CITY CODE
of
TAYLORSVILLE, UTAH
Code current through: Ord. 20-15, passed 7-1-2020
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
525 Vine Street  *  Suite 310  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled and edited under the
direction of John N. Brems, City Attorney. Sterling Codifiers began
supplementation of this Code in 2004.
This code of the City of Taylorsville, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 20-15, passed 7-1-2020.  Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Cincinnati, Ohio
PENDING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. 20-16
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF TAYLORSVILLE APPROVING A ZONING MAP AMENDMENT FROM
RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY MINIMUM 8,000 SQUARE FEET (R-1-8) AND LIMITED
COMMERICAL (LC) TO RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICT; 8 UNITS PER ACRE (RM-8)
FOR THE PROPERTIES LOCATED AT 3399 W 4700 S AND 3397 W 4700 S.
WHEREAS, the Taylorsville City Council (the “Council”) met in regular session
on August 5, 2020, to consider, among other things, approving a zoning map
amendment from Residential Single-Family Minimum 8,000 Square Feet (R-1-8) and
Limited Commercial (LC) to Residential Multi-family district; 8 units per acre
(RM-8) for the Properties Located at 3399 W 4700 S and 3397 W 4700 S; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to Taylorsville Municipal Code Section 13.05.030(A)(2),
notice of a public hearing before the City’s Planning Commission was published
in the Salt Lake Tribune on July 1, 2020; and
   WHEREAS, the notice of a public hearing before the City’s Planning
Commission was also published on the State Public Notice Website on July 1,
2020; and
   WHEREAS, the City’s Planning Commission held a properly noticed public
hearing on the proposed amendment on July 14, 2020 and voted 6-1 to recommend
that the City Council approve the proposed amendment; and
   WHEREAS, although not required by City ordinances, the City Council heard
courtesy public comment on the proposed amendment during its regularly
scheduled meeting on August 5, 2020; and
   WHEREAS, after careful consideration, the Council has determined that it is
in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of
Taylorsville to approve the proposed amendment. 
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Taylorsville City Council that the
proposal to amend the City’s zoning map from Residential Single-Family Minimum
8,000 Square Feet (R-1-8) and Limited Commercial (LC) to Residential Multi-
family district; 8 units per acre (RM-8) for the Properties Located at 3399 W
4700 S and 3397 W 4700 S, a legal description of which is attached as Exhibit
“A’ and incorporated by this reference, is hereby approved. 
This ordinance, assigned Ordinance No. 20-16, shall take effect as soon as it
shall be published or posted as required by law, deposited and recorded in the
office of the city recorder, and accepted as required herein.
PASSED AND APPROVED by the Council of Taylorsville, Utah, this _______ day of
_____________________, 2020.
                  TAYLORSVILLE CITY COUNCIL
                  ____________________________________
                  Meredith Harker, Council Chair
SEAL               VOTING:
               Meredith Harker   ____ Yea   ____ Nay
Ernest Burgess   ____ Yea   ____ Nay
               Brad Christopherson   ____ Yea   ____ Nay
               Dan Armstrong    ____ Yea   ____ Nay
               Curt Cochran      ____ Yea   ____ Nay
               
   PRESENTED to the Mayor of the City of Taylorsville for approval this ____
day of ___________________, 2020.
   APPROVED this ______ day of ___________________, 2020.
                  __________________________________________
                  Kristie S. Overson, Mayor
ATTEST:
_________________________________
Jamie Brooks, City Recorder
   DEPOSITED in the office of the City Recorder this ____ day of _____________,
2020.
   RECORDED this ____ day of ___________________, 2020.
TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Adoption   1.01
Introductory Title   1.08
Constitutional Taking   1.10
CHAPTER 1.01
ADOPTION
SECTION:
1.01.010: Adoption Of Code
1.01.010: ADOPTION OF CODE:
All ordinances of a general nature now in force in the city of Taylorsville,
Utah, as revised, compiled and herein set forth in the volume entitled "City Of
Taylorsville Code Of Ordinances 1998" are adopted, passed, published and
declared to be the city of Taylorsville code of ordinances, and are passed by
authority of the city council. (Ord. 02-19, 7-3-2002)
CHAPTER 1.08
INTRODUCTORY TITLE
SECTION:
1.08.010: Definitions; General
1.08.020: Penalty For Violation Of Code Provisions
1.08.030: Copies Available For Inspection
1.08.010: DEFINITIONS; GENERAL:
In the construction of the ordinances set out in this code, and all ordinances
amendatory thereof, the following definitions shall apply, unless such
definitions would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council,
or repugnant to the context of the ordinance. Any reference in the ordinances
set out in this code to a city division, department, branch, agency, or similar
term that is not currently in existence, shall mean the city of Taylorsville,
Utah, or its contract providers as the context dictates.
BOARD OF HEALTH, HEALTH DEPARTMENT OR SIMILAR TERM: Salt Lake Valley health
department.
BUSINESS: Any activity, operation, enterprise or calling referred to in this
code for which a license is required.
CITY: The city of Taylorsville, Utah, and its contract providers as the context
dictates.
CITY ATTORNEY OR ATTORNEY: The attorney of the city, or its contract providers
as the context dictates.
CITY CLERK, CLERK OR SIMILAR TERM: The recorder or the director of community
development as the context dictates.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city.
CITY ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT, ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT, CITY ENGINEER, ENGINEER OR
SIMILAR TERM: The engineering department of the city, or its contract providers
as the context dictates.
CITY TREASURER, TREASURER OR SIMILAR TERM: The treasurer of the city.
FIRE DEPARTMENT OR SIMILAR TERM: The fire department of the city, or its
contract providers as the context dictates.
HIGHWAY, PUBLIC HIGHWAY OR SIMILAR TERM: Any road, street, lane, court, place,
viaduct, culvert, bridge, alley, or other public way situated within the city,
laid out or erected as such by the public, or dedicated, abandoned or open to
the public, or made such in any action for the partition of real property, or
such public property so designated by any ordinance or statute, and includes
the entire area within the right of way.
HIS/HER, HE/SHE, OR SIMILAR TERMS: Include the masculine, feminine or neuter
form, and the singular of nouns, pronouns and verbs shall include the plurals
and vice versa.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that facts exist that bring the act or
omission within the provisions of these ordinances. It does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LAW: Means and denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of
the state of Utah, the ordinances of the city and when appropriate, any and all
rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.
LICENSE OFFICIAL OR SIMILAR TERM: The director of the appropriate division
within the city, or its contract providers as the context dictates.
MALICIOUSLY OR MALICE: A person engaged in conduct with respect to
circumstances surrounding his conduct or the results of his conduct, when he is
aware of, but consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the circumstances exist or the result will occur. The risk must be of such a
nature and degree that its disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the
standard of care that an ordinary person would exercise under all the
circumstances as viewed from the actor's standpoint.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who owns
any part of the building or land, wholly or as a joint tenant or tenant in
common, or any less interest.
PERSON: Includes bodies politic and any individual, partnership, association,
corporation, limited liability company or group of individuals, however styled
or designated.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in action
and evidences of debt.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The law enforcement authority of the city.
PROPERTY: Means and includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT, DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS OR SIMILAR TERM: The
department of public works of the city, or its contract providers as the
context dictates.
REAL PROPERTY: Means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SEWER DEPARTMENT, DEPARTMENT OF SEWERS, WATER DEPARTMENT OR SIMILAR TERM: The
sewer department of the city, its contract providers or the applicable
improvement district as the context dictates.
STATE: The state of Utah.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, mean and include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, either alone or
with others.
WILFULLY OR WILFULNESS: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or
omitted, means and implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or
make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law or
to injure another or to acquire any advantage.
WRITING OR WRITTEN: Means and includes any handwriting, typewriting, printing,
electronic storage or transmission or any other method of recording information
or fixing information in a form capable of being printed.
YEAR: A calendar year unless specified otherwise. (Ord. 02-19, 7-3-2002; amd.
Ord. 05-11, 3-16-2005, eff. 4-1-2005)
1.08.020: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CODE PROVISIONS:
When no other penalty is prescribed, any person convicted of violating any
provision or provisions of an ordinance included in this code or in any
ordinances hereafter enacted, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six (6) months or
by a fine in any sum less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or both, except
that in all cases where a corporation is convicted of an offense for the
commission of which a natural person would be punished as for a misdemeanor and
there is no other punishment prescribed by the ordinance, such corporation is
punishable by a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). (Ord. 02-
19, 7-3-2002)
1.08.030: COPIES AVAILABLE FOR INSPECTION:
Three (3) copies of the ordinance or resolution imposing penalty for violating
code provisions shall be on file for use and examination by the public in the
offices of the city recorder. (Ord. 02-19, 7-3-2002)
CHAPTER 1.10
CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING
SECTION:
1.10.010: Policy Considerations
1.10.020: Definitions Of Constitutional Taking
1.10.030: Guidelines Advisory
1.10.040: Review Of Decision
1.10.050: Reviewing Guidelines
1.10.060: Results Of Review
1.10.010: POLICY CONSIDERATIONS:
There is an underlying policy in the city, strongly favoring the careful
consideration of matters involving constitutional taking claims, in fairness to
the owner of private property bringing the claim and in view of the uncertainty
and expense involved in defending lawsuits alleging such issues. At the same
time, the legitimate role of government in lawfully regulating real property
must be preserved and the public's right to require the dedication or exaction
of property consistent with the constitution. Consistent with this policy, it
is desired that procedure be established for the review of actions that may
involve the issue of a constitutional taking. These provisions are to assist
governments in considering decisions that may involve constitutional takings.
It is intended that a procedure for such a review be provided, as well as
guidelines for such considerations. This chapter is further intended and shall
be construed to objectively and fairly review claims by citizens that a
specific government action should require payment of just compensation, yet
preserve the ability of the city to lawfully regulate real property and fulfill
its other duties and functions. (Ord. 02-19, 7-3-2002)
1.10.020: DEFINITIONS OF CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING:
   A.   "Constitutional taking" means actions by the city involving the
physical taking or exaction of private real property that might require
compensation to a private real property owner because of:
      1.   The fifth or fourteenth amendment to the constitution of the United
States;
      2.   Article I, section 22, of the Utah constitution;
      3.   Any court ruling governing the physical taking or exaction of
private real property by a government entity;
   B.   Action by the city involving the physical taking or exaction of private
real property is not a constitutional taking if the physical taking or exaction
bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest, and is roughly
proportionate and reasonably related, on an individualized property basis, both
in nature and extent, to the impact of the proposed development on the
legitimate government interest. (Ord. 02-19, 7-3-2002)
1.10.030: GUIDELINES ADVISORY:
The guidelines adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter are advisory, and shall not be construed to expand or limit the
scope of the city's liability for a constitutional taking. The reviewing body
or person shall not be required to make any determination under this chapter
except pursuant to section
 1.10.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 02-19, 7-3-2002)
1.10.040: REVIEW OF DECISION:
Any owner of private real property who claims there has been a constitutional
taking of their private real property may request a review of a final decision
of any officer, employee, board, commission, or council. The following are
specific procedures established for such a review:
   A.   The person requesting a review must have obtained a final and
authoritative determination relative to the decision from which they are
requesting review.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days from the date of the final decision that gave
rise to the concern that a constitutional taking has occurred, the person
requesting the review shall file in writing, in the office of the city recorder
a request for review of that decision. A copy shall also be filed with the city
attorney.
   C.   The city council or an individual, or body designated by the city
council, shall immediately set a time to review the decision that gave rise to
the constitutional taking claim.
   D.   In addition to the written request for review, the applicant must
submit, prior to the date of the review, the following:
      1.   Name of the applicant requesting review;
      2.   Name and business address of current owner of the property, form of
ownership, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not for profit
corporation, partnership, joint venture or other, and if owned by a
corporation, partnership, or joint venture, name and address of all principal
shareholders or partners;
      3.   A detailed description of the grounds for the claim that there has
been a constitutional taking;
      4.   A detailed description of the property taken;
      5.   Evidence and documentation as to the value of the property taken,
including the date and cost at the date the property was acquired. This should
include any evidence of the value of that same property before and after the
alleged constitutional taking, the name of the party from whom purchased,
including the relationship if any, between the person requesting a review and
the party from whom the property was acquired;
      6.   Nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected, such as,
but not limited to, fee simple ownership or leasehold interest;
      7.   Terms (including sale price) of any previous purchase or sale of a
full or partial interest in the property in the three (3) years prior to the
date of application;
      8.   All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including
financing, offering for sale, or ad valorem taxation, within the three (3)
years prior to the date of application;
      9.   The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes on the property for the
previous three (3) years;
      10.   All information concerning current mortgages or other loans secured
by the property, including name of the mortgagee or lender, current interest
rate, remaining loan balance and term of the loan and other significant
provisions, including, but not limited to, right of purchasers to assume the
loan;
      11.   All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any, within the previous three (3) years;
      12.   All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the
petitioner within the previous three (3) years concerning feasibility of
development or utilization of the property;
      13.   For income producing property, itemized income and expense
statements from the property for the previous three (3) years;
      14.   Information from a title policy or other source showing all
recorded liens or encumbrances affecting the property; and
      15.   The city council or their designee may request additional
information reasonably necessary, in their opinion, to arrive at a conclusion
concerning whether there has been a constitutional taking.
   E.   A request for review shall not be deemed to be "complete" or
"submitted" until the reviewing body/official certifies to the applicant, that
all the materials and information required by the body/official above have been
recorded by the city. The reviewing body/official shall promptly notify the
applicant of any incomplete application.
   F.   The city council or an individual or body designated by them, shall
hear all the evidence related to and submitted by the applicant, city, or any
other interested party.
   G.   A final decision on the review shall be rendered within fourteen (14)
days from the date the complete application for review has been received by the
city recorder. The decision of the city council regarding the results of the
review shall be given in writing to the applicant and the officer, employee,
board, commission or council that rendered the final decision that gave rise to
the constitutional taking claim.
   H.   If the city council fails to hear and decide the review within fourteen
(14) days, the decision appealed shall be presumed to be approved. (Ord. 02-19,
7-3-2002)
1.10.050: REVIEWING GUIDELINES:
The city council shall review the facts and information presented by the
applicant to determine whether or not the action by the city, constitutes a
"constitutional taking" as defined in this chapter. In doing so, they shall
consider:
   A.   Whether the physical taking or exaction of the private real property
bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest.
   B.   Whether a legitimate governmental interest exists for the action taken
by the city.
   C.   Whether the property and exaction taken is roughly proportionate or
reasonably related, on an individual property basis, both in nature and extent,
to the impact caused by the activities that are the subject of the decision
being reviewed. (Ord. 02-19, 7-3-2002)
1.10.060: RESULTS OF REVIEW:
After completing the review, the reviewing body shall make a determination
regarding the above issues and where determined to be necessary and
appropriate, shall make a recommendation to the officer, employee, board,
commission or council that made the decision that gave rise to the
constitutional taking claim. (Ord. 02-19, 7-3-2002)
TITLE 2
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Administrative Provisions Generally   2.08
City Council   2.12
Judicial Code   2.13
City Officers Generally   2.14
Mayor   2.16
Departmental Organization   2.20
Committees   2.24
City Arts Council   2.25
City Youth Council   2.26
City Youth Ambassador Program   2.26A
Community Councils   2.27
Employee Appeal Board   2.28
Financial Administration   2.32
Elections   2.36
Reserved   2.40
Reserved   2.44
Government Records Access Management Act   2.48
CHAPTER 2.08
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS GENERALLY
SECTION:
2.08.010: Role And Mission Of City Government
2.08.020: Intent; Purpose
2.08.030: Municipal Government Generally
2.08.040: Administrative Organization Generally
2.08.050: Enacting Clause Of Ordinances
2.08.010: ROLE AND MISSION OF CITY GOVERNMENT:
The quality of life and community identity of Taylorsville's residents and
businesses are enhanced by city government being responsible, accountable,
accessible, innovative, informative, communicative, and by providing efficient
and cost effective municipal services. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.08.020: INTENT; PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of this title to establish and clarify the
organization and operation of city departments and to provide for an orderly
means of conducting the operation of city government. It is further intended
that this title ensures cooperation, communication and coordination between the
legislative branch, executive branch, judicial branch, and all departments of
the city. All ordinances of the city shall be construed in such manner as to
foster and promote such cooperation, communication, liaison, and coordination.
(Ord. 10-05, 3-17-2010)
2.08.030: MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT GENERALLY:
   A.   The municipal government of the city is divided into three (3)
separate, independent and equal branches of government:
      1.   The executive branch, which consists of the elected mayor of the
city and the administrative services department of the city, together with
department and division heads, officers and employees;
      2.   The legislative branch, which consists of the city council and its
staff; and
      3.   The judicial branch, which consists of the justice court and its
staff.
   B.   The mayor shall be elected at large by the voters of the city and shall
exercise the executive powers of the city government.
   C.   The council shall be constituted of five (5) members, elected by
district. The council thus elected shall exercise the legislative functions of
the city government.
   D.   The justice court shall be constituted as set forth in chapter 2.13 of
this title. (Ord. 10-05, 3-17-2010)
2.08.040: ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION GENERALLY:
Department heads, as provided by this title, shall report directly to the
mayor. Subject to the limitations and requirements of applicable budget and
appropriations, the city's administrative organization shall consist of the
operating departments, offices and divisions or bureaus, as set forth in this
title. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.08.050: ENACTING CLAUSE OF ORDINANCES:
The enacting clause of all ordinances of the city shall be "Be It Ordained by
the Taylorsville City Council". (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
CHAPTER 2.12
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
2.12.010: Powers
2.12.030: Meetings; Generally
2.12.033: Electronic Meeting
2.12.035: Policy For Approval Of Minutes
2.12.040: Meeting Schedules, Agendas And Minutes
2.12.050: Organization And Rules
2.12.060: Filling Of Vacancies
2.12.070: Override Disapproval Of Ordinance, Tax Levy Or Appropriation Item
2.12.080: Designation Of Landmarks
2.12.090: Community Development And Renewal Agency
2.12.010: POWERS:
The council shall exercise the legislative powers of city government, including
the adoption of ordinances, resolutions and policies, setting appropriate tax
levies for general city services, adopting the city budget, and setting other
general tax and services rates. The council shall supervise, appoint, and
direct its own staff and establish job descriptions, job functions, job
classifications or reclassifications and compensation therefor, within the
budgeted appropriations and consistent with state law. It may also review and
monitor the city administration, conduct public hearings and perform all other
duties and responsibilities authorized or required by state law. The council
shall consider and give its advice and consent to the mayor on all proposed
appointments to city boards, commissions, committees or other bodies
established to provide advice or assistance to the operation of city
government, as may otherwise be required by state law or by joint resolution
signed by the mayor and council. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.12.030: MEETINGS; GENERALLY:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The city council is a legislative body and shall meet
not less than twice monthly.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by order of the
chairman of the council or by any two (2) members of the city council. The
order signed by the party calling the meeting shall be filed with the city
recorder and entered in the minutes of the council. Notice of said special
meeting shall be given to all council members and the mayor, who have not
joined in said order, not less than forty eight (48) hours before said special
meeting. Said notice shall be served personally or a copy thereof left at the
said council member's or mayor's place of abode, either by leaving it with a
person of suitable age and discretion or affixing a copy thereof to the front
door by the city recorder or his designee. The personal appearance by a member
of the city council or mayor at any specially called meeting constitutes a
waiver of the notice required hereunder.
   C.   Emergency Meetings: Emergency meetings of the council may be called due
to unforeseen circumstances to consider matters of emergency or urgent nature.
Notice of the emergency meeting shall be given using the best notice
practicable. No emergency meeting of the council shall be held unless an
attempt has been made to notify all members of the city council and a majority
votes in the affirmative to hold the meeting.
   D.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the council shall be open to the public
unless closed pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 52-4-4 and 52-4-5.
   E.   Closed Meetings: A closed meeting may be held as provided in Utah Code
Annotated sections 52-4-4 and 52-4-5. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.12.033: ELECTRONIC MEETING:
   A.   Definitions: The following terms are defined as follows for the purpose
of this section:
ANCHOR LOCATION: The council chambers located in the city offices at 2600 West
Taylorsville Boulevard, Taylorsville, UT 84118, in Salt Lake County, Utah,
where interested persons and the public may attend and monitor the open
portions of the meeting.
ELECTRONIC MEETING: A public meeting of the city council convened and conducted
by means of a telephonic conference device or other electronic means, allowing
each member of the city council to be in contact with the anchor location and
participate concurrently with all other members of the city council in the
conduct of such meeting.
MEETING ADMINISTRATOR: The city recorder or another employee of the city
specifically assigned and designated to operate the electronic meeting
equipment at the anchor location to assure that all members of the city council
are continuously able to participate in the electronic meeting and to advise
the party conducting the meeting of the initiation, recess, if appropriate, or
adjournment of an electronic meeting.
   B.   Electronic Meetings: The city council may convene electronic meetings
when necessary pursuant to specific public notice of an electronic meeting by
posting written notice of the electronic meeting at the anchor location and
providing written or electronic notice to the media as otherwise provided by
law. Notice of the electronic meeting shall also be provided to each member of
the city council at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting, including
a description of how members will be connected to the electronic meeting. The
notice to members of the city council shall indicate the process including
telephone numbers, access codes, internet addresses, etc., in order to connect
to the electronic meeting.
   C.   Quorum Verification: Before an electronic meeting may be called to
order, all members of the city council shall be given an opportunity to
participate in the meeting and no electronic meeting shall be convened unless
the quorum of the city council is present at the anchor location for the
meeting.
   D.   Public Attendance: Each electronic meeting shall be convened by the
meeting administrator by announcing the parties present at the meeting and by
making available to members of the public at the anchor location an amplified
speaker enabling members of the public to hear the comments of city council
members and participate if appropriate.
   E.   Conduct Of The Meeting: Upon determining that a sufficient number of
the city council is present at the anchor location and members of the public
can adequately hear the comments of all members of the city council and
participate if appropriate, the chairman shall formally convene the meeting and
take or cause a roll call of those participating. The chairman shall provide
opportunity for each matter on the agenda to be presented and discussed, in an
order set forth in the agenda, as amended.
   F.   Compliance With Law: In all other respects, electronic meetings shall
be conducted, recorded, and minutes shall be kept as required by law. (Ord. 11-
15, 9-7-2011)
2.12.035: POLICY FOR APPROVAL OF MINUTES:
   A.   Definitions: All words and phrases shall have the same meaning as those
words and phrases as defined in Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-101, Utah open
and public meetings act.
   B.   Minutes Kept: Written minutes shall be kept of all meetings of any
public body in the city. The minutes of such meetings shall be kept by the city
recorder or meeting clerk, as the case may be, during the course of any public
meeting of the public body.
   C.   Review Of Proposed Minutes: Within a reasonable time following any
public meeting, the city recorder or meeting clerk, as the case may be, shall
prepare proposed minutes for such meeting and give a copy of the proposed
minutes to each member of the public body for review and comment.
   D.   Availability Of Pending Minutes To Public: The city recorder or meeting
clerk, as the case may be, shall make pending minutes available to the public
within thirty (30) days after holding the open meeting that is the subject of
the pending minutes. "Pending minutes" means written minutes of an open meeting
that have been prepared in draft form and are subject to change before being
approved by the public body that held the open meeting.
   E.   Approval Of Proposed Minutes: The public body shall consider the
proposed minutes for approval at the first meeting of the public body that
immediately follows the city recorder or meeting clerk, as the case may be,
submitting the proposed minutes to the members of the public body. The members
of the public body shall either approve the proposed minutes as presented or
vote to correct and amend the proposed written minutes and then approve the
corrected and amended written minutes at that meeting.
   F.   Approval By Inaction: If the public body fails to consider proposed
minutes, or does not take any action to approve the proposed minutes at the
first public meeting held by the public body immediately following the public
body's receipt of the proposed minutes from the city recorder or the meeting
clerk, as the case may be, the proposed minutes shall be deemed to have been
approved by the public body and shall stand as proposed.
   G.   Official Record Made Available: Once the proposed minutes have either
been approved by the public body, or have been deemed to have been approved by
the inaction of the public body, the minutes shall be signed by the city
recorder or the meeting clerk, as the case may be, and shall become the
official record of the proceedings of the public body. Within three (3)
business days after approval of the written minutes of an open meeting, the
city recorder or meeting clerk, as the case may be, shall post the approved
minutes to the Utah state public notice website, and shall make the approved
minutes available to the public at the public body's primary office, along with
any public materials distributed at the meeting. (Ord. 13-15, 7-17-2013)
2.12.040: MEETING SCHEDULES, AGENDAS AND MINUTES:
   A.   The council shall prescribe by ordinance the time and place of its
regular meeting schedule and the city recorder shall give public notice at
least once each year of the annual meeting schedule of the city council as
required by Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-1 et seq.
   B.   In addition to the foregoing notice, the council shall cause an agenda
to be prepared for each regular or special meeting of the council, which agenda
shall be reasonably specific and sufficient to identify the matters to be
considered by the council at such meeting. It shall also state the date, time
and place of the meeting. A copy of said agenda shall be posted at the building
where the meeting is to be held at least twenty four (24) hours prior to such
meeting and given at least twenty four (24) hours prior to such meeting to at
least one newspaper of general circulation within the city.
   C.   Minutes of all council meetings shall be kept as required by Utah Code
Annotated section 52-4-1 et seq. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.12.050: ORGANIZATION AND RULES:
The council shall elect a chairman and a vice chairman from its members and
shall determine by resolution its order, rules, attendance requirements,
procedure and organization from time to time as it deems prudent and
appropriate. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.12.060: FILLING OF VACANCIES:
Council vacancies shall be filled as provided in Utah Code Annotated section
20A-1-510. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.12.070: OVERRIDE DISAPPROVAL OF ORDINANCE, TAX LEVY OR APPROPRIATION ITEM:
If the mayor disapproves an ordinance, tax levy or appropriation, the mayor
shall return it with a statement of his objection to the council within fifteen
(15) days and the council shall, at its next meeting reconsider the ordinance,
tax levy or appropriation item. If after reconsideration it passes by a vote of
at least two-thirds (2/3) of all council members, it shall be recorded and
thereafter be in force. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.12.080: DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS:
Upon receipt of a request and a site plan, the city council may by resolution
designate (or revoke such designation) certain unique structures, sites, or
objects within the city limits as community landmarks. Upon such designation,
the landmark must conform to the site plan, be adequately maintained, may not
become a hazard, and may not be used as a sign for advertising. (Ord. 02-32,
10-2-2002)
2.12.090: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND RENEWAL AGENCY:
   A.   There is hereby created a community development and renewal agency, to
be known as the community development and renewal agency of Taylorsville
("agency").
   B.   The council is hereby designated as the governing body of the agency.
   C.   The agency is hereby authorized to enter into agreements and transact
business and to exercise all powers, rights, duties, and privileges as set
forth in the limited purpose local government entities - community development
and renewal agencies 1  ("act"), as may be amended from time to time. All of
the provisions of the act, as the same may be amended from time to time, are
hereby adopted as if fully set forth herein.
   D.   The recorder is directed to provide notice to the lieutenant governor
as required by Utah Code Annotated section 17C-1-201(2). (Ord. 09-16, 4-22-
2009)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 17C-1-101 et seq.
CHAPTER 2.13
JUDICIAL CODE
SECTION:
2.13.010: Establishment Of Justice Court
2.13.020: Appointment Of Judge And Term Of Office
2.13.030: Qualifications For Office
2.13.040: Compensation
2.13.050: Trial Facility And Hours Of Business
2.13.060: Administrative Responsibilities
2.13.070: Court Operations
2.13.080: Budget Responsibilities
2.13.010: ESTABLISHMENT OF JUSTICE COURT:
There is hereby recognized within the City of Taylorsville government a Justice
Court known as the "Taylorsville Justice Court" or "Justice Court" under the
authority of Utah Code Annotated section 78a-7-102(5)(a). (Ord. 10-03, 2-24-
2010)
2.13.020: APPOINTMENT OF JUDGE AND TERM OF OFFICE:
Judges of the Justice Court shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be
ratified by the City Council in accordance with applicable law. The term of the
Justice Court Judge shall be in accordance with applicable law. Upon expiration
of the Justice Court Judge's term of office, the Judge shall be subject to an
unopposed retention election in Salt Lake County in accordance with procedures
set forth in applicable law. (Ord. 13-22, 9-4-2013)
2.13.030: QUALIFICATIONS FOR OFFICE:
Justice Court Judges shall meet all qualifications as set forth in applicable
statute. (Ord. 10-03, 2-24-2010)
2.13.040: COMPENSATION:
Justice Court Judges shall be paid a fixed compensation as determined from time
to time by the City Council subject to compensation limits prescribed by
applicable statute. The City Council shall periodically review and adjust the
compensation paid to Justice Court Judges as required by applicable statutes,
provided, however, the salary fixed for a Judge may not be diminished during
the term for which the Judge has been appointed, or elected. (Ord. 10-03, 2-24-
2010)
2.13.050: TRIAL FACILITY AND HOURS OF BUSINESS:
The Justice Court shall be located at 2600 West Taylorsville Blvd.,
Taylorsville, Utah. All official court business shall be conducted at that
location unless otherwise determined by the Mayor in the case of a declared
emergency. The Justice Court shall be open and judicial business shall be
transacted five (5) days a week except for holidays. Regular operating hours
shall be as determined from time to time by the City Council. The hours of
operation for small claims matters shall be Thursday evening, as needed, and at
such times as defined from time to time by the Justice Court. The hours of the
court shall be posted conspicuously at the Justice Court and in any local
public building. In addition to other duties, the Judges and court staff shall
attend the court at regular scheduled times. All calendared court events shall
commence promptly as scheduled. (Ord. 10-03, 2-24-2010)
2.13.060: ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES:
Justice Court Judges shall comply with and ensure court personnel complies with
applicable personnel policies, Municipal rules, regulations, and orders
relating to personnel, budget, and other administrative functions. Failure of
the Judge to comply with such applicable provisions may be referred by the City
Council to the State Judicial Administrator, and/or the Judicial Conduct
Commission. (Ord. 10-03, 2-24-2010)
2.13.070: COURT OPERATIONS:
The Justice Court Judge shall be responsible for overall court operations and
administration of justice of the Justice Court. The City shall provide and
compensate court personnel to conduct the business of the court under the
City's general staffing plan. To that end, the Clerk of the Court shall be
appointed by the Justice Court Judge with the advice and consent of the City
Council. The supervision, and discipline of court and quasi- judicial
personnel, as well as day to day administrative operation, shall be managed by
the Justice Court Judge in accordance with applicable personnel policies,
Municipal rules, regulations, and orders relating to personnel, budget, and
other administrative functions. The City shall also provide a prosecutor to
attend the court and perform the duties of a prosecutor as may be directed from
time to time by City administration. The City shall also fund the costs of
defense for persons charged with a public offense who are determined by the
court indigent under the provisions of applicable law. (Ord. 18-25, 8-1-2018)
2.13.080: BUDGET RESPONSIBILITIES:
The Justice Court Judge shall cause the Justice Court to be operated and
implement programs or discontinue programs subject to the budget and
availability of funds. (Ord. 10-03, 2-24-2010; amd. Ord. 18-25, 8-1-2018)
CHAPTER 2.14
CITY OFFICERS GENERALLY
SECTION:
2.14.010: Oath And Bonds
2.14.020: Filing Of Bonds
2.14.030: Elective Officers; Election And Term Of Office
2.14.032: Council Districts
2.14.033: District Boundaries
2.14.040: Salary Of City Council Members
2.14.050: Salary Of Mayor
2.14.060: Holding Other Offices Prohibited
2.14.010: OATH AND BONDS:
   A.   All statutory officers of the city, whether elected or appointed,
shall, before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, take and
subscribe the constitutional oath of office.
   B.   Each statutory officer shall, before commencing official duties,
execute a bond, with good and sufficient sureties, payable to the city, in the
respective penal sums specifically provided by statute, resolution or
ordinance, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of that
office and the payment of all money received by such officer according to law
and the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.14.020: FILING OF BONDS:
City officers shall be bonded, as required by statute, city ordinance or
resolution. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.14.030: ELECTIVE OFFICERS; ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the term of office
for the mayor and each council member shall be four (4) years.
   B.   Beginning with the 1997 municipal election, the mayor and two (2)
council seats shall be up for election every four (4) years.
   C.   Beginning with the 1997 municipal election, the other three (3) council
seats shall have an initial term of two (2) years and beginning with the 1999
municipal election and thereafter, shall have terms of four (4) years. (Ord.
02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.14.032: COUNCIL DISTRICTS:
   A.   The city shall be divided into five (5) council districts of
substantially equal population.
   B.   One nonpartisan candidate for the council shall be elected from each
district. A person filing a declaration of candidacy for the council shall be a
resident of the district in which the person seeks office. Each elected member
of the council shall maintain residency within the boundaries of the district
during his term of office. If a member of the council establishes a principal
place of residency as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-2-105 outside
the district during his term of office, the office is automatically vacated.
(Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.14.033: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
   A.   Council districts shall be as shown in the figure on file in the city
recorder's office.
   B.   Members of the city council from districts 4 and 5 shall be filled in
municipal elections held in 2001.
   C.   Members of the city council from districts 1, 2 and 3 shall be filled
in municipal elections held in 2003. (Ord. 13-03, 1-16-2013)
2.14.040: SALARY OF CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS:
   A.   Beginning March 6, 2008, the biweekly base compensation of the city
council members shall be four hundred eighty six dollars fifty four cents
($486.54) ($12,650.00 annually), together with any general compensation
adjustments approved by the city council for full time city employees. The city
shall also pay a portion of the city council members' health insurance premium
in an amount equivalent to fifty percent (50%) of the monthly premium the city
pays for medical insurance for single coverage using the least expensive panel
option offered by the city sponsored health insurance plan. If members of the
city council do not participate in the city sponsored health insurance plan,
then such members of the city council may elect to use such amount to make
additional retirement contributions subject to the rules and regulations
thereof. Members of the city council may elect to use their biweekly base
compensation to participate in other benefits offered by the city such as
dental, additional group life insurance, and section 125 plan subject to the
rules and regulations thereof. For purposes of the city sponsored health
insurance plan, city council members shall be deemed to be "full time
employees" of the city, working no less than thirty (30) hours per week.
   B.   Members of the city council shall also receive reimbursement for all
reasonable expenses related to the performance of their duties, including, but
not limited to, the expense for high speed internet access, and mileage
allowance in the same amount allowed by the internal revenue service pursuant
to section 162 of the most current version of the internal revenue code.
   C.   Benefits shall also be provided to members of the city council for
noncontributory retirement and life insurance in the same manner provided to
city employees. (Ord. 08-11, 3-5-2008)
2.14.050: SALARY OF MAYOR:
   A.   Beginning March 6, 2008, the biweekly base compensation of the mayor
shall be three thousand thirty five dollars fifty eight cents ($3,035.58)
($78,925.00 annually), together with any general compensation adjustments
approved by the city council for full time city employees. The mayor shall also
receive an additional amount for medical, dental, and group life insurance
equal to the amount offered to full time employees of the city.
   B.   The mayor shall also receive reimbursement for all reasonable expenses
related to performance of his duties, including, but not limited to, mileage
allowance in the same amount allowed by the internal revenue service pursuant
to section 162 of the most current version of the internal revenue code.
   C.   Benefits shall also be provided to the mayor for noncontributory
retirement, life insurance, and short term disability in the same manner
provided to full time city employees. (Ord. 08-11, 3-5-2008)
2.14.060: HOLDING OTHER OFFICES PROHIBITED:
The mayor may not hold any other office under the city government during his
term of office. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
   2-16.txt ()CHAPTER 2.16
MAYOR
SECTION:
2.16.010: Functions And Duties
2.16.030: Intragovernment Cooperation
2.16.050: Vacancy In Office; Appointment Of Successor
2.16.060: Mayor Approval Or Disapproval Of Ordinance, Tax Levy Or Appropriation
Item
2.16.010: FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES:
The mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city.
He shall have the power and duty to:
   A.   Enforce the laws and ordinances of the city;
   B.   Execute the policies adopted by the city council;
   C.   Appoint and remove administrative assistants, including a chief
administrative officer, and with the advice and consent of the council, appoint
department heads, all statutory officers, commissions, boards, and committees
of the city, except as may otherwise be specifically limited by law;
   D.   Remove department heads and officers and employees, commissions, boards
and committees;
   E.   Exercise control of all departments, divisions, and bureaus within the
city government;
   F.   Attend all meetings of the council with the right to take part in all
discussions and the responsibility to inform the council of the condition and
needs of the municipality and make recommendations and freely give advice to
the council, except that the mayor shall not have the right to vote in council
meetings;
   G.   Appoint a budget officer to serve in place of the mayor for the purpose
of conforming with the requirements of the uniform municipal fiscal procedures
act for Utah cities and in all other respects fulfill the requirements of that
act;
   H.   Appoint with the advice and consent of the council a qualified person
to each of the offices of recorder, treasurer, engineer and attorney; create
any other offices as may be deemed necessary for good government, and make
appointments to them; and regulate and prescribe the powers and duties of all
other officers of the city, within the general provisions of law and ordinance;
   I.   Furnish the city council with a report, periodically or as determined
by ordinance, setting forth the amounts of all budget appropriations, the total
disbursements to date from these appropriations, and the amount of indebtedness
incurred or contracted against each appropriation (including disbursements and
indebtedness incurred and not paid) and the percentage of the appropriations
encumbered to date, which report shall be made available for public
inspections;
   J.   Execute agreements within certified budget appropriations on behalf of
the city, or delegate by written executive order the power to execute such
agreements to executive officials, subject to the procedure described in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-6-138;
   K.   When necessary, call on the residents of the city over the age of
twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the state and
ordinances of the city;
   L.   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this title or may be
required by ordinance not inconsistent with the optional form of government;
and (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
   M.   Appoint a temporary judge currently holding office within the same
jurisdictional judicial district to serve as a temporary judge when the
permanent judge is absent or disqualified. (Ord. 11-06, 9-7-2011)
2.16.030: INTRAGOVERNMENT COOPERATION:
   A.   To the extent permitted by the government records access management
act, the mayor, or departments designated by the mayor, shall provide such
information concerning city finances, operations and procedures, as reasonably
requested by the council and necessary for the council to fulfill its statutory
duties.
   B.   No member of the council shall direct or request, except in writing,
the appointment of any person to, or his removal from office or to interfere in
any way with the performance by the officers of their duties. The council shall
not give orders to any subordinate of the mayor either publicly or privately,
but may make suggestions and recommendations.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall prevent the council from appointing
committees of its own members or citizens to conduct investigations into the
conduct of any office, department or agency of city government, or any matter
relating to the welfare of this city, and delegating to these committees such
power of inquiry as the council may deem necessary. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
   D.   It is unlawful for the mayor, contract provider, department head,
supervisor, city employee, or committee to knowingly adopt a policy or rule
which prohibits an employee of the city from communicating a matter of public
concern with a member of the city council.
   E.   It is unlawful for any elected official, contract provider, department
head, supervisor, city employee, or committee to knowingly threaten, interfere
with, intimidate, discourage, or otherwise act in a manner that would cause a
reasonable person to withhold information that is a matter of public concern
from any elected official of the city.
   F.   It is unlawful to knowingly subject an employee of the city to any form
of verbal or written discipline, suspension or termination for providing,
making or delivering any communication protected by this section. (Ord. 05-59,
11-2-2005)
2.16.050: VACANCY IN OFFICE; APPOINTMENT OF SUCCESSOR:
Vacancy in the office of the mayor shall be filled as provided in Utah Code
Annotated section 10-3-1222. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.16.060: MAYOR APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF ORDINANCE, TAX LEVY OR APPROPRIATION
ITEM:
Every ordinance or tax levy passed by the council shall be presented to the
mayor for his approval or disapproval. If the mayor approves the ordinances or
the tax levy, he shall sign it and it shall be recorded and thereafter shall be
enforced. If the ordinance is an appropriation ordinance, the mayor may approve
or disapprove all or any part of the appropriation. If the mayor disapproves an
ordinance, tax levy or appropriation, he shall return it with a statement of
his objection to the council within fifteen (15) days of presentation. If any
ordinance, tax levy or appropriation item is not returned within fifteen (15)
days after presentation to the mayor, it shall be recorded and thereafter shall
be in force. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
CHAPTER 2.20
DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION
SECTION:
2.20.010: Definitions
2.20.020: Appointed Officers
2.20.030: Office Of City Administrator
2.20.040: Designation Of Departments And Department Heads
2.20.050: Functions Of The Department Of Administrative Services And Duties Of
Appointed Officers
2.20.060: Department Of Community Development And Duties Of Appointed Officers
2.20.065: Department Of Economic Development And Duties Of Appointed Officers
2.20.070: Office Of City Attorney
2.20.075: Police Department
2.20.080: Organizational Responsibility
2.20.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall be defined as follows for the purposes of the
administrative code:
DEPARTMENT: The designation within the organizational structure of the
administrative branch of city government which groups a broad classification of
similar functions, services and duties.
OFFICE: A designation within the organizational structure of a department which
specifies a limited range of unique functions and duties. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-
2002)
2.20.020: APPOINTED OFFICERS:
   A.   The following officers occupy appointed positions within the
administrative branch of city government. The employment standards and job
descriptions pertaining to such appointed officers shall be created, modified
and implemented by the mayor, subject to council approval:
      1.   City administrator;
      2.   Director of community development;
      3.   City recorder;
      4.   City treasurer;
      5.   City attorney; (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
      6.   Director of economic development; and
      7.   Chief of police. (Ord. 04-36, 9-22-2004)
   B.   All appointments to the position of department head or to other
appointive office as required by state law shall be made by the mayor after
advice and consent of the city council.
   C.   All department heads and other appointed officers shall keep original
copies of all official records pertaining to their office in the public
buildings where their official office is maintained and shall not remove such
records therefrom. Each of the department heads and appointed officials shall
also, within five (5) days of notification or request, deliver to his successor
in office all properties, books and effects of every description in his
possession belonging to the city or appertaining to his office. Any refusal to
do so shall be deemed unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 02-32,
10-2-2002)
2.20.030: OFFICE OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
The office of city administrator shall be the administrative head of the city
government under the direction and control of the mayor and city council. The
city administrator shall perform the following duties:
   A.   Supervise the administration and enforcement of all laws, this code,
and other ordinances of the city as they affect the administrative departments;
   B.   Execute the policies affecting the administrative departments that are
adopted by the city council;
   C.   Recommend to the mayor the hiring, disciplining or terminating of city
employees, including department heads;
   D.   Conduct performance evaluations and administrative pay adjustments as
prescribed by this code and other city ordinances or policy;
   E.   Administer and exercise control of all departments of the city and all
other subordinate offices and employees of the city through their department
heads;
   F.   Authorize the issuance of administrative rules and outline general
administrative procedures;
   G.   Attend official city council meetings;
   H.   Investigate, examine or inquire into the affairs or operations of any
department or office; and when authorized by the city council, employ
consultants and professional counsel to aid such investigations or inquiries;
   I.   Recommend to the mayor merit pay increases and bonuses for city
employees;
   J.   Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, parks and other
public property under the control and jurisdiction of the city;
   K.   Assist in preparation of the annual budget;
   L.   Manage the day to day operations of the city;
   M.   Direct activities relating to contracts for services for the city;
   N.   Examine performance requirements, delivery schedules and estimates of
costs of various contracts involving the city, to ensure completeness and
accuracy;
   O.   Prepare information to receive bids, specifications, progress reports
and other items that may be required in connection with contracts, or proposed
contracts, involving the city;
   P.   Review bids and proposals from other agencies for conformity to
contract requirements and help determine acceptable bids and proposals;
   Q.   Assist in negotiating various contracts;
   R.   Coordinate scheduling for implementation and fulfillment of contracts
and may act as liaison between city and contract provider;
   S.   Perform such other duties as may be delegated to the city administrator
from time to time. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.20.040: DESIGNATION OF DEPARTMENTS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS:
The following shall be departments within the administrative branch of city
government. The appointed officials designated herein shall act as department
heads and be responsible for the administrative direction of the respective
departments:
   A.   The department of administrative services shall be headed by the city
administrator, and shall include, among others, the office of city recorder and
the office of city treasurer.
   B.   The department of community development shall be headed by the director
of community development. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.20.050: FUNCTIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES AND DUTIES OF
APPOINTED OFFICERS:
   A.   Department Of Administrative Services: The department of administrative
services consolidates the majority of staff functions and support services of
the city under one head as a means of facilitating coordination and control.
This department shall be financed by the general fund. The department shall be
responsible to provide central support required by all city operations which
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Finance: Budget preparation and control, purchasing, billing,
accounts receivable and payable, general ledger accounting and payroll,
financial management and reporting.
      2.   Information Services: Records management, community services,
clerical support and internal telephone system.
      3.   Management Services: Contract administration, research, special
management reports and data processing.
      4.   Personnel: Recruiting, administration of the personnel ordinance and
such other personnel functions as may be necessary for the proper operation of
the city.
      5.   Building Maintenance: Operation and maintenance of all city offices
and facilities.
   B.   City Recorder: The office of city recorder shall be under the direction
of the city administrator. The city recorder shall perform the following
duties:
      1.   Serve as custodian of official city records and public documents and
provide public records and information to citizens, civic groups, the media and
other agencies as requested.
      2.   Attend regular and special council meetings; oversee or perform an
accurate recording of the proceedings.
      3.   File ordinances and resolutions and oversee the codification of
ordinances into the city municipal code.
      4.   Assure that the oath of office is administered to public officials
by an authorized individual.
      5.   Supervise and maintain records regarding the city's personnel and
purchasing functions.
      6.   Serve as the ex officio city auditor and perform the duties of that
office.
      7.   Countersign all contracts made on behalf of the city and maintain a
properly indexed record of all such contracts.
      8.   Preaudit all claims and demands against the city before they are
allowed; prepare the necessary checks in payment of those claims and demands;
and follow all procedures as outlined in Utah Code Annotated section 10-6-139.
      9.   Keep the corporate seal of the city.
      10.   Seal and attest all legal documents of the city.
      11.   Coordinate and process city elections.
   C.   City Treasurer: The office of city treasurer shall be under the
direction of the city administrator. The city treasurer shall perform the
following duties:
      1.   Serve as the custodian of all monies, bonds and other securities of
the city.
      2.   Determine the cash requirements of the city and provide for the
investment of all idle cash as directed by the governing body in accordance
with the Utah state money management act.
      3.   Prepare revenue estimates as required by the mayor, council, or
department heads.
      4.   Interface with bank and financial institutions and other agencies
who work with the city or who provide investment opportunities to the city.
      5.   Assist in the preparation of the overall city budget.
      6.   Receive all public funds and monies payable to the city, including
all taxes, license fees, fines, etc., and deposit said money in appropriate
accounts.
      7.   Keep an accurate detailed account of all monies received in
accordance with the uniform fiscal procedure act for Utah cities and reconcile
those accounts.
      8.   Cosign all city checks. Prior to affixing his signature, the
treasurer shall determine that a sufficient amount is on deposit in the
appropriate bank account of the city to honor the check. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-
2002)
2.20.060: DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND DUTIES OF APPOINTED OFFICERS:
   A.   Department Of Community Development: The department of community
Development and its Director shall have charge of and be responsible for:
      1.   Providing the assistance necessary to City administration, the City
Council and the City's Planning Commission in the development of a Master Land
Use Plan and public facility plan for the City. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
      2.   The development, administration and enforcement of all attendant
laws, codes, ordinances and relative regulations, including, but not limited
to, future land use plans, land use ordinances, and Building and Housing Codes
intended to serve the implementation of said plans. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002;
amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
      3.   Administration of their functions and duties in such a manner as to
assist the City's administration, the City Council and the City's Planning
Commission to:
         a.   Facilitate, in conjunction with the City's engineering
contractor, the lessening of congestion in the City's streets and roads.
         b.   Develop standards for the design, construction, alteration,
occupancy, use, repair, and maintenance of buildings, structures, and certain
equipment within the City.
         c.   Classify land uses within the City.
         d.   Protect the tax base of the City.
         e.   Secure economy in the City's expenditures by proper land use
planning.
         f.   Foster the City's industrial, business and residential
development.
         g.   Develop standards for property rehabilitation.
      4.   Direction of the City's Division of Building and Safety. (Ord. 02-
32, 10-2-2002)
   B.   Boards And Commissions: The following boards and commissions are hereby
established for the City. Their organization, duties and powers are outlined
elsewhere within the City's ordinances. These boards and commissions shall,
where appropriate, coordinate with the City administration through the Director
of Community Development and the Mayor:
      1.   Planning Commission; and
      2.   Appeal Authority. (Ord. 18-09, 2-28-2018)
   C.   Community Development Director: The Community Development Director
shall perform the following duties:
      1.   Administer the Department of Community Development.
      2.   Supervise the personnel of the Department of Community Development.
      3.   Recommend long range and short range Land Use Plans, goals, policies
and frameworks for land use.
      4.   Provide the Mayor, the City Council, the City's Board of Adjustment
and the City's Planning Commission with technical assistance and advice.
      5.   Review all zoning petitions and conditional use permit applications.
      6.   Prepare and coordinate the agendas for meetings of the Planning
Commission and the Board of Adjustment.
      7.   Review all plats of subdivisions and site plans of commercial and
industrial developments to ensure compliance with City ordinances and the
City's General Plan.
      8.   Issue building and development permits.
      9.   Assist and advise the public with respect to the application and
approval process.
      10.   Administer and ensure compliance with the City's planning
ordinances.
      11.   Administer and ensure compliance with the City's business license
ordinances.
      12.   Abate nuisances and other unsightly, deleterious, or noxious
objects or conditions in the City. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.20.065: DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND DUTIES OF APPOINTED OFFICERS 1
:
   A.   Department Of Economic Development: The Department of Economic
Development and its Director shall have charge of and be responsible for the
following:
      1.   Determine the needs of the City in connection with economic
development, and propose solutions and an economic development plan for the
City.
      2.   Promote the location, development, relocation, and improvement of
industries, businesses, and related activities in the City.
      3.   Coordinate with Federal, State and other local government agencies
on economic matters as assigned.
      4.   Promote the dissemination of news and information regarding economic
development within the City and conduct such other consistent public relation
activities.
      5.   Assemble and maintain current accurate information on City
characteristics such as available sites, buildings, transportation, labor
market, utility service, and cost of living conditions within the City.
      6.   Conduct business retention activities to promote and retain
businesses in the City.
      7.   Provide referral services to business and potential entrepreneurs.
      8.   Perform such other duties and functions as assigned.
   B.   Economic Development Director: The Economic Development Director shall
perform the following duties:
      1.   Administer the Department of Economic Development.
      2.   Supervise any personnel in the Department of Economic Development.
      3.   Recommend long range and short range plans, goals, etc.
      4.   Provide the mayor and the city council with assistance and advice.
      5.   Perform such other duties and functions as assigned. (Ord. 04-21, 5-
5-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  2.24.060 of this title.
2.20.070: OFFICE OF CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   Functions:
      1.   The city attorney shall be the chief legal officer of the city and
shall be responsible to the mayor and city council for the proper
administration of the legal affairs of the city.
      2.   The mayor and city council shall enjoy equal and independent access
to the services of the office of the city attorney with reference to their
respective functions and duties. The city attorney and his staff shall perform
in such a manner which will enable the mayor and the city council to fulfill
their respective duties in a timely fashion.
      3.   The foregoing notwithstanding, the city attorney shall not in any
instance, either personally, or by his deputies, act as both prosecutor and
advocate before (and at the same time advisor to) any board, commission,
agency, officer, official or body of the city. In cases where such a conflict
shall arise, special counsel may be employed who shall not be subject to the
control or direction of the city attorney in such matter, and who shall provide
the legal service to or before such board, commission, agency, officer,
official or body.
   B.   Separate Counsel: Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
prohibit either the council or mayor from retaining separate counsel from
appropriated funds. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.20.075: POLICE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Functions: The police department and its chief, by and through its
sworn officers, shall be responsible for the following:
      1.   Preserving the public peace.
      2.   Preventing crime with a major effort towards the adoption of
programs for crime prevention.
      3.   Detecting and arresting criminal offenders.
      4.   Protecting the rights of persons and property.
      5.   Regulating and controlling motorized, bicycle, and pedestrian
traffic, with a major emphasis on adoption of programs to prevent traffic
accidents.
      6.   Training of sworn personnel.
      7.   Providing and maintaining police records and communication systems.
      8.   Supervising all related functions.
   B.   Duties: The chief of police shall have command over all of the
officers, members and employees of the police department. It shall be the duty
of the chief of police, subject to the approval of the mayor, to make and adopt
rules and procedures for the operation and administration of the police
department. The chief of police, acting by himself or the sworn officers of the
police department, shall have the following powers:
      1.   Execute and return all writs and process as directed by a court of
competent jurisdiction. In criminal cases, quasi-criminal cases, or in a case
of violation of city ordinances he may serve the same as authorized by law.
      2.   Suppress all riots, disturbances, and breaches of the peace.
      3.   Apprehend all disorderly persons in the city.
      4.   Pursue and arrest any persons fleeing from the jurisdiction in any
part of the state.
      5.   Apprehend any person in the act of committing any offense against
the laws of the state or ordinances of the city and bring such person before a
court of competent jurisdiction for examination and trial consistent with law.
      6.   Have like powers and be subject to like responsibilities as a
sheriff or constable in similar cases.
      7.   Be responsible for prevention of accidents, crimes and other
incidents prohibited by statute or ordinance.
      8.   Be responsible for the protection of life and property, all pursuant
to and as provided by statute and ordinance. (Ord. 04-36, 9-22-2004)
      9.   Adopt a written policy regarding high speed chases, use of deadly
force, racial profiling, and use of nondeadly force (for example, tasers and
clubs). (Ord. 05-13, 4-6-2005)
2.20.080: ORGANIZATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY:
Chart 2.20.080 of this section graphically displays the organizational
responsibility within the administrative branch of city government. (Ord. 02-
32, 10-2-2002)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4016.png]
(Ord. 04-36, 9-22-2004)
CHAPTER 2.24
COMMITTEES
SECTION:
2.24.005: Purpose And Procedure
2.24.010: Formation And Function Of Joint Committees
2.24.020: Formation And Function Of Executive Committees
2.24.030: Formation And Function Of Legislative Committees
2.24.040: Parks And Recreation Committee
2.24.050: Public Safety Advisory Committee
2.24.060: Economic Development Committee
2.24.070: Budget Committee
2.24.080: Ordinance Review Committee
2.24.090: Historic Preservation Committee
2.24.100: Cemetery Advisory Committee (Rep. by Ord. 18-04, 2-7-2018)
2.24.110: Green Committee
2.24.120: Healthy Taylorsville Committee
2.24.130: Cultural Diversity Committee
2.24.005: PURPOSE AND PROCEDURE:
   A.   Intent And Purpose: It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to
encourage citizen involvement and obtain citizen advice and input. Citizens are
encouraged to share their opinions and expertise by joining any of the
committees. Any committee Chairman may invite interested individuals to share
their experience and advice with the committee. Any and all committees
established pursuant to this chapter have no authority to bind the City or
impose any conditions on the City or its citizens and are not vested with the
authority to make decisions regarding the public's business.
   B.   Rules Of Procedure: The committees shall operate in accordance with
"Robert's Rules of Order" unless the committee develops rules of procedure that
are approved by the committee advisor.
   C.   City Staff Support: The Mayor shall provide the committee with such
administrative staff support and materials, as he deems necessary to assist in
carrying out the duties and responsibilities of each committee.
   D.   Limit Of Membership: Membership, subject to the appointment process set
forth herein, on the committee shall be limited to the City residents or
qualified individuals who have demonstrated an interest in promoting the
welfare of the City. An appointment to a committee shall expire if a member
misses more than three (3) meetings without reason. If a member's term expires,
that member may reapply at a future date; however, the opening on the committee
may or may not still be available.
   E.   Meetings: The committees shall set their own meeting schedule.
Committee meetings shall be open to the public. (Ord. 13-33, 12-4-2013)
2.24.010: FORMATION AND FUNCTION OF JOINT COMMITTEES:
   A.   In addition to the committees or councils created by this chapter, the
City Council and the Mayor may form joint committees by joint resolution. Said
resolution shall state that the committee is a joint committee being formed
pursuant to this chapter, the name of the committee, the duties and
responsibilities of the committee, whether the committee is an ongoing or
special purpose committee and if a special purpose committee its duration.
   B.   The applicant is required to fill out a volunteer application form. The
committee Chair and Council advisor to the committee will review the
application and interview the applicant. If the committee Chair and Council
advisor find the appointment in the best interest of the City, then the Council
advisor will recommend the applicant to the City Council for appointment to the
committee. Some committees have membership capacity limits as outlined in the
specific section for the committees in this Code. If an applicant's committee
of choice is full, that applicant will be asked to consider appointment to a
different committee and/or asked if the applicant would like to keep their
application on file in the case that a spot opens on the committee of choice.
   C.   A Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be appointed and removed by the
Mayor or the Chairman of the City Council, with the advice and consent of the
City Council. The Chairman and Vice Chairman shall serve a one year term. If at
the end of the one year term, beginning March 1 and ending on the last day of
February the following year, the committee members vote to continue with the
same Chairman and Vice Chairman, those individuals may be reappointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
   D.   Members of joint committees who are appointed by the Mayor may be
removed by the Mayor at any time without cause. Members of joint committees
appointed by the City Council may be removed by the City Council at any time
without cause. In the case of removals or vacancies for other causes, such
vacancy shall be filled by the appointment process previously set forth herein.
   E.   Joint committees shall have appointed thereto a City Council member to
serve as an advisor. Appointment and removal of such advisor shall be made by
the Chairman of the City Council. (Ord. 13-33, 12-4-2013)
2.24.020: FORMATION AND FUNCTION OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEES:
   A.   In addition to the committees created by this chapter, the Mayor may
establish executive committees by executive order to assist and provide
counsel. Appointment to such executive committees shall be made by the Mayor
with advice and consent of the City Council. Executive committees shall report
to, coordinate with, or have City liaison through the Mayor or his designee who
shall also serve as the advisor to the committee.
   B.   A Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be appointed and removed by the
Mayor or the Chairman of the City Council, with the advice and consent of the
City Council. The Chairman and Vice Chairman shall serve a one year term. If at
the end of the one year term, beginning March 1 and ending on the last day of
February the following year, the committee members vote to continue with the
same Chairman and Vice Chairman, those individuals may be reappointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
   C.   Members of executive committees may be removed by the Mayor at any time
without cause. (Ord. 13-33, 12-4-2013)
2.24.030: FORMATION AND FUNCTION OF LEGISLATIVE COMMITTEES:
   A.   In addition to the committees created by this chapter, the City Council
may establish legislative committees by resolution to assist, provide counsel
and investigate the conduct of any officer, department, or agency of the City
or any matter relating to the welfare of the City. Appointment to such
legislative committees shall be made by the Chairman of the City Council with
advice and consent of the City Council. Legislative committees shall report to,
and coordinate with the City Council or its designee, and shall have such power
of inquiry as the Council deems necessary.
   B.   A Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be appointed and removed by the
Mayor or the Chairman of the City Council, with the advice and consent of the
City Council. The Chairman and Vice Chairman shall serve a one year term. If at
the end of the one year term, beginning March 1 and ending on the last day of
February the following year, the committee members vote to continue with the
same Chairman and Vice Chairman, those names can be recommended and submitted
to the City Council and appointed with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
   C.   Members of legislative committees may be removed at any time by the
City Council without cause. In the case of removals, or vacancies for other
causes, such vacancy shall be filled by the appointment process previously set
forth herein.
   D.   Legislative committees shall have appointed thereto a City Council
member to serve as an advisor. Appointment and removal of such advisor shall be
made by the Chairman of the City Council. (Ord. 13-33, 12-4-2013)
2.24.040: PARKS AND RECREATION COMMITTEE:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created an ongoing joint committee known as
the Parks and Recreation Committee.
   B.   Members: The Parks and Recreation Committee has no limit on the number
of members, and all members are appointed and governed consistent with section
2.24.010 of this chapter.
   C.   Duties And Responsibilities: The Parks and Recreation Committee shall
study and provide objective, current, and relevant information about the
quantity and quality of existing or potential leisure and recreation
opportunities to the Council and the Mayor, and as directed by the Mayor or
Council:
      1.   Assist the Council and the Mayor in improving the quantity and
quality of the leisure and recreation experience for residents and visitors to
the City.
      2.   Assist the Council and the Mayor in providing an optimum range, mix,
and location of leisure and recreation opportunities for all people.
      3.   Promote preserving or developing appropriate recreation resources to
serve their highest and best use.
      4.   Assist in relating recreation plans to other types of planning and
the General Plan.
      5.   Promote public understanding of and support for more effective
recreation planning at all levels of government.
      6.   Conduct research and evaluate the effectiveness of existing
facilities.
      7.   Encourage public and private cooperation to provide diversified
leisure and recreation opportunities in the City.
      8.   Review and report to the Council and the Mayor the status of
existing and proposed park and recreation facilities encouraging innovation in
planning, design, funding, and maintenance support.
      9.   Perform such other duties and functions as are consistent with the
promotion of leisure and recreational activities and facilities in the City as
directed by the Council and the Mayor. (Ord. 18-05, 2-7-2018)
2.24.050: PUBLIC SAFETY ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created an ongoing joint committee known as
the Public Safety Advisory Committee.
   B.   Members: The Public Safety Committee has no limit on the number of
members, and all members are appointed and governed consistent with section
2.24.010 of this chapter.
   C.   Duties And Responsibilities: The committee's duties shall be to advise,
evaluate and recommend to the Council and the Mayor all phases of safety in the
City regarding the following areas of concern, as well as other areas of
concern hereafter identified by the Mayor, the Council, or the committee:
      1.   Federal, State, County and City roads, signals, and signs;
      2.   Sidewalks;
      3.   Law enforcement;
      4.   Fire and paramedics;
      5.   Citizen involvement in Neighborhood Watch, Mobile Watch, and similar
programs;
      6.   Crime prevention;
      7.   Court systems;
      8.   Graffiti and gangs;
      9.   Emergency management and preparation, including incorporation of
Salt Lake County's CERT plan;
      10.   Coordination of other public safety agencies in the City, including
(without limitation) Salt Lake Community College, the Utah Department of
Transportation, and the police academy;
      11.   Public and private schools and churches;
      12.   Storage, usage and disposal of hazardous materials;
      13.   Safe business practices in the City;
      14.   Traffic;
      15.   Snow removal on sidewalks; and
      16.   Street lighting. (Ord. 13-33, 12-4-2013)
2.24.060: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE 1 :
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created an ongoing joint committee known as
the Economic Development Committee.
   B.   Members: The Economic Development Committee shall consist of not more
than five (5) members, appointed and governed consistent with section
2.24.010 of this chapter.
   C.   Duties And Responsibilities: The Economic Development Committee shall
advise and recommend economic development strategies and policies to promote
the development needs of the City in connection with its economic development
plan and as directed by the Mayor or Council:
      1.   Assist the Council and the Mayor in the establishment, revision, and
promotion of an economic development plan for the City.
      2.   Review and comment on the proposed economic development budget for
planned economic development activities throughout the year.
      3.   Publicize and disseminate news and information regarding economic
development activities within the City.
      4.   Hold publicized meetings in which economic development within the
City is discussed.
      5.   Assist with business attraction and development by identifying
advantages of locating within the City, and by identifying those target
businesses with the greatest potential for locating within the City.
      6.   Conduct business retention activities to help expand and retain
existing City businesses.
      7.   Assist in making presentations to the Council and other agencies
concerning economic development in the City.
      8.   Represent Economic Development Committee to civic and governmental
organizations whose purpose is to foster economic development.
      9.   Recommend projects, legislation, policies, funding allocations,
incentives and other measures, programs, and activities for economic
development and redevelopment of the City.
      10.   Initiate, sponsor, and promote involvement, activities, and
contributions by the private sector for the economic development of the City.
      11.   Perform such other duties and functions as are consistent with this
chapter and which are designed to promote economic development in the City.
(Ord. 13-33, 12-4-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  2.20.065 of this title.
2.24.070: BUDGET COMMITTEE:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created an ongoing joint committee known as
the Budget Committee.
   B.   Members: The Budget Committee shall consist of not more than twelve
(12) members, appointed and governed consistent with section
2.24.010 of this chapter.
   C.   Mission Statement: The Taylorsville Budget Committee reviews the
financial statements of the City of Taylorsville and reviews the proposed City
of Taylorsville budgets each year as prepared by the administration and
presented to the City Council. We seek to verify that sound financial
procedures are followed in the financial statements and the budgets.
   D.   Duties And Responsibilities: The Budget Committee shall:
      1.   Study and become familiar with the State mandated format for annual
municipal budgets.
      2.   Gather appropriate information from the Mayor, department heads, the
Council, and other staff, to evaluate and estimate revenues and expenditures.
      3.   Assist in drafting a budget and a budget message which reflects the
needs of the City, the directives of the Council, and all necessary elements
required by law, and which is understandable to the public.
      4.   Review actual revenues and expenditures as compared to budgeted
amounts, evaluating variances and reasons for variances.
      5.   Review quarterly and annual audit reports, recommend necessary
midyear modifications, and use actual revenues and expenditure information for
beginning basis of budget for the upcoming fiscal year. (Ord. 13-33, 12-4-2013)
2.24.080: ORDINANCE REVIEW COMMITTEE:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created an ongoing legislative committee
known as the Ordinance Review Committee.
   B.   Members: The Ordinance Review Committee shall consist of not more than
seven (7) members, appointed and governed consistent with section
2.24.030 of this chapter.
   C.   Mission Statement: With resident input the Ordinance Review Committee
assists the City Council in the evaluation and prioritization of existing and
needed ordinances for our City.
   D.   Duties And Responsibilities: The Ordinance Review Committee shall:
      1.   Assist in determining the ordinances needed by the City.
      2.   Prioritize the ordinances to be considered.
      3.   Evaluate ordinances used by other government entities, the Utah
League of Cities and Towns, etc.
      4.   Consider citizen input regarding City ordinances.
      5.   Assist in drafting proposed ordinances.
      6.   Present ordinances to the City Council for consideration. (Ord. 13-
33, 12-4-2013)
2.24.090: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMITTEE:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created an ongoing joint committee known as
the Historic Preservation Committee.
   B.   Members: The Historic Preservation Committee has no limit on the number
of members, and all members are appointed and governed consistent with section
2.24.010 of this chapter.
   C.   Duties And Responsibilities: The Historic Preservation Committee shall
consist of members with a demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in
historic preservation. To the extent available in the community, two (2)
committee members shall be professionals, as defined by the National Park
Service regulations, from the disciplines of history, archaeology, planning,
architecture or architectural history. The Historic Preservation Committee
shall perform those duties as set forth in subsection
13.18.020B2 of this Code. (Ord. 13-33, 12-4-2013)
2.24.100: CEMETERY ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
(Rep. by Ord. 18-04, 2-7-2018)
2.24.110: GREEN COMMITTEE:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created an ongoing joint committee known as
the Green Committee.
   B.   Members: The Green Committee has no limit on the number of members, and
all members are appointed and governed consistent with section
2.24.010 of this chapter.
   C.   Duties And Responsibilities: The Green Committee shall advise and
recommend programs that assist the City and its residents to experience the
benefits of sustainable living as we conserve resources, reduce pollution, slow
climate change, and ensure a healthy, sustainable future for City residents and
as directed by the Mayor and Council:
      1.   Assist the Council and the Mayor in the establishment and promotion
of recycling and waste reduction.
      2.   Assist the Council and the Mayor in the establishment and promotion
of programs and/or strategies to slow climate change and improve air quality.
      3.   Assist the Council and the Mayor in the establishment and promotion
of energy conservation and renewable energy.
      4.   Assist the Council and the Mayor in the establishment and promotion
of improved water quality and conservation.
      5.   Assist the Council and the Mayor in the establishment and promotion
of food production and nutrition. (Ord. 13-33, 12-4-2013)
2.24.120: HEALTHY TAYLORSVILLE COMMITTEE:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created an ongoing joint committee known as
the Healthy Taylorsville Committee.
   B.   Members: The Healthy Taylorsville Committee has no limit on the number
of members, and all members are appointed and governed consistent with section
2.24.010 of this chapter.
   C.   Mission Statement: To promote opportunities for all Taylorsville
residents to make healthy choices on active living, healthy eating, and
preventive medical care.
   D.   Duties And Responsibilities: The Healthy Taylorsville Committee will
assist the Council and the Mayor to:
      1.   Identify local issues that affect the health and the quality of
life;
      2.   Work with agencies such as the Salt Lake Valley Health Department
and the Utah Department of Health in assisting the Council and Mayor with the
implementation of proven programs to better our community and the lives of our
citizens;
      3.   Assist the Council and the Mayor in the establishment and promotion
of programs and/or strategies to promote good health;
      4.   Assist the Council and the Mayor in the establishment and promotion
of preventive medical care. (Ord. 13-33, 12-4-2013)
2.24.130: CULTURAL DIVERSITY COMMITTEE:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created an ongoing joint committee known as
the Cultural Diversity Committee. This committee is for all who are interested
in cultural integration and community inclusion.
   B.   Members: The Cultural Diversity Committee shall consist of not more
than fifteen (15) members, appointed and governed consistent with section
2.24.010 of this chapter. The committee officers (Chair, Vice Chair, Treasurer,
Secretary, and any future officers deemed necessary) shall be residents of the
City or Taylorsville business owners or their designated representatives. All
other non-member committee volunteers may include both residents and non-
residents.
   C.   Mission Statement: With resident input, the Cultural Diversity
Committee assists and provides counsel to the City Council and the Mayor
regarding diverse citizen involvement in local government.
   D.   Bylaws: The Cultural Diversity Committee shall have the authority to
create its own governing bylaws, and to amend those bylaws from time to time as
needed.
   E.   Duties And Responsibilities: The Cultural Diversity Committee shall
study and provide objective, current, and relevant information leading to the
creation of multi-cultural events, activities, and celebration opportunities to
the City Council, the Mayor, and staff as requested, in an effort to increase
multi-cultural awareness within and outside of the City. Other committee duties
and responsibilities shall include the following:
      1.   Assist the City Council and the Mayor in improving the quantity and
quality of cultural experiences and opportunities for residents and visitors to
the City;
      2.   Assist the City Council and the Mayor in providing an optimum range,
mix, and location of multi-cultural opportunities for all people;
      3.   Promote preserving or developing appropriate City and community
resources to serve their highest and best use;
      4.   Communicate recreational and multi-cultural plans to other City
committees, thus maximizing City resources, efficiency, and building an
environment where committees can work together to plan and sponsor events;
      5.   Promote public understanding of and support for cultural diversity
at all levels of government;
      6.   Encourage public and private cooperation to provide cultural
diversity opportunities in the City;
      7.   Work with and solicit involvement from ethnic businesses and other
cultural groups;
      8.   Review and report to the City Council and the Mayor the status of
existing and proposed cultural events that the committee considers would
benefit both the City and various cultural organizations;
      9.   Perform any other duties and functions as are consistent with the
promotion of cultural diversity activities in the City as directed by the City
Council and the Mayor;
      10.   Publicize and disseminate news and information regarding cultural
diversity activities within the City. Work with the City's communication staff
members to promote events and activities in all news and social media;
      11.   Hold publicized meetings in which cultural diversity within the
City is discussed;
      12.   Initiate, sponsor, and promote involvement, activities, and
contributions by the private sector for the expansion and awareness of cultural
diversity within the City;
      13.   Submit an annual budget request to the City Council and review
actual revenues and expenditures as compared to budgeted amounts, evaluating
variances and reasons for variances, and submit a quarterly report to the City
Council and the Mayor;
      14.   Work with agencies and organizations within and outside of the City
to assist the City Council and the Mayor with the implementation of cultural
events and programs to improve the community and the lives of the City's
citizens;
      15.   Conduct educational events for ethnic groups with the purpose of
sharing different cultural beliefs, traditions, and customs of citizens of the
City;
      16.   Conduct educational events for ethnic and other groups to learn
about City, County and State government; and
      17.   Provide a voice for the ethnic and other communities to communicate
issues that are important for each group to City, County and State officials.
(Ord. 18-24, 8-1-2018)
CHAPTER 2.25
CITY ARTS COUNCIL
SECTION:
2.25.010: Creation
2.25.020: Trustees
2.25.030: Duties And Responsibilities
2.25.040: Staff Support
2.25.050: Budget
2.25.060: Officers
2.25.070: Members
2.25.010: CREATION:
The city is authorized to create a separate nonprofit corporation known as the
arts council. The arts council shall have no authority to bind the city or
impose any condition on the city or its citizens. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.25.020: TRUSTEES:
The governing body of the arts council is the board of trustees, which shall
consist of the mayor, chairman of the city council or his designee who is a
member of the city council, and up to five (5) other people. Two (2) trustees
shall be appointed by majority vote of the trustees in the November preceding
the term of office with the advice and consent of the city council. The
remaining trustees shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent
of the city council. Any trustee must be a resident of the city and a member of
the arts council, except the mayor and chairman of the city council or his
designee who is a member of the city council. Terms of office shall expire on
the first Monday in January of each applicable year. Subcommittees consisting
of board and nonboard members may be established as needed. (Ord. 07-15, 3-21-
2007)
2.25.030: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The arts council is an ongoing committee. The arts council shall:
   A.   Promote events and activities which encourage community residents to
enjoy musical, literary, visual and performing arts and dance;
   B.   Provide opportunities for residents to develop and display their
talents by participating in literature, visual art exhibits and performing arts
events;
   C.   Subject to section
2.32.180 of this title, solicit grants, sponsors and other funding sources to
support various events and activities;
   D.   Promote other activities to expand and enhance the interests of
residents in artistic and cultural events. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.25.040: STAFF SUPPORT:
The mayor may assign such personnel, as deemed necessary, to assist the arts
council and to attend its meetings. (Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.25.050: BUDGET:
The mayor may prepare and recommend to the city council a budget appropriation
to be paid to the arts council pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-2.
(Ord. 02-32, 10-2-2002)
2.25.060: OFFICERS:
The officers of the arts council shall be chairman, vice chairman, and
secretary/treasurer. Officers shall be appointed by the board of trustees in
the November preceding the term of office. Officers must be residents of the
city of Taylorsville and a member of the arts council. The term of appointment
for an officer shall be two (2) years. Generally, the vice chairman shall
succeed to the office of chairman upon expiration (or early expiration) of the
chairman's term. Members holding the office of either chairman or vice chairman
may hold such position more than once and may hold such position in consecutive
terms. Members holding the office of secretary/treasurer may hold such position
more than once and may hold such position in consecutive terms. Terms of office
shall expire on the first Monday in January of each applicable year. (Ord. 12-
35, 12-19-2012)
2.25.070: MEMBERS:
   A.   The members of the arts council shall be appointed by the mayor with
the advice and consent of the city council. Prior to such appointment, the
mayor shall solicit nominations and consult with the board of trustees
regarding such appointment.
   B.   In addition to the members appointed in subsection A of this section,
two (2) members of the arts council shall be appointed from the youth council
each year at the beginning of the youth council members' terms. Such
appointment shall be made by the mayor. Prior to such appointments, the mayor
shall solicit nominations and consult with the youth council mayor. Of the two
(2) members appointed from the youth council, one should be male and one should
be female. With respect to these two (2) members, upon the expiration of their
terms, or should they be removed as members of the youth council for any other
reason, their membership in the arts council shall immediately terminate.
   C.   Members of the arts council may be removed by the board of trustees at
any time without cause. In the case of removals or vacancies for other causes,
such vacancy shall be filled by the appointment process previously set forth
herein.
   D.   Nonresidents of the city may be members of the arts council. (Ord. 07-
15, 3-21-2007)
CHAPTER 2.26
CITY YOUTH COUNCIL
SECTION:
2.26.010: Creation And Purpose
2.26.020: Structure Of Officers
2.26.030: Selection And Appointment
2.26.040: Term; Removal; Vacancy
2.26.050: Officers
2.26.060: Rules Of Procedure
2.26.070: Operations
2.26.010: CREATION AND PURPOSE:
There is hereby created a city youth council. The city youth council is created
as an advisory body to the city with the following purposes:
   A.   To promote and provide an opportunity for the youth of the city to
acquire a greater knowledge of, and appreciation for, the political system of
local government through activities and participation in local government.
   B.   To obtain information and assistance from city youth regarding planning
and implementation of social, educational, cultural and recreational activities
for youth in the city.
   C.   To, as an organization and body, with the consent of the city council,
plan and implement activities of service to the community of the city, as well
as accept and act upon foreign proposals to do acts of community service.
The city youth council shall report to and be responsible to the city council.
The city youth council shall meet twice a month in a regular youth city council
meeting, holding additional work sessions when necessary. The city youth
council shall not have authority to bind the city or impose any condition on
the city or its citizens. (Ord. 14-17, 10-15-2014)
2.26.020: STRUCTURE OF OFFICERS:
The city youth council shall consist of a minimum of ten (10) members to
include, but not be limited to, a youth mayor, five (5) youth city council
members, a youth council chair, a youth council vice chair, a youth city
recorder, and a youth city historian. (Ord. 14-17, 10-15-2014)
2.26.030: SELECTION AND APPOINTMENT:
   A.   The positions of youth council chair and vice chair, youth mayor, youth
city recorder, and youth city historian shall be determined by the election
process. The general election shall occur annually during the first regular
city youth council meeting in August. Voters may have only one ballot and may
vote only one at a time. Votes will be counted immediately and the results will
be announced by the mayor or his designated representative that same meeting.
The newly elected positions will take office during the first regular youth
city council meeting, to be held in September of each year.
   B.   The city youth council and youth mayor may create subcommittees to
accomplish their purposes.
   C.   Members of the city youth council are required to be residents of the
city and be in good standing academically and with regard to citizenship as
determined by their school. Youth who are residents of the city who are
homeschooled are also eligible for selection to the city youth council. (Ord.
14-17, 10-15-2014)
2.26.040: TERM; REMOVAL; VACANCY:
   A.   Subject to subsections
2.26.050A and B of this chapter, and excepting appointment by reason of vacancy
due to removal or resignation, the term of appointment for a member of the city
youth council shall be one year, beginning in September of the year he or she
is elected.
   B.   A member of the city youth council may be removed with advice and
consent of the city council for, among other things, excessive, unexcused
absences/not maintaining an attendance record of eighty percent (80%).
   C.   Any vacancy occurring on the youth city council, either by removal or
by resignation, shall be filled by the youth city council coordinator with
advice and consent of the city council. The new member filling the vacancy
shall have a term to end at the same time as the current youth city council
members. (Ord. 14-17, 10-15-2014)
2.26.050: OFFICERS:
Officers of the city youth council shall consist with the consent of the city
council as follows:
   A.   Youth Mayor: Shall be elected annually with the advice and consent of
the city council. The youth mayor shall be a high school senior and will serve
as the youth mayor from September to August.
   B.   City Youth Council Chair And Vice Chair: Shall be elected annually with
the advice and consent of the city council. The city youth council chair and
vice chair shall be high school juniors or seniors and will serve as the city
youth council chair and vice chair from September to August.
   C.   Youth City Recorder: Shall be elected annually with the advice and
consent of the city council and shall serve as the secretary of the city youth
council and record all proceedings of the city youth council meetings.
   D.   Youth City Historian: Shall be elected annually with the advice and
consent of the city council and shall serve as the historian of the city youth
council. The youth city historian shall provide photos of all city youth
council events.
   E.   Other Officers: Other officers deemed necessary by the youth mayor,
youth city council chair and vice chair, youth city recorder, and youth city
historian shall be appointed annually by the unanimous consent of the youth
mayor, youth city council chair and vice chair, youth city recorder, and youth
city historian and shall function as directed.
   F.   City Support Staff: The city youth council advisor shall provide the
city youth council with such administrative staff support and advisors as he or
she deems necessary to assist the city youth council in carrying out its duties
and responsibilities.
   G.   City Youth Council Advisor: A city council member shall serve as an
advisor to the city youth council, along with the city council coordinator, and
attend meetings of the city youth council and provide leadership and support to
the program. (Ord. 14-17, 10-15-2014)
2.26.060: RULES OF PROCEDURE:
The city youth council shall operate in accordance with "Robert's Rules Of
Order" unless the city youth council develops rules of procedure that are
approved by the city youth council advisor. (Ord. 14-17, 10-15-2014)
2.26.070: OPERATIONS:
As allowed by this chapter and other applicable law, and with the prior
approval of the city council, the city youth council may:
   A.   Take opportunities to acquire a greater knowledge of, and appreciation
for, the political system of local government, through completion of planned
projects and active participation in local government.
   B.   Inform city government officials regarding planning and implementing of
social, educational, cultural and recreational activities for youth. (Ord. 14-
17, 10-15-2014)
CHAPTER 2.26A
CITY YOUTH AMBASSADOR PROGRAM
SECTION:
2.26A.010: Purposes
2.26A.020: Ambassadors; Terms
2.26A.030: Ambassador Eligibility
2.26A.040: Selection And Appointment
2.26A.050: Service Responsibilities
2.26A.010: PURPOSES:
The purposes of the city youth ambassador program are to:
   A.   Prepare youth to become successful, contributing members of the
community by promoting involvement, education, and experience in local
government and politics.
   B.   Match high school seniors and recent high school graduates with mentors
from various local businesses and government offices to provide opportunities
for youth to exercise mutual understanding, develop leadership and
interpersonal skills, and experience all facets of local government including,
but not limited to, services provided to city residents, current issues facing
the city, and city department contributions. (Ord. 14-16, 10-15-2014)
2.26A.020: AMBASSADORS; TERMS:
   A.   Ambassadors: The city youth ambassador program shall consist of a
minimum of four (4) ambassadors.
   B.   Term: City youth ambassadors shall serve for a one year term beginning
in October and ending in August of the following year. City youth ambassadors
may only serve for one selection term. City youth ambassadors shall serve until
the new ambassadors are selected for the next selection year. City youth
ambassadors who successfully complete a one year term shall receive a
scholarship to any university of their choice, or receive reimbursement for
school expenses including, but not limited to, housing and/or textbooks. (Ord.
14-16, 10-15-2014)
2.26A.030: AMBASSADOR ELIGIBILITY:
City youth ambassador applicants must meet the following requirements to be
considered for selection to the city youth ambassador program:
   A.   The applicant must be a high school senior or must have graduated from
high school within the previous year.
   B.   The applicant must have a minimum high school grade point average of
3.0. A copy of the applicant's high school transcript should be included in the
application materials packet.
   C.   The applicant must be a resident of Taylorsville City.
   D.   The applicant must have served on the city youth council for a minimum
of one year.
   E.   The applicant must submit a written proposal for a service project the
applicant will implement during their year as a city youth ambassador. The
proposal must include details and a time line for completing the service
project.
   F.   The applicant must submit two (2) letters of recommendation from any of
the following individuals: a teacher from the applicant's school, an official
from the applicant's school, an employer, a neighbor, a friend, or an
ecclesiastical leader.
   G.   The applicant must submit a resume that includes all previous and
current extracurricular activities in which the applicant has participated or
is participating.
   H.   The applicant must commit to participating in all city youth ambassador
events during the course of the applicant's one year ambassador term.
   I.   The applicant must participate in an interview by a selection panel.
(Ord. 14-16, 10-15-2014)
2.26A.040: SELECTION AND APPOINTMENT:
The city youth ambassadors shall be chosen by a selection panel. The selection
panel shall consist of no less than four (4) of the following individuals: the
city mayor, a member of the city council, the city council coordinator, a
representative from a Taylorsville secondary school, a Taylorsville resident at
large, or a member of a local service organization. (Ord. 14-16, 10-15-2014)
2.26A.050: SERVICE RESPONSIBILITIES:
The city youth ambassadors shall, during their term as ambassadors, fulfill the
following service responsibilities:
   A.   Participate in a workshop with city government and submit a written and
oral report on the workshop to the city council during a regularly scheduled
city council meeting.
   B.   Volunteer at city events including, but not limited to, parades, local
ribbon cuttings, groundbreakings, city ceremonies, and Taylorsville Dayzz.
   C.   Plan and implement a service project to be completed within their one
year term of service as an ambassador, including coordinating with the city
public information officer to ensure community awareness for the service
project.
   D.   Provide leadership and mentoring at city youth council meetings,
including, but not limited to, arranging speakers and other presentations to
educate the city youth council on government processes. (Ord. 14-16, 10-15-
2014)
CHAPTER 2.27
COMMUNITY COUNCILS
SECTION:
2.27.005: Purpose
2.27.010: Establishment
2.27.020: Volunteer Status
2.27.025: Advisors
2.27.030: Budget
2.27.005: PURPOSE:
The purpose of establishing community councils is to inform communities about
city policies and services, engage the public in city decisions, promote a
sense of community, and encourage and cultivate community participation and
communication. Community councils are a forum where a variety of city related
community interests such as community and economic development, public safety,
emergency preparedness, public services, city infrastructure, civil
enforcement, and budget can be discussed. Topics outside of the scope of city
government but important to the community may also be discussed in community
councils. (Ord. 13-07, 3-6-2013)
2.27.010: ESTABLISHMENT:
   A.   Community councils are advisory councils established by the city.
Community councils shall not have authority to bind the city or impose any
conditions on the city or its citizens.
   B.   There shall be a minimum of one and a maximum of two (2) community
councils per city council district, coinciding with the boundaries of the city
council districts on three (3) sides, with an approximate middle boundary for a
second community council in each of the city council districts as follows:
District one shall be divided along Redwood Road.
District two shall be divided along county voting precinct boundaries, south
along Redwood Road to Murray Taylorsville Road, south on Woodhaven Road, to
Marinwood Drive and then along 1130 West.
District three shall be divided along Interstate 215 and then along Redwood
Road.
District four shall be divided along county voting precinct boundaries along
Whitewood Drive, and then across the north end of the UDOT parcel to 3200 West.
District five shall be divided along 3200 West.
   C.   Membership of community councils shall include the following groups
within a city council district: residents; property owners; business owners;
and leaders of local religious congregations, schools, nonprofit organizations,
and other community organizations located within the boundaries.
   D.   Each community council is required to make reasonable efforts to reach
out to and include all members and to ensure that meetings reflect the diverse
demographics of their districts.
   E.   Community councils should meet on a regular monthly schedule with at
least nine (9) meetings per year. Meetings should be on a weekday evening not
overlapping with city council meetings.
   F.   Each community council shall elect a chair, a vice chair, and a
secretary who are members of the community council. These individuals form an
executive committee responsible for setting and distributing the agenda,
conducting meetings, keeping minutes, conducting outreach to the broad
membership, liaising with the city, and performing other appropriate duties. An
individual may not be elected to the same position more than two (2)
consecutive times. However, if the only candidate has been elected twice
consecutively, then such person may be elected to serve in the same position
for another term.
   G.   Elections for members of the executive committee shall be held annually
in the last meeting of the calendar year. Elections and the positions up for
election must be listed on the agenda and the agenda must be posted not less
than twenty four (24) hours in advance of the meeting. Elections should be
conducted by an individual not currently serving on the executive committee. A
call for nominations should be made in the previous meeting, then again on the
night of the elections. Individuals may self- nominate. All nominations shall
be seconded to be accepted. Nominees should be given an opportunity to accept
the nomination and introduce themselves and their interest in the community
council. If there are more than two (2) nominees for a position, a primary
election shall be held then a general election in the same meeting. If there is
a vacancy in any position during the year, an election should be held to fill
the position until the end of the year.
   H.   The executive committee may establish subcommittees to focus on special
topics. The chair of a subcommittee shall be appointed by consensus of the
executive committee.
   I.   Meetings are conducted by the chair or vice chair. The community
councils shall be a place where differing and opposing opinions are welcome but
where civility is always expected. The individual conducting shall be a
facilitator for respectful dialogue. Executive committee members are expected
to act as objective leaders of community councils, refraining from the use of
their position as a platform for any personal agenda or opinion, and putting
first their role as facilitator.
   J.   Votes, other than elections (as described in subsection G of this
section), shall be cast by the general membership (as defined in subsection C
of this section) in attendance at the public meeting of the community council.
Formal votes shall be handled using a simplified form of "Robert's Rules Of
Order" including a motion, a second, adequate opportunity for discussion,
opportunity to amend the motion, and the vote. The results of votes should
always be conveyed with a count of the number of individuals in favor of and
those opposed to a motion.
   K.   The mayor will appoint a staff member or members who will be primary
point(s) of contact between the administration and the executive committee.
However, community councils are responsible for scheduling and other staffing
needs such as the taking of minutes.
   L.   To initially establish community councils, the mayor shall appoint
individuals to serve in the executive committee positions until the end of 2013
when elections will be held for the 2014 year. (Ord. 13-07, 3-6-2013)
2.27.020: VOLUNTEER STATUS:
Community council members shall be considered volunteers to the city and not
employees, officials or officers of the city. Community council members shall
be defended and indemnified by the city pursuant to the provisions of the Utah
governmental immunities act in any civil action which may arise within the
course and scope of performance of their duties. (Ord. 13-07, 3-6-2013)
2.27.025: ADVISORS:
Members of the city council may serve as advisors to the community council
located within their district. (Ord. 13-07, 3-6-2013)
2.27.030: BUDGET:
The city council may budget funds for community councils which will be spent
for various administrative costs such as postage, duplication costs, etc.
Community councils receiving funds from the city shall file a detailed expense
statement with the recorder by July 15 of each year. (Ord. 13-07, 3-6-2013)
CHAPTER 2.28
EMPLOYEE APPEAL BOARD
SECTION:
2.28.010: Purpose
2.28.020: Board Creation
2.28.030: Terms And Duties Of Board
2.28.040: Quorum Use Of Alternate Member
2.28.050: Preemptory Challenge
2.28.060: Appeal Of Discharge, Suspension Without Pay, Or Involuntary Transfer
2.28.070: Procedure For Conducting Evidentiary Hearing
2.28.080: Standard Of Review
2.28.090: Remedies
2.28.100: Appeal Of Board Decision
2.28.010: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to create an employee appeal board to satisfy
the requirements of Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-1105 and 1106. (Ord. 12-
06, 3-21-2012)
2.28.020: BOARD CREATION:
There is hereby created an employee appeal board. The employee appeal board
shall consist of three (3) members and one alternate, no more than one of whom
is an employee of the city. The members of the employee appeal board shall be
appointed or removed without cause by the mayor, with the advice and consent of
the city council, and one such member shall be appointed by the mayor, with the
advice and consent of the city council as the chair of the employee appeal
board. (Ord. 12-06, 3-21-2012)
2.28.030: TERMS AND DUTIES OF BOARD:
Members of the employee appeal board, including the alternate member, shall
serve for a term of three (3) years, and, except with the unanimous consent of
the city council, no member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms.
The employee appeal board shall have jurisdiction to hear appeals from
employees with appeal rights who have been discharged, suspended for more than
two (2) days without pay, or involuntarily transferred from one position to
another with less remuneration. (Ord. 12-06, 3-21-2012)
2.28.040: QUORUM USE OF ALTERNATE MEMBER:
No hearing or action by the employee appeal board shall be official or of any
effect except when three (3) members are present. A majority vote at a meeting
constitutes the action of the employee appeal board. In the event of a
preemptory challenge, as provided below, or the inability or unwillingness of a
member of the employee appeal board to serve, then with respect to a preemptory
challenge, the alternate member shall serve as a member of the employee appeal
board for that specific appeal or with respect to the inability or
unwillingness of a member of the employee appeal board to serve during the
period that a member of the employee appeal board is unable or unwilling to
serve. (Ord. 12-06, 3-21-2012)
2.28.050: PREEMPTORY CHALLENGE:
The employee appealing to the employee appeal board may preemptory challenge
one of the members of the employee appeal board in which case such member shall
be excused from service during the pending hearing or such employee's appeal.
The preemptory challenge must be raised before the hearing starts. (Ord. 12-06,
3-21-2012)
2.28.060: APPEAL OF DISCHARGE, SUSPENSION WITHOUT PAY, OR INVOLUNTARY TRANSFER:
   A.   For purposes of this chapter, an "employee without appeal rights" is
defined as a person identified in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1105(2), as
amended from time to time. An employee without appeal rights shall have no
rights under this chapter.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, an "employee with appeal rights" means
all other employees of the city.
   C.   An employee without appeal rights who is discharged, suspended for more
than two (2) days without pay, or involuntarily transferred from one position
to another with less remuneration for any reason may not appeal the discharge,
suspension without pay, or involuntary transfer to the employee appeal board.
   D.   An employee with appeal rights who is discharged, suspended for more
than two (2) days without pay, or involuntarily transferred from one position
to another with less remuneration for any reason may appeal the discharge,
suspension without pay, or involuntary transfer to the employee appeal board.
(Ord. 12-06, 3-21-2012)
2.28.070: PROCEDURE FOR CONDUCTING EVIDENTIARY HEARING:
Within five (5) business days of the notice of the employee appeal board's
receipt of any appeal from an employee with appeal rights, the parties shall
stipulate to a scheduling conference to, among other things, schedule evidence
hearings or other procedural issues. The employee appeal board's authority is
limited to conducting an evidentiary hearing and rendering its decision in
accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-1106, as amended from time to
time, and matters incident thereto, such as holding scheduling conferences,
entering orders regarding procedural issues, and directing the parties to
exchange witnesses/exhibit lists in advance of the evidentiary hearing.
Hearings will generally be open to the public, but the employee appeal board
may, for good cause or to protect the privacy interests of individuals, close
any part of the proceedings. Unless it is impractical to do so, the party
requesting closure of the hearing (or any part thereof) should make written
request seeking closure at least two (2) business days prior to the
commencement of any evidentiary hearing. The employee appeal board may exclude
from the hearing any witnesses who have not yet given testimony or evidence in
the appeal before the employee appeal board. Hearings shall be conducted with
appropriate formality and decorum, so that the due process rights of the
parties are protected. Utah rules of evidence and rules of civil procedure are
used as guidelines but need not be strictly followed or applied. Rules of
evidence regarding authorization, foundation, hearsay, or relevance need not be
strictly applied. Discovery shall be limited to that information which was
actually considered in making the decision which is being appealed. If
mitigating evidence is introduced which was not considered in making the
decision being appealed, the employee appeal board may in its discretion
suspend the proceedings and remand the matter to the person who made the
decision. The person who made the decision shall reconsider his decision and
may issue a supplemental written decision within fourteen (14) calendar days.
If requested by the employee within fourteen (14) calendar days after receipt
of the supplemental written decision, the employee appeal board shall then
reconvene and hear the employee's appeal. With respect to appeals of
disciplinary matters, the burden of proof and burden of proceeding shall
initially be on the city to prove the facts supporting the allegations made
against the employee and that the disciplinary sanction is proportionate to the
alleged misconduct and consistent with discipline imposed against other
similarly situated employees with appeal rights. A record of the proceeding
shall be kept. (Ord. 12-06, 3-21-2012)
2.28.080: STANDARD OF REVIEW:
Consistent with the parties' respective burdens of proof and proceeding as set
forth in section
 2.28.070 of this chapter, the disciplinary decision being reviewed can only be
overturned if the disciplinary decision is not supported by substantial
evidence, that the disciplinary decision is disproportionate to the alleged
misconduct, or is inconsistent with sanctions imposed against other similarly
situated employees with appeal rights. "Substantial evidence" means quantum or
quantity of relevant evidence that is adequate to convince a reasonable mind to
support a conclusion. (Ord. 12-06, 3-21-2012)
2.28.090: REMEDIES:
Unless the employee appeal board finds that there is no substantial evidence to
support the city's disciplinary decision, the employee appeal board shall
uphold the disciplinary decision. If the employee appeal board does not uphold
the disciplinary decision, then the city shall compensate the employee as
required by state law. The employee appeal board shall not provide any remedy
beyond that required by state law or as authorized in this chapter. (Ord. 12-
06, 3-21-2012)
2.28.100: APPEAL OF BOARD DECISION:
The employee appeal board's decision may be appealed by the city or an employee
with appeal rights as provided by state law. (Ord. 12-06, 3-21-2012)
CHAPTER 2.32
FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
2.32.010: Scope
2.32.015: Director Of Finance
2.32.020: Definitions
2.32.030: Responsibility For Budgetary Compliance
2.32.040: Acquisition Of Nonprofessional Services Or Supplies Of Twenty
Thousand Dollars Or Less
2.32.050: Acquisition Of Nonprofessional Services Or Supplies Greater Than
Twenty Thousand Dollars
2.32.051: Acquisition Of Nonprofessional Services Or Supplies In Certain
Situations
2.32.060: Acquisition Of Professional Services
2.32.070: Emergency Acquisitions
2.32.080: Conditions Of Acceptance
2.32.085: Protest
2.32.090: Petty Cash Accounts
2.32.100: Reserved
2.32.110: Blanket Purchase Order
2.32.120: Payment Of Routine Expenditures
2.32.125: Payments From City Council Budget
2.32.130: Payment Of Payroll Obligations
2.32.140: Payments To Be Made From Bond Proceeds
2.32.150: Disposal Of Surplus Property
2.32.155: Disposal Of Parcels Of Real Property
2.32.160: Administrative Regulations And Policies
2.32.165: Claims
2.32.170: Sanctions
2.32.180: Grants
2.32.010: SCOPE:
   A.   This chapter shall, except where otherwise noted, govern the
acquisition and disposal of property, whether real or personal, owned by the
city.
   B.   No purchases shall be made and no encumbrances shall be incurred for
the benefit of the city except as provided in this chapter.
   C.   No purchase shall be made and no encumbrance shall be incurred unless
funds sufficient to cover the purchase or encumbrance have been budgeted and
are available within the approved budget and sufficient documentation is
provided.
   D.   Notwithstanding the provisions above, whenever any purchase or
encumbrance is made with state or federal funds and the applicable state or
federal laws or regulations are in conflict with this chapter to the extent
that following the provisions of this chapter would jeopardize the use of those
state or federal funds, such conflicting provisions of this chapter shall not
apply and the city officials making such purchases shall follow the procedure
required by the state or federal laws or regulations. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.015: DIRECTOR OF FINANCE:
There is hereby created the position of the director of finance. The director
of finance shall perform the financial duties and responsibilities of the city
recorder as established in Utah Code Annotated sections 10-6-101 through 159.
The director of finance shall be a qualified person appointed and removed with
the advice and consent of the city council, and may not assume the duties of
the city treasurer. The director of finance shall be bonded in the same amount
as the city treasurer. All costs of such bond shall be paid by the city. (Ord.
07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.020: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
CITY, DETERMINED BY THE CITY, APPROVED BY THE CITY (Or Similar Terms): Approval
or action by the mayor or his designee.
DESIGNEE: The city administrator or a person appointed by the mayor with the
advice and consent of the city council.
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE: The person appointed pursuant to section
2.32.015 of this chapter.
ENCUMBRANCE: An obligation of the city.
INVITATION FOR BIDS: Solicitation (including soliciting documents) of
competitive sealed bids for procurement of nonprofessional services or
supplies. An invitation for bids should be used as determined by the city when
the city is capable of specifically defining the scope of work for
nonprofessional services or supplies required or when the city is capable of
establishing precise specifications defining the actual commodity or group of
commodities required.
NONPROFESSIONAL SERVICES: Services other than professional services.
PREQUALIFIED: A list of individuals or firms that provide professional services
that is maintained by the city and established pursuant to the statement of
qualifications process. The prequalified list of professional service providers
and the procedure used for awarding those services will be reviewed and
approved as part of the annual budget process.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: A licensed professional who provides a service such as
architecture, engineering, surveying, appraising, legal and financial advising,
sought or obtained from sources other than city employees.
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS: Solicitation (including soliciting documents) of
competitive sealed proposals for procurement of nonprofessional services or
supplies. The request for proposals should be used as determined by the city
when there may be a need for price and service negotiations, before or during
the performance of a contract, where the relative skill and expertise of the
offeror needs to be evaluated, where costs are secondary to the characteristics
of the nonprofessional services or supplies sought (for example, in a work of
art), or where the conditions of the nonprofessional service, product or
delivery conditions are unable to be sufficiently described in the invitation
for bids.
REQUEST FOR QUOTATIONS: Solicitation (including soliciting documents) of quotes
for procurement of nonprofessional services or supplies. A request for
quotations should be used as determined by the city when a description or
specifications adequately describe the scope of work for nonprofessional
services or supplies requested, when negotiations are not necessary, and when
written, faxed or electronic quotations are sufficient.
STATEMENT OF QUALIFICATIONS: Solicitation (including soliciting documents) of a
statement of qualifications for procurement of professional services. A
statement of qualifications should be used to procure professional services.
SUPPLIES: Any and all tangible articles or things, materials or equipment which
shall be furnished to or used by any city department or employee within the
scope of his employment with the city. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.030: RESPONSIBILITY FOR BUDGETARY COMPLIANCE:
   A.   The mayor shall require all city expenditures by any department to
conform with the department budget and other requirements of Utah Code
Annotated section 10-6-121.
   B.   The city shall indemnify the mayor against all claims brought against
him by reason of a director or department head incurring expenditures in excess
of the approved budget. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.040: ACQUISITION OF NONPROFESSIONAL SERVICES OR SUPPLIES OF TWENTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS OR LESS:
   A.   Subject to the budgetary compliance, departments may obtain
nonprofessional services or supplies in the amount of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00) or less as follows:
      1.   Where the amount to be paid by the city is one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or less, no formal quotes are required and a purchase order, check
requisition, or service request may be approved by the department head,
committee advisor, designee or mayor.
      2.   Where the amount to be paid by the city is greater than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), but not greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00),
two (2) verbal quotes are required and a purchase order, check requisition, or
service request must be approved by the city. The authorized person approving
the acquisition must document the verbal quotes and include the documentation
with the purchase order, check request or service request.
      3.   Where the amount to be paid by the city is greater than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or less,
a request for quotation shall be issued and obtained prior to such acquisition,
and a purchase order, check requisition, or service request must be approved by
the city.
      4.   All purchases made by the city council shall be approved by the city
council chair or vice chair.
   B.   For purposes of determining the amount to be paid as described in this
section, a single purchase, or what would commonly be considered a single
purchase, shall not be subdivided into component parts to avoid the
authorization limits.
   C.   Approval of a purchase order, check requisition, or service request for
nonprofessional services or supplies as described in this section includes
authorization to make payment to the contractor or vendor.
   D.   Change orders with respect to items authorized pursuant to this section
may be approved by the city in the amounts indicated in this section as long as
the total amount paid, including the change order, is within the original
budget amount. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.050: ACQUISITION OF NONPROFESSIONAL SERVICES OR SUPPLIES GREATER THAN
TWENTY THOUSAND DOLLARS:
Subject to budgetary compliance, whenever the estimated total amount to be paid
by the city for nonprofessional services or supplies is estimated to be greater
than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), an invitation for bids or a request
for proposals shall be issued prior to acquisition and the following procedures
shall apply:
   A.   The city shall develop the appropriate plans and/or specifications for
each such acquisition or project.
   B.   The city shall cause notice of invitation for bids or response to
request for proposals (including a general description of the items to be
procured, the work to be done and the time and place for the opening of bids or
proposals) to be published in at least one newspaper of general circulation
within the city not less than five (5) days prior to the bid opening.
   C.   The city may determine a nonrefundable fee to be charged to each
prospective bidder who desires a set of plans and/or specifications.
   D.   Bids or proposals shall be invited from vendors deemed to be
appropriate and responsible.
   E.   Bids or proposals shall be sealed and delivered to the location or
person designated by the notice before the time and date specified. At the
appointed time, the designated person will open and read aloud all the bids.
   F.   For purposes of determining the estimated total price to be paid of a
contract for nonprofessional services or supplies, what would commonly be
considered a single purchase shall not be subdivided into component parts to
avoid authorization limits.
   G.   Approval of a contract for nonprofessional services or supplies
includes authorization to make payment to the contractor or vendor in the
original amount of the contract.
   H.   Change orders with respect to items authorized pursuant to this section
are subject to approval by the city if the total amount to be paid, including
change orders, is within the budget approved for the project. The city shall
provide a full and complete accounting and description to the city council of
any change order or series of change orders with respect to a project that
exceeds twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). The city shall provide a full and
complete accounting and description to the city council of any change order or
series of change orders with respect to an acquisition that exceeds twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00).
   I.   If the estimated cost of a building improvement or public works project
exceeds the bid limit 1 , the city shall request bids as required in Utah Code
Annotated section 11-39-101 et seq., or its successor. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. All as defined in UCA § 11-39-101 et seq.
2.32.051: ACQUISITION OF NONPROFESSIONAL SERVICES OR SUPPLIES IN CERTAIN
SITUATIONS:
   A.   When Not Practical Or Advantageous To The City: Notwithstanding the
above but subject to budgetary compliance, if the city determines in writing
prior to the acquisition, a copy of which shall be given to the city council at
the next regular city council meeting, that the method described above is
either not practical or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered
into as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 63-56-408, or other methods
provided for in Utah Code Annotated section 63-56-101 et seq.
   B.   When Vendor Is Approved By State Purchasing Office Or Other
Governmental Agency: Notwithstanding the above, but subject to budgetary
compliance, the city may purchase from or otherwise participate in the state of
Utah public procurement unit agreements or contracts or participate in other
governmental entity procurement agreements or controls or purchase from vendors
approved by other governmental units, provided that such other governmental
entity used a solicitation process that is the same or similar to the
solicitation process described herein with respect to such purchase, without
any solicitation, price quotation, request for proposals, or invitation for
bids. For such purposes, the quoted price shall be deemed to be the lowest
price available for such items and need not follow the solicitation procedures
otherwise required by this chapter.
   C.   When Vendor Assures Standardization, Sole Source, Continuation Or
Pursuant To Interlocal Agreement: Notwithstanding the above, but subject to
budgetary compliance, if the vendor assures standardization, sole source,
continuation or provision pursuant to interlocal agreement, the city may: 1)
purchase supplies from vendors to assure standardization of supplies, provided
that such standardization is in the public interest, 2) purchase supplies which
can be procured from only one source, manufacturer, or distributor, 3) purchase
services or supplies from vendors based on a continuation of supplies, provided
that such combination is in the public interest, or 4) purchase nonprofessional
and professional services or supplies from other government entities pursuant
to Utah Code Annotated section 11-13-101 et seq. (interlocal cooperative act),
without any solicitation, price quotation, request for proposals, or invitation
for bids. For such purposes, such price shall be deemed to be the lowest price
available for such items and need not follow the solicitation procedures
otherwise required by this chapter. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.060: ACQUISITION OF PROFESSIONAL SERVICES:
Professional services shall be procured from prequalified professionals or by a
statement of qualifications. Prequalified professionals shall have fair and
equal treatment with respect to any opportunity to provide professional
services. Prequalification should be used to establish a pool of qualified
providers of repetitive type professional services. Providers of professional
services will no longer be prequalified if they provide substandard services as
determined by the city or no longer satisfy the minimum qualifications
established in the statement of qualifications. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.070: EMERGENCY ACQUISITIONS:
In case of an actual emergency, the mayor, designee or department head may
purchase directly any supplies, nonprofessional services, or professional
services whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent any delays in the
work of the using agency that may vitally affect life, health, safety or
welfare of the public. The mayor, designee or department head shall promptly
send the director of finance a requisition and a copy of the over the counter
delivery order, and a summary to the city council. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.080: CONDITIONS OF ACCEPTANCE:
   A.   The city reserves the right to reject any and all bids or responses. No
bidder or responder shall have any right, legal or equitable, or claim against
the city for any expense or cost incurred by him in the preparation or
submission of his bid or response, which is rejected, regardless of the reasons
for the rejection.
   B.   The city expressly reserves the right to waive minor or slight
irregularities in a bid or response which in the judgment of the city are in
the best interest of the city. The decision of the city concerning
irregularities in a bid or response shall be final and conclusive and shall not
create any right to bidders or responders. Further, the city reserves the right
to amend, modify or waive any provision in a request for proposals, invitation
for bids, or statement of qualifications.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided herein, supplies or nonprofessional
services shall be obtained from the lowest responsible bidder. In determining
the lowest responsible bidder, the city may consider, in addition to price:
      1.   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the service
required;
      2.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide his services
promptly, or within the time specified without delay or interference;
      3.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
      4.   The quality and performance of previous nonprofessional services by
the bidder;
      5.   Previous and existing compliance by the bidder with the laws and
ordinances relating to contractor services;
      6.   Sufficiency of the financial resources of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the nonprofessional services;
      7.   Quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
      8.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service;
      9.   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid or price
quotation;
      10.   Such other factors as the city shall determine including, but not
limited to, inventory, expertise and ease of maintenance;
      11.   The value provided to the city; and
      12.   Other factors set forth in the request for proposals, invitation
for bids, or statement of qualifications. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.085: PROTEST:
   A.   Persons who are aggrieved over procurement by the city may file a
protest with the city.
   B.   A protest in regard to specifications of an invitation for bids or
request for proposals shall be submitted, in writing, prior to opening of bids
or proposals. All other protests shall be submitted, in writing, within five
(5) working days after the aggrieved person knows or should have known that it
was the city's intent to award the bid or contract.
   C.   Protests must specifically state the facts which constitute error in
the award and the desired remedy.
   D.   If a protest is received before the award, the city shall not proceed
further in its attempt to acquire the nonprofessional services or supplies
until the protest is resolved by the mayor. The mayor may, however, make a
written determination that the award of contract, without delay, is necessary
to protect the interest of the city and a copy of which shall be given to the
city council at the next regular city council meeting.
   E.   In the event the award is not given to the bidder submitting the lowest
price, any bidder may submit a written protest to the city within five (5)
working days after the bidder knows or should have known that it was the city's
intent to award the bid or contract. In response, the city shall prepare a
statement setting forth the reason(s) for placing the order elsewhere and shall
file the statement with the other papers relating to the bid solicitation and a
copy of which shall be given to the city council at the next regular city
council meeting.
   F.   A decision regarding the protest shall be made by a hearing officer
appointed by the mayor upon the advice and consent of the city council. The
hearing officer shall have power and authority to investigate the protest,
call, preside and conduct a hearing and render findings of fact, conclusions of
law, and a decision regarding the protest. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.090: PETTY CASH ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Petty cash accounts may be established by the city in such amounts as
are determined by the mayor. Petty cash accounts may be established for city
committees in an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). The city's
petty cash accounts shall be administered by the city treasurer. The city
committee's petty cash account shall be administered by the committee chair or
designee. Department heads, designee, or committee chair may authorize using
such petty cash funds to purchase supplies, materials and equipment when the
cost thereof does not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) and when documentation of
the purchase is maintained. Supplies, materials and equipment regularly
purchased and available through the city's regular purchasing channels shall
not be purchased using said petty cash funds. Petty cash accounts shall not be
commingled with any other accounts or monies, and the person designated to
administer the account shall be responsible for its safekeeping.
   B.   All petty cash shall be reconciled at least monthly. If the petty cash
account is reconciled by someone other than the city treasurer, a copy of such
reconciliation together with receipts shall be submitted to the city council
advisor (if applicable) and the city treasurer within ten (10) days of the end
of the month. In the event that funds in the committee's petty cash accounts
exceed the established amount, such excess shall be turned over to the city at
the time the reconciliation is submitted to the city treasurer and such excess
shall be applied to the appropriate budget line item.
   C.   The city may authorize a variance to exceed the fifty dollar ($50.00)
limitation outlined above. However, such variance shall not exceed one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 08-03, 1-9-2008)
2.32.100: RESERVED:
(Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.110: BLANKET PURCHASE ORDER:
The city is authorized to arrange with suppliers blanket purchase orders which
shall authorize continuing charges against the city. Such purchase orders shall
be reviewed and renewed at least once each fiscal year. The city shall, in
advance of any transaction negotiated upon such blanket purchase order, notify
the merchant or supplier of the specific city employee authorized to take
delivery and sign the purchase order. No billing against the city shall be
valid as applied against the purchase order unless the person taking delivery
was authorized to do so and the supplier can provide the city with a signature
and printed name of that person. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.120: PAYMENT OF ROUTINE EXPENDITURES:
Notwithstanding the above, the mayor or director of finance is authorized to
approve payments for routine expenditures such as utility bills, leases, and
payroll related expenses, provided that such expenditures are referenced in the
then approved budget, that the funds are available for such expenditures, and
that sufficient documentation is provided concerning such expenditures. The
city is authorized to approve payments for supplies, nonprofessional and
professional services and payments on city approved contracts, provided that
such expenditures are referenced in the then approved budget, that the funds
are available for such expenditures, and that sufficient documentation is
provided concerning such expenditures. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.125: PAYMENTS FROM CITY COUNCIL BUDGET:
The city council budget is for the sole use and purpose of the city council,
and expenditures and activities regarding the budget are the responsibility of
the council. The mayor or director of finance is authorized and directed to
make payment for expenditures to the council budget as submitted by the council
chair or vice chair, provided that such expenditures are referenced in the then
approved budget, and that the funds are available for such expenditures, and
that sufficient documentation is provided authorizing such expenditures. No
other expenditures or payments shall be made without documentation which must
be signed by the city council chair or vice chair with the exception of payroll
checks prepared in accordance with a salary schedule established by the city
council. (Ord. 05-44, 8-17-2005)
2.32.130: PAYMENT OF PAYROLL OBLIGATIONS:
Notwithstanding the above, the city is authorized to approve payroll checks, if
the checks are prepared in accordance with a salary schedule approved by the
city council. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.140: PAYMENTS TO BE MADE FROM BOND PROCEEDS:
Payments made from proceeds of any bond shall only be used for acquisition or
improvements contemplated by the bond. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.150: DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS PROPERTY:
   A.   No city owned property, except property that is consumed in normal
operations, shall be disposed of or released to ownership by anyone other than
the city unless such property has been declared surplus by the city council.
   B.   Whenever city property is surplus, unused, obsolete, unsuitable or
otherwise no longer needed, the department head or designee having control of
such property shall promptly so notify the mayor. The mayor then shall notify
other city departments of the availability of such property. The mayor shall
supervise the transfer of such property to the department requesting the
property. If no use can be made or can be expected to be made within the
reasonably foreseeable future, the property shall be disposed of in accordance
with this section.
   C.   The city shall prepare and present a listing to the city council of all
city owned property which it feels is no longer needed by the city and which
can be declared surplus. The city council may declare the property surplus and
shall either establish a minimum bid for the sale of such property or declare
that the property is of nominal value. If the city council has declared the
items to be surplus and established a minimum bid, then the city shall proceed
to sell such surplus property based on the highest and best economic return to
the city. If the city council has declared the items to be surplus and declared
that the property is of nominal value, then the city shall proceed to dispose
of such surplus property as determined by the city.
   D.   The highest and best economic return to the city, as referred to
herein, shall be determined by one or more of the following methods: 1)
competitive bid; 2) evaluation by a qualified and disinterested appraiser; 3)
other professional publication and valuation service; or 4) an informal market
survey by the city in the case of items of personal property possessing readily
discernable market value.
   E.   If the reasonable value of the property declared surplus by the city
council exceeds two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), then the method to determine
the highest and best economic return to the city shall be approved by the city
council at the time the minimum bid is established. If the reasonable value of
the property declared surplus by the city council is two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) or less, then the mayor shall disclose the method to determine the
highest and best economic return to the city council before the sale occurs.
After satisfying the requirements provided for in this section, the city may
sell the surplus property based on its highest and best economic return to the
city provided the sales price for the surplus property is equal to or exceeds
the minimum bid established by the city council.
   F.   Monetary proceeds from the sale or other disposition of such property
pursuant to this section shall be credited to the general fund.
   G.   The city council may, by resolution, withdraw any surplus property from
the surplus property list. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.155: DISPOSAL OF PARCELS OF REAL PROPERTY:
   A.   If the property that is declared surplus pursuant to section
2.32.150 of this chapter, is a "significant parcel of real property" as defined
in this section, then the mayor shall provide "reasonable notice", as defined
below, of the proposed disposition, at least fourteen (14) days before the
proposed disposition, to provide the public an opportunity for comment on the
proposed disposition.
   B.   If the mayor receives public comment on the proposed disposition, the
mayor shall forward copies of such public comment to the city council.
Thereafter, the city council may rescind its declaration of surplus property,
direct the mayor to proceed with the sale, or impose such additional terms and
conditions as the city council may adopt.
   C.   If the mayor does not receive public comment on the proposed
disposition, the mayor may proceed with the sale after satisfying all of the
other terms and conditions applicable to the disposition.
   D.   For purposes of this section, "disposition" shall mean to transfer
control of city owned property to another by any means including, but not
limited to, sale, lease or other type of conveyance of such property.
   E.   For purposes of this section, "reasonable notice" shall mean posting
notice of the proposed disposition in at least three (3) public places within
the city and publishing notice of the proposed disposition in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city.
   F.   For purposes of this section, "significant parcel of real property"
shall mean a parcel of real property owned by the city with a reasonable value
equal to or greater than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) or
reasonable yearly rental value equal to or greater than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00). (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.160: ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS AND POLICIES:
The mayor may prescribe administrative regulations and procedures, including
property acquisition and disposal, which are consistent with the provisions of
this chapter and other written financial procedures approved by the city
council. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.165: CLAIMS:
   A.   Whenever payment is requested from the city that is not provided for by
contract, purchase order, service request, check requisition or other
requisition process described in this chapter, the request shall be processed
as a claim under this provision.
   B.   The city shall review all claims for services and supplies.
   C.   All claims shall be forwarded to the city attorney for review and
recommendation.
   D.   After consideration of the recommendations, the mayor shall approve the
claim if it appears to be just, lawful and properly due and owing and shall
provide a full and complete description of such payment to the city council
with respect to payments that exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00).
Otherwise, the mayor shall disapprove the claim and provide a full and complete
description of such denial to the city council.
   E.   All claims for services, supplies and equipment must describe in detail
the basis for the claim including the following: names, dates, services,
supplies and equipment rendered, and to whom the services, supplies and
equipment were furnished.
   F.   All claims must be presented to the mayor within one year of the last
date that the services, supplies and equipment subject to claim were rendered
or provided. If the mayor rejects a claim because it is not properly made out,
the mayor shall give written notice to the claimant or agent and allow a
reasonable time for clarification or further itemization or substantiation.
Further time allowed hereunder shall toll the one year limitation but not to
exceed thirty (30) days from the date of the mayor's written notice. (Ord. 07-
10, 3-7-2007)
2.32.170: SANCTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful:
      1.   For any bidder or prospective bidder, or any city employee or city
officer thereof, in restraint of freedom of competition or otherwise, by
agreement with any other person, bidder, or prospective bidder, to bid a fixed
price, or to "rotate" bidding practices among competitors;
      2.   For any person to offer or to give to any employee of the city or
any member of his immediate family, any gain, whether in the form of money,
services, loan, travel, entertainment, hospitality, promise, or other form,
under circumstances in which it could reasonably be intended to influence him
or could reasonably be expected to influence him in his duties concerning the
award of any contract or order of purchase, or for any city employee to
directly or indirectly solicit or directly or indirectly accept any such gift
for such purpose;
      3.   For any city employee or city officer to disclose, in advance of the
opening of the bids, the content of any bid invited through the formal
competitive bidding procedure;
      4.   For any city employee or city officer to actively participate in the
awarding of a contract from which he will directly benefit; and
      5.   For any city employee or city officer or other person to appropriate
for personal or private use any item of public property.
   B.   Any city employee or city officer committing any of the foregoing acts
may be discharged or suspended from employment, and the city may seek
additional appropriate legal redress.
   C.   At the discretion of the city council, the following contracts are
voidable:
      1.   Contracts which result from a conflict of interest under this
chapter or other applicable law;
      2.   Contracts awarded to a person or firm that tried to influence the
award of such contract by offering something of value to any city officer or
city employee; and
      3.   Contracts awarded by a city officer or city employee circumventing
the requirements of this chapter or other applicable statute.
The city council hereby declares its intent that such contracts would not have
been entered into on behalf of the city if such misconduct had been discovered
prior to the execution of the contract. In this regard, the council further
states that no city officer or city employee has authority, either actual,
apparent or implied, to negotiate or execute any such contract and that such
contract shall, at the discretion of the city council, be voidable, unless the
action of the city officers or city employees in executing the contract is
ratified by affirmative action of the city council after the misconduct was
discovered and made known to the city council.
   D.   All persons or firms responsible for any misconduct prohibited by this
section shall be liable to the city for any losses incurred by the city
resulting from any contract awarded due to such misconduct. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-
2007)
2.32.180: GRANTS:
Any grant application that anticipates or proposes to bind the city to a
particular project or contract or commit the city financially, directly or
indirectly, either by liability for cash payment or matching funds, or for in-
kind or noncash credit, shall be submitted as part of the annual budget or
approved in advance by the city council. All such requests shall include full
disclosure of the terms and conditions of the grant and the purpose and use of
the grant. Any grant that attempts to bind the city that is filed without an
annual budget appropriation or approval from the city council shall be void and
without authority. (Ord. 07-10, 3-7-2007)
CHAPTER 2.36
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
2.36.010: Municipal Election Procedures
2.36.020: Candidate Filing Fee
2.36.030: Campaign Contributions
2.36.040: Campaign Finance Statements
2.36.050: Penalty For Noncompliance
2.36.010: MUNICIPAL ELECTION PROCEDURES:
Title 20A of the Utah code, or its successor, is incorporated herein by
reference and made a part of this chapter. All city elections shall be
conducted in accordance with the procedures prescribed therein, as it applies
to municipal elections. (Ord. 13-19, 8-7-2013)
2.36.020: CANDIDATE FILING FEE:
Each person seeking to become a candidate for city office shall pay a filing
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00); except that an individual submitting a
nomination petition, signed by twenty five (25) or more residents of the city
who are at least eighteen (18) years or older, shall pay a filing fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 13-19, 8-7-2013)
2.36.030: CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS:
   A.   No person shall make contributions during any election cycle, as set
forth in this chapter, to any candidate or his personal campaign committee, or
any political committee with respect to any election for city office, that, in
the aggregate, exceeds the following amounts:
 
Office       Amount
Mayor        $7,500.00
City council 1,500.00
 
   B.   The acceptance of anonymous contributions is prohibited. Any anonymous
contribution received by a candidate or a personal campaign committee or a
political committee shall be transmitted to the city treasurer for deposit in
the general fund of the city. Each contributor of a contribution shall disclose
to the personal campaign committee or political committee the name and address
of such contributor.
   C.   The limitation imposed above shall not apply to contributions by a
candidate of the candidate's own resources to the candidate's own campaign.
(Ord. 13-19, 8-7-2013)
2.36.040: CAMPAIGN FINANCE STATEMENTS:
   A.   All candidates for municipal office shall comply with campaign finance
disclosure requirements as prescribed in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-208
or its successor.
   B.   In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection A of this
section, each elected official and/or candidate for municipal office shall file
with the city recorder a campaign finance statement containing the information
required in this section on March 1 of each year. (Ord. 16-20, 12-14-2016)
2.36.050: PENALTY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
Any candidate, individual or entity who fails to comply with this chapter is
guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 13-19, 8-7-2013)
CHAPTER 2.40
RESERVED
CHAPTER 2.44
RESERVED
CHAPTER 2.48
GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACCESS MANAGEMENT ACT
SECTION:
2.48.010: Adoption Of The Utah Government Records Access And Management Act And
The Utah Municipal General Retention Schedule
2.48.010: ADOPTION OF THE UTAH GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT ACT AND
THE UTAH MUNICIPAL GENERAL RETENTION SCHEDULE:
   A.   The government records access and management act Utah Code Annotated
sections 63G-2-101 to 63G-2-901, as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by this reference in its entirety as if set forth in full herein.
   B.   The Utah state division of archives and records service municipal
general retention schedule, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by
this reference in its entirety as if set forth in full herein. (Ord. 12-30, 11-
7-2012)
TITLE 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Sales And Use Tax   3.08
Municipal Transient Room Tax   3.09
Municipal Energy Sales And Use Tax   3.10
Telecommunications License Tax   3.12
Development Fees   3.16
CHAPTER 3.08
SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3.08.010: Title
3.08.020: Purpose
3.08.030: Effective Date
3.08.040: Sales And Use Tax
3.08.050: Reserved
3.08.060: Penalties
3.08.070: Severability
3.08.010: TITLE:
This section shall be known as the TAYLORSVILLE SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 96-5, 4-17-1996)
3.08.020: PURPOSE:
The Utah legislature has authorized municipalities to adopt an ordinance that
imposes a one percent (1%) sales and use tax. It is the purpose of this section
to conform the sales and use tax ordinance of the city to the requirements of
the sales and use tax act, as amended. (Ord. 96-5, 4-17-1996)
3.08.030: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This section shall become effective one second past twelve o'clock (12:00:01)
A.M. on July 1, 1996. (Ord. 96-5, 4-17-1996)
3.08.040: SALES AND USE TAX:
   A.   From and after the effective date of this section, there are levied and
there shall be collected and paid taxes as follows:
      1.   A tax is hereby imposed upon every retail sale of tangible personal
property, services and meals made within the city at the rate of one percent
(1%).
      2.   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other
consumption in the city of tangible personal property from any retailer on or
after the effective date of this section at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
sales price of the property.
      3.   For the purpose of this section all retail sales shall be presumed
to have been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or
his agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to
an out of state destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall
be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed by and adopted by
the Utah state tax commission. Public utilities as defined by title 54 of the
Utah code, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places within any
county or municipality where public utilities services are rendered, but the
place of sale or the sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to
the city shall be as determined by the Utah state tax commission pursuant to an
appropriate formula and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and
adopted by the Utah state tax commission.
   B.   The provisions of chapter 12, title 59 of the Utah code, as amended,
are hereby adopted as follows:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the sales and use tax act, all of the
provisions of chapter 12, title 59, of the Utah code, as amended, and in force
and effect on the effective date of this section, insofar as they relate to
sales and use taxes, excepting Utah Code Annotated sections 59-12-101 and 59-
12-119 thereof, are hereby adopted and made a part of the ordinance codified
herein as though fully set forth herein.
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that in chapter 12, title 59, of the
Utah code, as amended, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of the city, or other name pursuant to a name change, shall be
substituted therefor. Nothing in subparagraph B shall be deemed to require
substitution of the name of the city for the word "state" when that word is
used as part of the title of the Utah state tax commission, or of the
constitution of the state of Utah, nor shall the name of the city be
substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, rather
than by or against the Utah state tax commission in performing the functions
incident to the administration or operation of this section.
      3.   If a license has been issued to a retailer under Utah Code Annotated
section 59-12-106, an additional license shall not be required by reason of
this section.
      4.   There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by
which the tax is measured:
         a.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of Utah
upon a retailer or consumer; and
         b.   The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use
tax has become due by reason of the sale transaction to any other municipality
and any county in the state of Utah, under the sales or use tax ordinance
enacted by that county or municipality in accordance with the sales and use tax
act. (Ord. 96-5, 4-17-1996)
3.08.050: RESERVED:
(Ord. 96-5, 4-17-1996)
3.08.060: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a
fine in an amount not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
imprisonment for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. (Ord. 96-5, 4-17-1996)
3.08.070: SEVERABILITY:
If any chapter, subchapter, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, any exemption is for any reason held to
be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter.
It is the intention of the city council that each separate provision of this
chapter shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein. (Ord. 96-5,
4-17-1996)
CHAPTER 3.09
MUNICIPAL TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION:
3.09.010: Authority
3.09.020: Imposition Of Tax
3.09.030: State Tax Commission
3.09.010: AUTHORITY:
Authority and guidelines for the municipal transient room tax, set forth in
Utah code section 59-12-352 et seq., as currently adopted and as hereinafter
amended, are adopted as the authority and guide for the municipal transient
room tax of the city. (Ord. 17-01, 2-1-2017)
3.09.020: IMPOSITION OF TAX:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent (1%) on charges for
tourist homes, hotels, motels, or mobile home accommodations and services that
are regularly rented for less than thirty (30) consecutive days. (Ord. 17-01,
2-1-2017)
3.09.030: STATE TAX COMMISSION:
The Utah state tax commission shall collect the tax imposed under this chapter.
(Ord. 17-01, 2-1-2017)
CHAPTER 3.10
MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3.10.010: Definitions
3.10.020: Tax Levied
3.10.030: Exemptions
3.10.040: Franchises
3.10.050: State Tax Commission Contract
3.10.060: Incorporation Of State Statute
3.10.070: No Additional License Required
3.10.080: Reimbursement
3.10.010: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases in this chapter shall have the same meanings given them
in the municipal energy sales and use tax act, Utah Code Annotated, section 10-
1-301 et seq., with the following additions:
CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to
the municipal energy sales and use tax.
MUNICIPALITY: Taylorsville, Utah.
SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange, or barter, conditional or otherwise, in
any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
   A.   Installment and credit sales;
   B.   Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
   C.   Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable
energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable
if an outright sale were made.
STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in this municipality for
any purpose except sale in the regular course of business.
USE: The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the
ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy. "Use" does not include the
sale, display, demonstration, or trial of the taxable energy in the regular
course of business and held for resale. (Ord. 06-35, 8-16-2006)
3.10.020: TAX LEVIED:
Effective January 1, 2007, there is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of
this chapter, a tax on every sale or use of taxable energy made within the
municipality equaling six percent (6%) of the delivered value of the taxable
energy. This tax shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax.
   A.   The municipal energy sales and use tax shall be calculated on the
delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer.
   B.   The municipal energy sales and use tax shall be in addition to any
sales or use tax imposed by the municipality under title 59, chapter 12, the
sales and use tax act. (Ord. 06-35, 8-16-2006)
3.10.030: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax
except as expressly provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b);
notwithstanding an exemption granted by title 59, chapter 12, part 1, tax
collection.
   B.   The following are exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b):
      1.   The sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, and special fuels
subject to taxation under title 59, chapter 13, motor and special fuel tax act;
      2.   The sales and use of taxable energy that the municipality is
prohibited from taxing under federal law or the constitution of the United
States or the Utah constitution;
      3.   The sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored in the state
for resale;
      4.   The sales or use of taxable energy to a person if the primary use of
the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a
fuel subject to taxation under title 59, chapter 13 of the motor and special
fuel tax act;
      5.   Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the
nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except
taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or
working in the state at the time of purchase;
      6.   The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a
fuel or energy; and
      7.   The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the
municipality.
   C.   The sale, storage, use, or other consumption of taxable energy is
exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this chapter,
provided:
      1.   The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a
municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within this
state under an ordinance enacted in accordance with title 10, chapter 1, part
3, municipal energy sales and use tax act; and
      2.   The municipality shall be paid the difference between the tax paid
to the other municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this
chapter if the tax due under this chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other
municipality. (Ord. 06-35, 8-16-2006)
3.10.040: FRANCHISES:
   A.   This chapter shall not alter any existing franchise agreements unless
otherwise terminated or altered by agreement or applicable law.
   B.   There is a credit against the tax due in the amount of a contractual
franchise fee paid if:
      1.   The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the
municipality pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
      2.   The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy
supplier to a taxpayer as a separately itemized charge; and
      3.   The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 06-35, 8-16-
2006)
3.10.050: STATE TAX COMMISSION CONTRACT:
   A.   If needed then on or before the effective date hereof, the municipality
shall contract with the commission to perform all functions related to the
administration and collection of the municipal energy sales and use tax. The
mayor and recorder are hereby authorized to enter into such agreement or
amended agreement as needed with the commission that may be necessary to the
continued administration and operation of the municipal energy sales and use
tax ordinance.
   B.   An energy supplier shall pay the municipal energy sales and use tax
revenues collected from its consumers directly to the municipality monthly if:
      1.   The municipality is the energy supplier; or
      2.   a. The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and
use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more, and
         b.   The energy supplier collects the municipal energy sales and use
tax.
   C.   An energy supplier paying the municipal energy sales and use tax
directly to the municipality may retain the percent of the tax authorized under
subsection 59-12-108(2) for the energy supplier's cost of collecting and
remitting the tax. (Ord. 06-35, 8-16-2006)
3.10.060: INCORPORATION OF STATE STATUTE:
   A.   Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent
with the provisions of title 10, chapter 1, part 3, municipal energy sales and
use tax act, as well as this chapter, all of the provisions of title 59,
chapter 12, part 1, tax collection, as amended, and in force and effect on the
effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, excepting
section 59-12-101 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales and use
taxes levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as if
fully set forth herein.
   B.   Wherever, and to the extent that in title 59, chapter 12, part 1, tax
collection, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the
name of the municipality shall be substituted, insofar as is necessary for the
purposes of that part, as well as title 10, chapter 1, part 3, in the municipal
energy sales and use tax act. Nothing in this subsection B shall be deemed to
require substitution of the name of the municipality for the word state when
that word is used as part of the title of the state tax commission, or of the
constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the municipality be substituted for
that of the state in any section when the result of such a substitution would
require action to be taken by or against the municipality or any agency
thereof, rather than by or against the state tax commission in performing the
functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.
   C.   Any amendments made to title 59, chapter 12, part 1, tax collection,
that relate to levying or collecting a municipal energy sales and use tax is
hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 06-35, 8-16-2006)
3.10.070: NO ADDITIONAL LICENSE REQUIRED:
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use
tax ordinance is required, provided the energy supplier collecting the tax has
a license issued under section 59-12-106. (Ord. 06-35, 8-16-2006)
3.10.080: REIMBURSEMENT:
   A.   Qualification For Reimbursement: City residents who qualify for less
than fifty percent (50%) of the tax abatement or tax exemption pursuant to Utah
Code Annotated section 59-2-1107 (commonly referred to as the Salt Lake County
indigent tax abatement program), Utah Code Annotated section 59-2-1109(1)(a) or
(b) (commonly referred to as the Salt Lake County hardship tax abatement
program), Utah Code Annotated section 59-2-1106 (commonly referred to as the
Salt Lake County blind tax exemption program), Utah Code Annotated section 59-
2-1104 (commonly referred to as the Salt Lake County disabled veterans tax
exemption program), or Utah Code Annotated section 59-2-1201 et seq. (commonly
referred to as the Salt Lake County circuit breaker tax abatement program)
(collectively "county tax abatements"), shall be entitled to a reimbursement of
fifty percent (50%) of the amount paid by the resident for the municipal energy
sales and use tax. City residents who qualify for fifty percent (50%) or more
of the county tax abatement shall be entitled to a reimbursement of one hundred
percent (100%) of the amount paid by the resident for the municipal energy
sales and use tax.
   B.   Application For Reimbursement: Residents may obtain the reimbursement
for any calendar year by submitting to the city a copy of the resident's
property tax notice showing that the resident qualified for one or more of the
county tax abatements for the prior year (notices are typically received in
November), copies of the resident's gas bills and electric bills showing the
total amount the resident paid for the municipal energy sales and use tax for
the previous year, and acceptable evidence of payment of the municipal energy
sales and use tax. Residents must submit a request for reimbursement between
the first business day in January and the last business day in February for
reimbursement for the amounts paid in the previous calendar year.
   C.   Payment To Be Debt Of City: Upon payment of the municipal energy sales
and use tax by a resident who is entitled to a rebate and timely submitting a
request for reimbursement, the rebate becomes a debt of the city due and
payable to the resident.
   D.   Failure To Timely Pay: Any resident who fails to pay all or a portion
of the municipal energy sales and use tax to the service provider shall forfeit
a proportionate share of the right to reimbursement for that tax from the city.
(Ord. 06-52, 10-4-2006, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2006)
   E.   Members Of National Guard Or Armed Forces Reserves: Any city resident
who is a member of the national guard or armed forces reserves that is called
to active duty shall be entitled to a proportionate reimbursement (as provided
herein) of the amount paid for the municipal energy sales and use tax for
services provided to the resident's principal place of residency during the
time that the resident is on active duty.
      1.   Application For Reimbursement: Reimbursement may be applied for on a
quarterly basis consisting of the following quarter periods: January 1 - March
31; April 1 - June 30; July 1 - September 30; and October 1 - December 31.
Residents may obtain the reimbursement for any quarter period by submitting to
the city the following: a) evidence of membership in the national guard or
armed forces reserves; b) a call to active duty during that quarter period; c)
copies of the resident's gas bills, and electric bills showing the total amount
paid for the municipal energy sales and use tax during that quarter period; and
d) acceptable evidence of payment of the municipal energy sales and use tax.
Residents must submit a request for reimbursement within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the end of the quarter period.
      2.   Payment To Be Debt Of City: Upon payment of the municipal energy
sales and use tax by a resident who is entitled to a rebate and timely
submitting a request for reimbursement, the rebate becomes a debt of the city
due and payable to the resident.
      3.   Failure To Timely Pay: Any resident who fails to pay all or a
portion of the municipal energy sales and use tax to the service provider shall
forfeit a proportionate share of the right to reimbursement for that tax from
the city. (Ord. 07-01, 1-3-2007, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2007)
CHAPTER 3.12
TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX
SECTION:
3.12.010: Adoption Of Municipal Telecommunications License Tax Act
3.12.020: Definitions
3.12.030: Levy Of Tax
3.12.040: Rate
3.12.050: Rate Limitation And Exemption
3.12.060: Effective Date Of Tax Levy
3.12.070: Procedure For Taxes Erroneously Received From Customers
3.12.080: Changes In Rate Or Repeal Of Tax
3.12.090: Interlocal Agreement For Collection Of Tax
3.12.100: Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
3.12.110: Reimbursement
3.12.010: ADOPTION OF MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX ACT:
The municipal telecommunications license tax act, Utah Code Annotated section
10-1-401 et seq., as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by this
reference in its entirety as if set forth in full herein. (Ord. 06-37, 8-16-
2006)
3.12.020: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases in this chapter shall have the same meanings given to
them in the municipal telecommunications license tax act, Utah Code Annotated
section 10-1-401 et seq. In addition, "municipality" shall mean the city of
Taylorsville. (Ord. 06-37, 8-16-2006)
3.12.030: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to the municipality in
accordance with section 10-1-407. (Ord. 06-37, 8-16-2006)
3.12.040: RATE:
The rate of the tax levy shall be four percent (4%) of the telecommunication
provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed
to the municipality in accordance with section 10-1-407. (Ord. 06-37, 8-16-
2006)
3.12.050: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION:
The rate of this levy shall not exceed four percent (4%) of the
telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunication service
attributed to the municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a majority
vote of the voters in the city that vote in:
   A.   A municipal general election;
   B.   A regular general election; or
   C.   A local special election. (Ord. 06-37, 8-16-2006)
3.12.060: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX LEVY:
This tax shall be levied beginning January 1, 2007. (Ord. 06-37, 8-16-2006)
3.12.070: PROCEDURE FOR TAXES ERRONEOUSLY RECEIVED FROM CUSTOMERS:
The provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-408 are hereby incorporated
herein by this reference. (Ord. 06-37, 8-16-2006)
3.12.080: CHANGES IN RATE OR REPEAL OF TAX:
This chapter is subject to the requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 10-
1-403. If the tax rate is changed or the tax is repealed, then the appropriate
notice shall be given as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-403.
(Ord. 06-37, 8-16-2006)
3.12.090: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION OF TAX:
On or before the effective date hereof, the municipality shall enter into the
uniform interlocal agreement with the commission described in Utah Code
Annotated section 10-1-405, under which the commission collects, enforces, and
administers this municipal telecommunications license tax. (Ord. 06-37, 8-16-
2006)
3.12.100: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES:
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal ordinance
or fee which provides that the municipality may recover from a
telecommunications provider the management costs of the municipality caused by
the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights of way of the
municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah Code Annotated
section 72-7-102 and is not related to the municipality's loss of use of a
highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a
right of way, or increased deterioration of a highway as a result of the
activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way, nor does this
chapter limit the municipality's right to charge fees or taxes on persons that
are not subject to the municipal telecommunications license tax under this
chapter and locate telecommunications facilities, as defined in Utah Code
Annotated section 72-7-108, in the municipality. (Ord. 06-37, 8-16-2006)
3.12.110: REIMBURSEMENT:
   A.   Qualification For Reimbursement: City residents who qualify for less
than fifty percent (50%) of the tax abatement or tax exemption pursuant to Utah
Code Annotated section 59-2-1107 (commonly referred to as the Salt Lake County
indigent tax abatement program), Utah Code Annotated section 59-2-1109(1)(a) or
(b) (commonly referred to as the Salt Lake County hardship tax abatement
program), Utah Code Annotated section 59-2-1106 (commonly referred to as the
Salt Lake County blind tax exemption program), Utah Code Annotated section 59-
2-1104 (commonly referred to as the Salt Lake County disabled veterans tax
exemption program), or Utah Code Annotated section 59-2-1201 et seq. (commonly
referred to as the Salt Lake County circuit breaker tax abatement program)
(collectively "county tax abatements"), shall be entitled to a reimbursement of
fifty percent (50%) of the amount paid by the resident for the municipal
telecommunications tax. City residents who qualify for fifty percent (50%) or
more of the county tax abatement shall be entitled to a reimbursement of one
hundred percent (100%) of the amount paid by the resident for the municipal
telecommunications tax.
   B.   Application For Reimbursement: Residents may obtain the reimbursement
for any calendar year by submitting to the city a copy of the resident's
property tax notice showing that the resident qualified for one or more of the
county tax abatements for the prior year (notices are typically received in
November), copies of the resident's telecommunications bills showing the total
amount the resident paid for the municipal telecommunications tax for the
previous year, and acceptable evidence of payment of the municipal
telecommunications tax. Residents must submit a request for reimbursement
between the first business day in January and the last business day in February
for reimbursement for the amounts paid in the previous calendar year.
   C.   Payment To Be Debt Of City: Upon payment of the municipal
telecommunications tax by a resident who is entitled to a rebate and timely
submitting a request for reimbursement, the rebate becomes a debt of the city
due and payable to the resident.
   D.   Failure To Timely Pay: Any resident who fails to pay any municipal
telecommunications tax to the service provider shall forfeit a proportionate
share of the right to reimbursement for that tax from the city. (Ord. 06-52,
10-4-2006, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2006)
   E.   Members Of National Guard Or Armed Forces Reserves: Any city resident
who is a member of the national guard or armed forces reserves that is called
to active duty shall be entitled to a proportionate reimbursement (as provided
herein) of the amount paid for the municipal telecommunications tax for
services provided to the resident's principal place of residency during the
time that the resident is on active duty.
      1.   Application For Reimbursement: Reimbursement may be applied for on a
quarterly basis consisting of the following quarter periods: January 1 - March
31; April 1 - June 30; July 1 - September 30; and October 1 - December 31.
Residents may obtain the reimbursement for any quarter period by submitting to
the city the following: a) evidence of membership in the national guard or
armed forces reserves; b) a call to active duty during that quarter period; c)
copies of the resident's telecommunications bills showing the total amount paid
for the municipal telecommunications tax during that quarter period; and d)
acceptable evidence of payment of the municipal telecommunications tax.
Residents must submit a request for reimbursement within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the end of the quarter period.
      2.   Payment To Be Debt Of City: Upon payment of the municipal
telecommunications tax by a resident who is entitled to a rebate and timely
submitting a request for reimbursement, the rebate becomes a debt of the city
due and payable to the resident.
      3.   Failure To Timely Pay: Any resident who fails to pay any municipal
telecommunications tax to the service provider shall forfeit a proportionate
share of the right to reimbursement for that tax from the city. (Ord. 07-01, 1-
3-2007, eff. retroactive to 1-1-2007)
CHAPTER 3.16
DEVELOPMENT FEES
SECTION:
3.16.010: Appeal Authority Application Fees
3.16.020: Subdivision Application Fees
3.16.030: Land Development Code Amendment Application Fees
3.16.040: Conditional Use Permit Application Fees
3.16.050: General Plan Amendment Application Fees
3.16.060: Non-Conforming Use, Building, Or Lot Fees
3.16.070: Permitted Use Application Fees
3.16.080: Other Fees
3.16.090: Waiver, Modification And Refund Of Fees; Appeals
3.16.010: APPEAL AUTHORITY APPLICATION FEES:
The fees for application to the Appeal Authority shall be as follows:
 
A. Appeal of Land Use Authority $600.00
B. Variance:                     
  Commercial                   500.00
  Residential                  250.00
 
(Ord. 19-04, 5-1-2019)
3.16.020: SUBDIVISION APPLICATION FEES:
The fees for subdivision review shall be as follows:
 
A. Subdivision application (preliminary)     $1,200.00
B. Subdivision application (final review)    1,000.00
C. Two-family dwelling lot split             400.00
D. Subdivision amendment                     500.00
E. Lot line adjustment - residential         325.00
F. Lot line adjustment - commercial (2 lots) 700.00
G. Lot line adjustment - commercial (more than 2 lots)VA:TO>$1,000.00 plus
   $75.00 per lot
 
(Ord. 19-04, 5-1-2019)
3.16.030: LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE AMENDMENT APPLICATION FEES:
The fees for Land Development Code amendments shall be as follows:
 
A. Zoning map amendment                                   $ 750.00
B. Land Development Code text amendment                   500.00
C. Land Development Code text amendment - SSD designation 1,800.00
 
(Ord. 19-04, 5-1-2019)
3.16.040: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION FEES:
The fees for conditional use permit applications shall be as follows:
 
A. Non-administrative conditional use permit with construction    $1,200.00
   (preliminary review)
B. Non-administrative conditional use permit without construction 400.00
C. Administrative conditional use permit with construction        750.00
   (preliminary review)
D. Administrative conditional use permit without construction     250.00
E. Conditional use final site plan review                         700.00
F. Conditional use amendment (with construction)                  500.00
G. Conditional use amendment without construction                 50.00
 
(Ord. 19-04, 5-1-2019)
3.16.050: GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENT APPLICATION FEES:
 
A. General plan map amendment  $700.00
B. General plan text amendment 650.00
 
(Ord. 19-04, 5-1-2019)
3.16.060: NON-CONFORMING USE, BUILDING, OR LOT FEES:
 
A. Non-conformance determination                  $150.00
B. Non-conforming use, building, or lot expansion 750.00
 
(Ord. 19-04, 5-1-2019)
3.16.070: PERMITTED USE APPLICATION FEES:
 
A. Preliminary site plan review      $650.00
B. Final site plan review            700.00
C. Permitted use site plan amendment 300.00
D. Small cells reviewVA:TO>$250.00 per node
 
(Ord. 19-04, 5-1-2019)
3.16.080: OTHER FEES:
Fees for other applications, review processes and impact fees shall be as
follows:
 
A. Site and subdivision improvements inspection feeVA:TO>6% of the cost of
   improvements
B. Reasonable accommodation                       $ 500.00
C. Planning Department sign review                40.00
D. Temporary sign permit                          25.00
E. Commercial master plan as required by section  1,100.00
   13.23.240 of this title
F. Zoning verification letter                     75.00
G. Addressing affidavit                           200.00
H. Zoning maps (PDF on compact disc)              15.00
I. FBI national criminal history check            50.00
J. Park impact fee                                300.00
 
(Ord. 19-04, 5-1-2019)
3.16.090: WAIVER, MODIFICATION AND REFUND OF FEES; APPEALS:
   A.   Waiver Modification Or Refund: The City Council may, on its own motion
or otherwise, waive, modify or refund any fee imposed by this chapter as
provided herein. Otherwise, all requests for waiver, modification or refund of
any fee imposed by this chapter shall be submitted in writing to the Director
of Community Development, who shall then forward the request to the City
Council for their determination as provided below.
   B.   Standard For Waiver, Modification Or Refund Of Fees Imposed By This
Chapter: The City Council may waive, modify or refund any fee imposed by this
chapter upon a determination, in its sole and absolute discretion, that:
      1.   The applicant is engaged in business for solely religious,
charitable or other types of strictly nonprofit purposes which are tax exempt
in such activities under the laws of the United States or the State of Utah;
      2.   The applicant is engaged in the business specifically exempted from
Municipal taxation and fees by the laws of the United States or the State of
Utah; or
      3.   There is a prevailing public interest in waiving, modifying or
refunding the fees.
   C.   Appeals: Appeals to any fee imposed by this chapter shall be heard by
the Appeal Authority consistent with the provisions of Utah Code 10-9a-510 5
(c). All appeals to this chapter shall be submitted in writing to the City
Recorder within ten (10) calendar days of the imposition of the fee.
   D.   Authorization: The Appeal Authority shall have the authorization to
reduce the application fees for approved variances and Land Use Authority
appeals. (Ord. 19-04, 5-1-2019)
TITLE 4
RESERVED
TITLE 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
License Office And Official   5.02
License Certificates   5.04
Business Regulations   5.05
Business License Fees   5.06
Procedure For Obtaining Business License   5.08
License Suspension, Revocation, Or Denial To Renew   5.10
Hearings; Decision; Enforcement; Appeal   5.11
License Transferability   5.12
Temporary Licenses   5.14
Board Of License Equalization   5.16
Registration Cards   5.18
Inspections   5.20
Alarm Systems; Intrusion And Physical Duress   5.22
Alcohol And Beer   5.24
Amusement Devices, Billiard Halls, Pool Halls, Bowling Alleys, Card And Game
Rooms, Golf Course, And Miniature Golf   5.28
Auctions   5.30
Financial Institutions, Noncash (Rep. by Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)   5.34
Financial Institutions   5.36
Clubs And Teenage Dance Halls   5.38
Employment Offices   5.40
Home Occupations   5.54
Hotels Or Motels   5.60
Massage Establishments   5.62
Mobile Home Parks   5.64
Movie Theaters   5.66
Multiple Dwelling Rental Units (Rep. by Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)   5.68
Nursing, Convalescent, Assisted Living, Residential Or Special Care, And Group
Homes   5.70
Outdoor Advertisers   5.72
Pawnbrokers   5.75
Rental Dwelling Unit   5.76
Restaurants   5.77
Secondhand, Coin, And Junk Dealers   5.79
Service Stations   5.80
Sexually Oriented Businesses And Employee Licensing   5.82
Shooting Ranges   5.84
Residential Solicitation   5.86
Swap Meets And Flea Markets   5.87
Construction And Manufacturing Trades   5.88
Convenience Stores With Gasoline   5.89
Department Store/Big Box   5.90
Small Retail And Wholesale   5.92
Medium Retail And Wholesale Sales   5.93
Professional And Business Services   5.94
Family Services Excluding Residential Facilities For Elderly Persons And
Persons With A Disability   5.95
Food Services   5.96
Automotive   5.97
Full Service Grocery Stores   5.98
Personal Services   5.99
CHAPTER 5.02
LICENSE OFFICE AND OFFICIAL
SECTION:
5.02.010: Definitions
5.02.020: Office Created; Personnel
5.02.030: License Official; Powers And Duties
5.02.010: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever used in this title or elsewhere within any city ordinance:
LICENSE DEPARTMENT: The license office of the city.
LICENSE OFFICIAL: The city's community development director or other designee
appointed by the city. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.02.020: OFFICE CREATED; PERSONNEL:
There is hereby created a license office within the city. The city's community
development director shall be the license official and shall have charge of the
license office and shall direct the same subject to, and in accordance with,
such terms and conditions as the mayor may prescribe. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.02.030: LICENSE OFFICIAL; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The license official shall assess each licensee in accordance with the
provisions of this title and the applicable statutes of Utah, and shall receive
all license fees required herein to be paid. The assessment shall be based upon
the rates herein established. The license official shall also keep and maintain
a suitable index, properly alphabetized, containing the names of all licensees
of each and every class to be assessed and of all miscellaneous licensees.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.04
LICENSE CERTIFICATES
SECTION:
5.04.010: Definitions
5.04.020: License Required
5.04.030: Branch Establishments
5.04.040: Title Provisions Not Exclusive
5.04.050: Term
5.04.060: License Application; Public Records; Exceptions
5.04.070: Filing False Information Prohibited
5.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein prescribed:
BUSINESS: Means and includes all activities engaged in within the incorporated
limits of the city, carried on for the purpose of gain or economic profit, and
for the purposes of these provisions shall include nonprofit corporations or
owning or operating a rental dwelling unit, except that the acts of employees
rendering service to employers shall not be included in the term "business"
unless otherwise specifically prescribed.
EMPLOYEE: The operator, owner or manager of a place of business and any persons
employed by such person in the operation of that place of business, in any
capacity and also any salesman, agent, leased employee or independent
contractor engaged in the operation of that place of business, in any capacity.
ENGAGED IN BUSINESS OR ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Means and includes, but is not
limited to, the sale of tangible personal property at retail or wholesale, the
manufacturing of goods or property, or owning or operating a rental dwelling
unit, and the rendering of personal services for others for a consideration by
persons engaging in any profession, trade, craft, business, occupation or other
calling except the rendering of personal services by an employee to his
employer under any contract of personal employment.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES: The number of employees engaged at the place of business
each regular working day during the preceding calendar year. In computing such
number, each regular full time employee shall be counted as one employee, and
each part time employee shall be counted as one employee.
PERSON: Any individual, receiver, assignor, trustee in a bankruptcy, trust,
estate, firm, partnership, limited liability company, limited liability
partnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust,
corporation, association, society or other group of individuals acting as a
unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit or otherwise.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any location maintained or operated by a licensee within the
city, from which business activity is conducted or transacted. (Ord. 10-01, 1-
20-2010)
5.04.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in business within the city without
first procuring the license required by this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.04.030: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS:
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location
of business engagement in business within the city as if such branch
establishment or location were a separate business, and each license shall
authorize the licensee to engage only in the business licensed thereby at the
location or in the manner designated in such license, provided, that warehouses
and distributing places used in connection with or incident to a business
licensed under this title shall not be deemed to be separate places of business
or branch establishments. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.04.040: TITLE PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The general business license required under this title is in addition to all
other licenses and permits required by other applicable provisions hereof. No
person shall engage in business without first procuring the necessary licenses
and permits that are required by other applicable laws. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.04.050: TERM:
All business licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire each year on the
last day of the month in which the license was originally issued. (Ord. 10-01,
1-20-2010)
5.04.060: LICENSE APPLICATION; PUBLIC RECORDS; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   License applications shall be public records and information contained
therein shall be public except for specific items of data that the license
official designates or classifies as private, controlled or protected data
consistent with the provisions of the government records access and management
act 1 .
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to make public or to inform any other
person of the contents of any information contained therein, except as
authorized in this section. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 63-2-101 et seq.
5.04.070: FILING FALSE INFORMATION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly provide false information in
conjunction with a license application. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.05
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5.05.010: Posting License On Premises Required
5.05.020: Business Rules And Regulations
5.05.030: License Certificate To Be Shown To Officials
5.05.040: Unlawful Uses Of Certificates
5.05.010: POSTING LICENSE ON PREMISES REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city
to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such
business at all times. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.05.020: BUSINESS RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Rules and regulations covering the health, safety, morals, peace, good order,
comfort and convenience of the general public with respect to any business
covered under this title shall be adopted by the city council, and copies of
such rules and regulations shall be made available to the licensee. (Ord. 05-
14, 4-6-2005)
5.05.030: LICENSE CERTIFICATE TO BE SHOWN TO OFFICIALS:
It shall be the duty of each and every person to whom a certificate of license
has been issued to show the same at any proper time when requested to do so by
the license official, or other law enforcement officer. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.05.040: UNLAWFUL USES OF CERTIFICATES:
It is unlawful to counterfeit a business license, or to deface or mutilate the
same while it is required to be posted, or to remove it or attempt to remove it
therefrom without destroying it, or to use, or permit the same to be used at
any place other than that designated therein, or for any licensee to place or
permit it to be placed or be in any place of business or upon one amusement
device, contrivance, game, machine or vehicle after it has been placed in or
upon any place of business, amusement device, game machine or vehicle
prohibited or declared to be unlawful by this title or any other law. (Ord. 05-
14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.06
BUSINESS LICENSE FEES
SECTION:
5.06.010: Definitions
5.06.020: Exemptions
5.06.030: License Fee
5.06.040: General Business License Fee Schedule
5.06.050: Fee Payments; Delinquency Penalties
5.06.060: Civil Actions To Recover Fees
5.06.010: DEFINITIONS:
FEE SCHEDULE: The business license ordinance fee schedule adopted pursuant to
section
5.06.040 of this chapter, as the same may be amended from time to time.
PER LOCATION: For the purposes of this title, "per location" means a site
occupied by a business, rental dwelling unit, or multiple rental dwelling
units. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.06.020: EXEMPTIONS:
No license fee shall be imposed under this chapter upon businesses which are
exempt from both property taxes and privileges taxes or upon any person engaged
in business that is specifically exempt from licensing by political
subdivisions under the laws of the United States or the state of Utah; nor
shall any such fee be imposed upon any person doing business within the city
who has paid a like or similar license tax or fee to some other governmental
unit within the state, which governmental unit exempts from its license tax or
fee, by written interlocal cooperation agreement, businesses domiciled in the
city and doing business in such unit. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.06.030: LICENSE FEE:
There is hereby levied upon the business of every person engaged in business in
the city at a place of business within the city, not otherwise in this title
specifically provided, an annual license fee for "general or temporary business
license", plus fees for additional regulatory services and disproportionate
fees as provided in section
5.06.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.06.040: GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE:
A fee schedule specifying the various fees under this title is set forth in
chart 5.06.040 of this section. The fee schedule may be amended from time to
time by the city council.
CHART 5.06.040
GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE
All business licensees are subject to the following general and temporary
business license fees. The annual general business license fees levied and
imposed hereunder include, but not limited to, business license application and
registration process, issuance of licenses, collection of fees, monitoring
records, preparing business reports, and verifications.
 
Ordinance Reference License Category New Application/ Renewal Fee Comment
                                     Amount
                  General business license
                  (excluding home
                  occupations, temporary
5.06.040          license, rental dwelling   $137.00 Per location, new
                  units, restaurants 5,000           application fee
                  sq. ft. or larger, and
                  department stores 12,000
                  sq. ft. or larger)
                                           78.00   Renewal fee
5.06.040 and      Home occupations:                  
5.54.030
                    Class A              75.00   New application fee
                                           50.00   Renewal fee
                    Class B              75.00   New application fee
                                           50.00   Renewal fee
                    Class C              80.00   New application fee
                                           50.00   Renewal fee
                    Class D (5 or less   100.00  New application fee
                  children)
                                           75.00   Renewal fee
                    Class D (6 or more   100.00  New application fee
                  children)
                                           100.00  Renewal fee
                  Rentals - dwelling units
                  (includes all rental               New application fee per
5.06.040 and 5.76 dwellings except single-   90.00   location
                  family rental dwellings
                  and family rental)
                                           85.00   Renewal fee per location
                 Rentals - family rental    0.00    New application and
                                                     renewal fee
                 Single-family rental       20.00   New application fee
                  dwellings
                                           20.00   Renewal
5.06.040 and      Solicitors                 145.00  New application fee
5.86.100
                                           145.00  Renewal fee
5.06.040 and      Temporary licenses         113.00  Per location
5.14.040
                 Fireworks                  157.00  Per location
5.06.040 and      Restaurants (5,000 sq. ft. 225.00  New application fee
5.77.030          or larger)
                                           225.00  Renewal fee
5.06.040 and      Department stores (12,000  224.00  New application fee
5.90.030          sq. ft. or larger)
                                           83.00   Renewal fee
 
(Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010; amd. Ord. 12-07, 4-25-2012)
In addition to the fees described above, the following businesses are subject
to the additional annual fee described below for regulatory services involving
registering, monitoring, reporting, and licensing:
 
Ordinance Reference License Category          Fee Amount Comment
5.24.240            Establishment name change $25.00      
5.24.250            New location transfer     35.00       
 
   DISPROPORTIONATE BUSINESS LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE
In addition to the fees described above, the following businesses are subject
to the additional annual fees described below for the disproportionate cost of
providing police and fire services:
 
Ordinance Reference License Category Fee Amount Comment
5.14.160 Temporary fireworks stands                                                 $162.00  Per
                                                                                             location
5.24     Alcoholic product license:                                                 250.00   Per
                                                                                             location
5.28     Amusement halls and devices                                                330.00   Per
                                                                                             location
5.97     Automotive                                                                 414.00    
5.88     Construction and manufacturing trades                                      25.00     
5.89     Convenience stores with gasoline                                           800.00    
5.90     Department stores/big box                                                  2,000.00  
5.95     Family services                                                            50.00     
5.36     Financial institutions                                                     889.00   Per
                                                                                             location
5.96     Food services                                                              225.00   Per
                                                                                             location
5.98     Full service grocery stores                                                2,000.00  
5.60     Hotel or motel                                                             83.00    Per room
5.93     Medium retail and wholesale sales                                          300.00    
5.64     Mobile home parks                                                          0.00     Per
                                                                                             unit/pad
5.66     Movie theaters                                                             330.00   Per
                                                                                             location
5.70     Nursing and convalescent homes                                                     Per
                                                                                             business
                                                                                  20.00    Per bed
        Personal services (less than 50 employees)                                 25.00     
        Personal services (51 to 200 employees)                                    100.00    
        Personal services (201 or more employees)                                  250.00    
5.94     Professional/business services (less than 50 employees)                    50.00     
        Professional/business services (51 to 200 employees)                       100.00    
        Professional/business services (201 or more employees)                     250.00    
5.76     Rental dwelling units:                                                              
           Participants of the good landlord program (single-family home rentals0.00     Per unit
           Participants of the good landlord program (except single-family home 15.00    Per unit
         rentals)
           Nonparticipants of the good landlord program                         70.00    Per unit
5.77     Restaurant                                                                 225.00   Per
                                                                                             location
5.92     Small retail and wholesale                                                 50.00     
 
(Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010; amd. Ord. 20-07, 7-1-2020)
5.06.050: FEE PAYMENTS; DELINQUENCY PENALTIES:
   A.   Business license fees for new businesses shall be due and payable upon
making application to the license department. The application shall not be
processed until the fee is paid.
   B.   Business license fees for renewal businesses shall be due and payable
each year on or before the last day of the month in which the license was
originally issued. If the license fee is not paid by the due date, a twenty
five percent (25%) penalty of the amount of the fee shall be added to the
original amount due. If the fee is still not paid within one month after the
due date, a one hundred percent (100%) penalty of the amount of the fee shall
be added to the original amount due. If the fee plus penalty is still not paid
within two (2) months of the due date, the business shall be considered to be
operating without a business license in violation of this title, subject to
criminal prosecution for every day of operation after two (2) months from the
due date and the license fee, if a license is granted thereafter, shall be
doubled.
   C.   Penalty fees may be appealed to the license official in writing who
may, for good cause shown, refund all or part of the applicable penalty fee
that has been paid. The decision of the license official may be appealed to the
board of license equalization as set forth in chapter 5.16 of this title. The
board of license equalization may, upon good cause shown, order that all or
part of the applicable penalty fee be refunded. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.06.060: CIVIL ACTIONS TO RECOVER FEES:
   A.   Where this title requires a license to be obtained from the city, the
fee being fixed by ordinance, and where such fee is not paid at the time or in
the manner provided in this title, a civil action may be brought in the name of
the city against the person failing to pay such license fee, in any court of
this state having jurisdiction of such action, to recover the same, any
penalties that may attach, the city's reasonable attorney fees incurred in such
action, and/or to enjoin further operation by the licensee. Where several
amounts for licenses as fixed by any city ordinance shall remain due and unpaid
by any person, the amounts may be joined as separate causes of action in the
same complaint in a civil action.
   B.   The city attorney shall prepare, bring and prosecute the civil actions
contemplated by this title upon the request of the city. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-
2010)
CHAPTER 5.08
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING BUSINESS LICENSE
SECTION:
5.08.010: License Required To Carry On Business
5.08.020: Persons Subject To Licensing
5.08.030: License; Application; Contents
5.08.040: Fees And Penalties
5.08.050: Fees Not Refunded
5.08.060: Application Fee Refunds
5.08.070: Application Investigation
5.08.080: Additional Investigations
5.08.090: Report Of Investigations
5.08.100: Action By Mayor
5.08.110: Compliance With Building And Land Use Requirements
5.08.120: Application Approval
5.08.130: Denial Conditions
5.08.140: Appeal Hearing
5.08.150: Effect Of Denial
5.08.010: LICENSE REQUIRED TO CARRY ON BUSINESS:
Unless exempted by state or federal law, it is unlawful for any person to
engage in or carry on or operate any business in the city, or to use any
property for such business, without first making application for and obtaining
the required license from the city. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.08.020: PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSING:
Whenever a license is required for the maintenance, operation or conduct of any
business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or
occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to the requirements if,
by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth as
being engaged in the business or occupation, or solicits patronage therefor,
actively or passively, or performs or attempts to perform any part of such
business or occupation in the city. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.08.030: LICENSE; APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
   A.   Licenses, permits and applications required by ordinance shall be made
with the city's license official. Each application shall state the name of the
business; the name of the applicant; the permit or license desired; the
location of the business, if any; the time covered and the fee to be paid; the
name, street address and mailing address, if different, of the business agent
who is authorized to receive service of process and any communication regarding
the applicant's license via certified mail, return receipt requested; and such
additional information as may be needed for the purpose of guidance of the city
officials in issuing the permit or license. Any change in the above information
furnished by the license applicant shall be forwarded, in writing, within ten
(10) days after the change, to the license official.
   B.   Forms for all licenses and permits, and the application therefor, shall
be prepared and kept on file by the license official. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.08.040: FEES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Each application for a license under this title shall be accompanied by
the license fee required to be paid for the issuance of the license desired.
   B.   The license official may not, under any circumstances, waive the
business license fees due the city for the current year or for prior years in
which the business operated.
   C.   In addition to the license fee regularly assessed, any applicant which
shall have commenced doing business prior to obtaining a valid license shall be
assessed a penalty fee. The penalty fee shall be equal to twenty five percent
(25%) of the regular license fee if the applicant has operated without a
license for less than thirty (30) days, and shall be equal to one hundred
percent (100%) of the regular license fee if the applicant has operated without
a license for more than thirty (30) days during the fiscal year in question.
The fee may be paid by cash or check made payable to the city or a certified
cashier's check and conditioned upon the payment of the license fee to the city
in the event of the issuance of the license. Any license which has been issued
pursuant to payment by means of a check shall be void and of no force or effect
if such check is not honored. Applications received by the license official
shall be numbered in the order of their receipt. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.08.050: FEES NOT REFUNDED:
No license fee, or any part thereof, shall be refunded for any reason
whatsoever once the license has been granted or issued by the city, unless
allowed after an appeal. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.08.060: APPLICATION FEE REFUNDS:
If a license is denied for any reason, the applicant shall be entitled to a
refund to the extent the amount that accompanied the application is in excess
of thirty five dollars ($35.00). The sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00), or
any lesser amount, shall be retained to offset the cost of processing the
application. However, the city may, in its sole discretion, refund the entire
application fee if deemed appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 05-14, 4-
6-2005)
5.08.070: APPLICATION INVESTIGATION:
Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, where ordinances of the
city require an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such permit
or license, the license official or his authorized representative or such other
agency, including the police department and the planning and zoning department
as these ordinances specifically empower, shall make such investigation within
five (5) business days after the time the application was received by the
agency or department. However, when adequate investigation requires
correspondence with agencies or other sources of information outside the city,
or the license applicant is not ready to be inspected, such investigation shall
be completed within fifteen (15) business days. The officer charged with the
duty of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report thereon,
favorable or otherwise, within five (5) business days after making the
investigation or inspection. The Salt Lake Valley health department shall, for
the protection of health, make or cause to be made, an inspection in regard to
licenses in connection with the care and handling of food, the prevention of
nuisances and the spread of disease. The fire department shall make or cause to
be made inspections relating to the safety of buildings or other structures
licensed hereunder. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.08.080: ADDITIONAL INVESTIGATIONS:
As soon as practical, the license official, in his discretion, may refer the
application for additional investigation to the fire department, police
department or other official or body for the purpose of investigation and
inspection concerning the general reputation of the licensee, whether the
business is or has been conducted in a lawful, quiet, orderly and helpful
manner, and the conditions of health and safety of such premises, together with
any other fact or facts that the city should know in acting upon the
application. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.08.090: REPORT OF INVESTIGATIONS:
Upon being requested to do so by the mayor or the license official, the police
department, fire department, or any other official or department so requested
shall conduct the investigation and inspection provided for in this chapter and
submit to the mayor or license official a report on such investigation and
inspection, together with recommendations as to whether the license should be
granted or denied. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.08.100: ACTION BY MAYOR:
After receipt of the referenced reports and recommendations of the license
official, police department, fire department or other official or body, the
mayor shall act upon the application as he deems just and proper in regard to
granting or denying the same, and may order further information or
investigation if such appears necessary. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.08.110: COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING AND LAND USE REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit shall
be issued if the premises and building use do not fully comply with the city's
building and land use ordinances. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012)
5.08.120: APPLICATION APPROVAL:
In the event the city approves a business license, the business license shall
be signed by the mayor or impressed by his facsimile, and forwarded to the
applicant. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.08.130: DENIAL CONDITIONS:
   A.   The mayor, upon recommendation of the license official, may deny the
issuance of a license if the applicant has:
      1.   Been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude;
or
      2.   Obtained, or has aided another to obtain, a license by fraud,
deceit, material misrepresentation or material omission; or
      3.   Failed to pay any applicable taxes or fees; or
      4.   Violated the laws of the state, the United States government, the
ordinances of the city, or the rules and regulations of any Utah state or city
agency governing operation of the business holding the license or permit.
   B.   The reason for denial shall be endorsed on the application by the
license official, and the city recorder shall return to the applicant, via
certified mail, return receipt requested, the application, notice of the
applicant's rights to an appeal and any fees that are refundable. (Ord. 05-14,
4-6-2005)
5.08.140: APPEAL HEARING:
If the applicant files a written notice of appeal within twenty (20) days of
the notice of denial, a hearing to consider the denial of a license shall be
held as provided in chapter 5.11 of this title. Unless the mayor or hearing
examiner orders otherwise, it shall be unlawful for an applicant who has been
denied a license to commence or conduct the business or occupation contemplated
in the application. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.08.150: EFFECT OF DENIAL:
If at any time a license or renewal is denied under the provisions of this
chapter, it shall thereafter be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry
on or operate or use or permit to be operated or used, any property for any
business with respect to which the license or renewal has been denied, until a
license or renewal shall be granted by the city. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.10
LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR DENIAL TO RENEW
SECTION:
5.10.010: Enforcement Powers
5.10.020: Grounds For License Suspension, Revocation Or Denial To Renew
5.10.030: Notice Of Violation And Hearing
5.10.040: Waiting Period For New License
5.10.010: ENFORCEMENT POWERS:
The city shall be responsible for the enforcement of this title. The city may,
on its own initiative, or in response to complaints referred from the general
public or otherwise, investigate and gather evidence of violations of the
licensing provisions of this title. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.10.020: GROUNDS FOR LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR DENIAL TO RENEW:
In addition to any fine imposed, every license or permit issued by the city may
be revoked, suspended or renewal denied as prescribed herein. Upon
recommendation of the license official and upon a hearing held pursuant to
chapter 5.11 of this title, the mayor or hearing examiner may revoke, suspend
or deny renewal of licenses or permits, if the licensee or permittee:
   A.   Has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude;
   B.   Has obtained, or aided another to obtain, a license by fraud or deceit;
   C.   Has failed to pay any applicable taxes or fees;
   D.   Has violated the laws of the state, the United States government, the
ordinances of the city, or the rules and regulations of any agency of the city
or the state governing the operation of the business holding a license or
permit; or
   E.   Has refused to permit authorized officers or employees to make an
inspection or to take a sample of a commodity, or has interfered with such
officer or employee while in the performance of his duty in making such
inspection. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.10.030: NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND HEARING:
The city shall send the licensee written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, in care of the process agent specified in the license
application, of the alleged violation and notice of hearing and the licensee's
right to appear at the hearing, the consequences of the failure to appear and
answer, and of the date, time and place set for the hearing. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-
2005)
5.10.040: WAITING PERIOD FOR NEW LICENSE:
No person denied a license, or whose license has been revoked under the
provisions of this chapter, and no person associated or connected with such
person in conduct of such business shall be granted a license for the same
purpose for a period of six (6) months after the denial or revocation has
occurred. However, the mayor may, in his discretion, waive the prohibition
against persons formerly associated or connected with an individual who has had
his license revoked. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.11
HEARINGS; DECISION; ENFORCEMENT; APPEAL
SECTION:
5.11.010: Hearing Procedure
5.11.020: Hearing Examiner; Appointment And Powers
5.11.030: Unlawful To Operate Without A License
5.11.010: HEARING PROCEDURE:
   A.   A suspension, revocation, or denial to renew a license issued pursuant
to the ordinances of the city shall not be imposed until a hearing is first
held pursuant to this chapter before the mayor or a hearing examiner.
   B.   At least twenty (20) days prior to a hearing hereunder, the city shall
cause notice of the time and place of the hearing to be served upon the
licensee or applicant by mailing a copy to the licensee or applicant via
certified mail, return receipt requested, in care of the licensee specified in
the license or applicant specified in the application.
   C.   Failure to appear at such hearing or otherwise defend against
suspension, revocation, denial of a license or denial to renew a license shall
constitute grounds for immediate suspension, revocation, denial of a license or
denial to renew a license.
   D.   All witnesses called at a hearing shall be sworn by a person duly
authorized to administer oaths, and a record of such hearing shall be made by a
recording or a court reporter. A licensee or applicant shall have the right to
appear at the hearing in person or by counsel, or both, present evidence,
present argument on the applicant's behalf, cross examine witnesses, and in all
proper ways defend the licensee or applicant's position.
   E.   Within ten (10) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue a written findings of fact, conclusions of law and order
based upon and supported by the evidence presented at such hearing. (Ord. 05-
14, 4-6-2005)
5.11.020: HEARING EXAMINER; APPOINTMENT AND POWERS:
A hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor upon the advice and consent
of the city council. The hearing officer shall have power and authority to
call, preside at and conduct hearings to consider the suspension, revocation,
denial or approval of licenses or renewals issued by the city, including the
power to examine witnesses and receive evidence, compel the attendance of
witnesses, and compel the production of documents. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.11.030: UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT A LICENSE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence or conduct any
business, trade or occupation within the city without first procuring all
applicable city business licenses.
   B.   If at any time a license issued under the provisions of this title is
denied, suspended or revoked, it shall thereafter be unlawful for the holder of
such license to conduct business on the premises described in such application
or license until the old license is reinstated or a new license is issued.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.12
LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY
SECTION:
5.12.010: License Transfer Limitations
5.12.020: Transfer Fee Or Fee For Changes In Business, Location, Name Or
Ownership
5.12.010: LICENSE TRANSFER LIMITATIONS:
   A.   No license granted or issued under the provisions of the ordinances of
the city shall be deemed to be assignable or transferable, or to authorize any
person other than the person therein to do business, or to authorize the
conduct of business other than at the location therein named.
   B.   Persons to whom one or more licenses have been issued to transact or
conduct business at one location in the city may make application for the
transfer of said licenses for the purpose of transacting the same business at
another location in the city. Applications for transfer shall be filed with the
license official ten (10) days in advance of the proposed change. The city,
after receiving recommendations from the license official or his authorized
agent may, at its discretion, grant or deny the transfer of licenses. No
transfer shall be permitted without full compliance with the building and
zoning requirements of this code.
   C.   Alcohol licenses are not transferable. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.12.020: TRANSFER FEE OR FEE FOR CHANGES IN BUSINESS LOCATION, NAME OR
OWNERSHIP:
In the event of a transfer of business location as described in section
5.12.010 of this chapter or in the event of a change in the business name or
ownership, a new license will be issued provided the appropriate fee is paid as
specified in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.14
TEMPORARY LICENSES
SECTION:
5.14.010: Definitions
5.14.020: Required
5.14.030: Display
5.14.040: Fee
5.14.050: Application
5.14.060: Expedited License Charge
5.14.070: Location
5.14.080: Limitations And Restrictions
5.14.090: Exceptions
5.14.100: Inspection Of Merchandise
5.14.110: Cleanup Bond Required
5.14.120: Compliance With Laws
5.14.130: Signs
5.14.140: Temporary Automobile Sales
5.14.150: Temporary Christmas Tree Lots
5.14.160: Temporary Fireworks Stands
5.14.170: Temporary Food Vendors
5.14.180: Temporary Fruit Or Vegetable Stands
5.14.190: Temporary Merchants
5.14.010: DEFINITIONS:
FIREWORKS: Class C explosives as described in Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-
202.
TEMPORARY AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT: The conduct of business from a single
designated site, without a permanent foundation or location, from which new or
used automobiles are sold on a temporary basis.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS: The conduct of business from a single designated site or
premises without a permanent foundation or location, from which goods or
services are sold on a temporary or seasonal basis and includes a concert,
fair, rally, bazaar or festival.
TEMPORARY CHRISTMAS TREE LOT: The conduct of business from a single designated
site, without a permanent foundation or location, from which Christmas trees
are sold on a temporary basis.
TEMPORARY FIREWORKS SALES: The conduct of temporary retail sales of fireworks
from an existing retail store currently licensed by the city of Taylorsville to
perform retail sales.
TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STAND: The conduct of business from a single designated
site, without a permanent foundation or location, from which fireworks are sold
on a temporary basis.
TEMPORARY FOOD VENDOR: The conduct of business from a single designated site,
without a permanent foundation or location, from which prepared food and/or
beverages are sold on a temporary basis.
TEMPORARY FRUIT OR VEGETABLE STAND: The conduct of business from a single
designated site, without a permanent foundation or location, from which fresh
fruit and/or vegetables are sold on a temporary basis.
TEMPORARY MERCHANT: The conduct of business from a single designated site,
without a permanent foundation or location, from which goods or services and
nonfood items, other than fireworks, Christmas trees, and automobiles, are sold
on a temporary basis. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.020: REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in, promote or carry on a
temporary business within the city without first making application for and
obtaining a temporary business license from the city. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.030: DISPLAY:
A temporary business license granted pursuant to this chapter must be
conspicuously displayed in or at the site or premises where the temporary
business is conducted and must be available for inspection. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-
2005)
5.14.040: FEE:
The fee for engaging in, carrying on, or conducting a temporary business shall
be as specified in the fee schedule. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.050: APPLICATION:
An application for a temporary business license must be submitted ten (10) days
prior to the commencement of the temporary business and must include the
following:
   A.   Site plan delineating where the temporary business will be located and
the parking area available for patrons. (Note: Needs further analysis to ensure
compliance with zoning regulations.)
   B.   Written permission from the property owner where the temporary business
will be located in a form acceptable to the city.
   C.   Acceptable evidence of a special event sales tax number issued by the
state of Utah. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.060: EXPEDITED LICENSE CHARGE:
The license official may waive the ten (10) working day requirement of section
 5.14.050 of this chapter upon payment of an expedited license charge in the
amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.070: LOCATION:
The temporary business license shall specify the location at which the
temporary business may be conducted, and no temporary business may be conducted
at any other location without first obtaining a separate license for that
location. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.080: LIMITATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
Each person conducting business under this chapter shall:
   A.   Provide suitable containers for placement of any litter by customers or
other persons; and clean up any paper, cardboard, wood, plastic containers,
wrappers, residues from any liquid spilled on the site, or litter of any kind
within a fifty foot (50') area.
   B.   Display in a prominent and visible manner the business license issued
by the city and conspicuously post the price of all items sold.
   C.   Obey the lawful order of a police officer to move temporarily to a
different location to avoid congestion or obstruction of the sidewalk, parking
lot, or plaza or to remove the vending cart entirely from the site, if
necessary, to avoid such congestion or obstruction.
   D.   Conduct no temporary business at a location other than that designated
on his/her permit with the exception as stated in subsection C of this section.
   E.   Make no loud or unreasonable noise of any kind by vocalization or
otherwise for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention to his or her
wares.
   F.   Submit written approval from the property owner to locate on the site.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.090: EXCEPTIONS:
A temporary business license is not required for the following:
   A.   A vegetable and fruit stand that sells produce grown solely on property
owned or leased by the operator of the vegetable and fruit stand and such
property is located in the city.
   B.   Isolated or occasional sales from a private home by a person not
regularly engaged in business. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.100: INSPECTION OF MERCHANDISE:
The Taylorsville police department or other city official may inspect all goods
and merchandise to be sold pursuant to a temporary business license. (Ord. 05-
14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.110: CLEANUP BOND REQUIRED:
Any person applying for a temporary business license shall file, along with his
temporary business license application, a cash bond or irrevocable letter of
credit in an amount established pursuant to rules and regulations of the health
department. Such bonds shall cover the cost of disposing of all litter, garbage
and sewage of the individuals attending, observing or performing at the
temporary business license location. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.120: COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS:
Temporary license holders shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances
of the city, planning and zoning requirements, and any state laws governing the
operation of its business. In addition, all temporary businesses must receive
approval from the city and any appropriate agencies, including, but not limited
to, the fire, health, and police departments. Noncompliance with any city
ordinance may result in immediate revocation of the temporary business license.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.130: SIGNS:
All signs associated with temporary businesses shall comply with all standards
and regulations of the Taylorsville land development code. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-
2005; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
5.14.140: TEMPORARY AUTOMOBILE SALES:
   A.   Temporary automobile sales are limited to no more than eight (8)
consecutive days per licensee or dealership for any and all locations within
the city. No licensee or dealership may obtain more than six (6) permits per
calendar year.
   B.   Any licensee or dealership making application for a temporary sale must
include with their application an off site car sale permit from the state of
Utah. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.150: TEMPORARY CHRISTMAS TREE LOTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling
Christmas trees without first obtaining a license from the city to do so for
each location.
   B.   Each applicant shall provide verification that the applicant has a bona
fide title to the trees and that they were not obtained illegally.
   C.   Each applicant shall file with the city a cash bond or irrevocable
letter of credit, made payable to the city, in the amount of three hundred
fifty dollars ($350.00) for each location. Such bond or irrevocable letter of
credit shall assure compliance with the provisions of this section, including,
but not limited to, the removal of the lot and the cleaning of the site where
it is located. Such bond or irrevocable letter of credit may be forfeited when
damage has resulted.
   D.   Lighting for temporary Christmas tree lots shall be by electric light
only, and all temporary power shall comply with the applicable electrical code.
   E.   Temporary Christmas tree lots may operate from one week prior to
Thanksgiving through December 25. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.14.160: TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STANDS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling
fireworks without first obtaining a license from the city to do so for each
location.
   B.   All applications to sell fireworks must include insurance certificates
evidencing public liability insurance coverage in the amount of two hundred
thousand dollars/four hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00/$400,000.00), and
property damage insurance coverage in the amount of two hundred thousand
dollars ($200,000.00), and such certificates shall designate the city as an
additional insured, and include certificates evidencing products liability
insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence.
   C.   Each applicant for a temporary fireworks stand shall file with the city
a cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit, made payable to the city, in the
amount of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each location. Such bond or
irrevocable letter of credit shall assure compliance with the provisions of
this section, including, but not limited to, the removal of the stand and the
cleaning of the site where it was located. Such bond or irrevocable letter of
credit may be forfeited when damage has resulted.
   D.   All persons or entities selling fireworks in the city of Taylorsville
shall conform to the following general requirements:
      1.   Sale and possession of fireworks are limited to those listed and
approved by the Utah state fire marshal.
      2.   All fireworks retail sales locations shall be under the direct
supervision of a responsible person who is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
      3.   Fireworks cannot be sold to a person under the age of sixteen (16)
unless accompanied by an adult.
      4.   No temporary fireworks stand shall be within twenty five feet (25')
of any building, structure, or any other temporary fireworks stand or within
fifty feet (50') of any gasoline pump, or gasoline dispensing service, or LPG
tank or dispensing device.
      5.   All weeds and combustible materials shall be cleared from within
twenty five feet (25') of any temporary fireworks stand.
      6.   All sale locations must have on premises at least one "2A10BC" rated
fire extinguisher.
      7.   Temporary fireworks stands less than one hundred twenty (120) square
feet need not comply with the provisions of the uniform building code, but all
such stands shall be erected in a manner that will reasonably assure the safety
of occupants and patrons.
      8.   Temporary fireworks stands one hundred twenty (120) square feet or
larger must conform to all fire and building code requirements.
      9.   Lighting of temporary fireworks stands shall be by electric light
only and all temporary power shall comply with the applicable electrical code.
      10.   Signs bearing the message "Discharge of Fireworks Prohibited Within
One Hundred Feet of this Location" and "Smoking Prohibited Within Twenty Five
Feet of this Location" in letters at least three inches (3") tall shall be
attached and conspicuously displayed on all four (4) sides of the temporary
fireworks stand.
      11.   Fireworks may not be stored in residences or attached garages.
      12.   The storage or selling of fireworks shall not by its presence,
create a distinct hazard to any person or property.
      13.   Fireworks may only be sold from June 20 through July 25, and
December 20 through January 2, and fifteen (15) days before and on Chinese New
Year.
      14.   Fireworks may be discharged three (3) days prior to, or on the day
of, and three (3) days following July 4, July 24, January 1, and the Chinese
New Year.
      15.   Display of fireworks inside a building or temporary fireworks stand
shall be located to ensure constant visual supervision.
      16.   Temporary fireworks sales in permanent structures must be separated
from flammable and combustible gases, liquids, and solids by at least fifty
feet (50').
      17.   Temporary fireworks sales in permanent structures must be located
in such a manner as to not impede egress from the building. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-
2005)
5.14.170: TEMPORARY FOOD VENDORS:
   A.   All temporary food vendors are required to obtain approval and comply
with the Salt Lake Valley health department regulations for preparing and
operating a food cart.
   B.   A temporary food vendor shall not operate within one thousand feet
(1,000') of another food vendor or a restaurant, or a business which offers
similar food, without written permission of the business owner or manager.
   C.   Licenses for temporary food vendors shall expire sixty (60) days from
issuance. A licensee may reapply for subsequent licenses at the same location
but may not exceed one hundred eighty (180) days at the same location. For the
purposes of this section, any location within two hundred fifty (250) linear
feet is considered the same location. Temporary food vendors who are properly
licensed at a given location will have the right of first refusal for
subsequent temporary license renewals provided the licensee has not reached the
maximum permissible license duration. The business license or land use fee
shall be waived with subsequent licenses in the one hundred eighty (180) day
period at the same location by the same applicant as referenced above.
   D.   Prior to the issuance of any permit, the fire marshal or his designee,
shall inspect and approve any mobile device or pushcart containing cooking or
heating equipment to assure the conformance of any such equipment with the
provisions of the fire code. (Ord. 05-36, 7-6-2005)
5.14.180: TEMPORARY FRUIT OR VEGETABLE STANDS:
   A.   A vendor selling fruit and/or vegetables from a cart, stand or mobile
structure, shall be required to place all produce upon stands or in boxes,
which shall be kept at least six inches (6") above the ground.
   B.   A temporary business license is not required for a vegetable or fruit
stand that sells produce grown solely on property owned or leased by the
operator of the vegetable and fruit stand and such property is located within
the city.
   C.   Licenses for temporary fruit or vegetable stands shall expire thirty
(30) days from issuance. A licensee may reapply for subsequent licenses at the
same location but may not exceed ninety (90) days at the same location. For the
purposes of this section, any location within two hundred fifty (250) linear
feet is considered the same location. Temporary fruit and vegetable stand
vendors who are properly licensed at a given location will have the right of
first refusal for subsequent temporary license renewals provided the licensee
has not reached the maximum permissible license duration. The business license
or land use fee shall be waived with subsequent licenses in the ninety (90) day
period at the same location by the same applicant as referenced above. (Ord.
05-36, 7-6-2005)
5.14.190: TEMPORARY MERCHANTS:
   A.   All product changes require a new business license prior to
distribution of new merchandise.
   B.   Licenses for temporary merchants shall expire thirty (30) days from
issuance. A licensee may reapply for subsequent licenses at the same location
but may not exceed sixty (60) days at the same location. For the purposes of
this section, any location within two hundred fifty (250) linear feet is
considered the same location. Temporary merchants who are properly licensed at
a given location will have the right of first refusal for subsequent temporary
license renewals provided the licensee has not reached the maximum permissible
license duration. The business license or land use fee shall be waived with
subsequent licenses in the sixty (60) day period at the same location by the
same applicant as referenced above. (Ord. 05-36, 7-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.16
BOARD OF LICENSE EQUALIZATION
SECTION:
5.16.010: City Council; Powers And Duties
5.16.020: Council Meetings
5.16.030: Complaints On Assessments; Deadline For Presentation
5.16.010: CITY COUNCIL; POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The city council hereby constitutes the board of license equalization
for the equalization of license fees and penalties. The board shall have
authority to examine the assessments made by the license official, hear
complaints of aggrieved parties, and make changes in any assessments the city
council concludes to be illegal, unequal, or unjust.
   B.   Corrections made by the city council shall be entered in detail in the
record of license assessment kept by the license official, and the city council
shall approve in writing such entries before the license official shall adjust
the accounts. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.16.020: COUNCIL MEETINGS:
The city council shall meet as often as shall be necessary to complete the
business of equalization. The date, time and place of each meeting shall be set
by the majority vote of the city council during a regular session of the city
council. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.16.030: COMPLAINTS ON ASSESSMENTS; DEADLINE FOR PRESENTATION:
All complaints relative to an assessment made by the license official must be
presented to the city council within six (6) months after such assessment, or
be forever barred. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.18
REGISTRATION CARDS
SECTION:
5.18.010: Definitions
5.18.020: Persons And Establishments Which Require Registration Cards
5.18.030: Out Of State Entertainers; Group Work Card
5.18.040: Procedure For Obtaining Card
5.18.050: Fees
5.18.060: Card Numbers To Be Registered By Employer
5.18.070: Examination Of Employees' Cards
5.18.080: Possession Of Card Required; Cards Not Transferable
5.18.090: Denial Conditions; Appeals
5.18.100: Revocation Conditions; Appeals
5.18.110: Violation; Penalty
5.18.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
DEPARTMENT: Shall mean and include the Taylorsville police department.
EMPLOYED: Performing any type of work or assistance for or on behalf of any
establishment covered by this chapter, at any establishment covered by this
chapter, during hours such establishment is open to its members or to the
public, whether or not pecuniary compensation is provided or offered therefor.
EMPLOYEE: Any person, female or male, who is "employed", as defined in this
section, by any establishment covered by this chapter, whether the person is
employed on a contractual basis, by fixed salary, or by any other means.
EMPLOYER: Any establishment, or the principals thereof, covered by this
chapter. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.18.020: PERSONS AND ESTABLISHMENTS WHICH REQUIRE REGISTRATION CARDS:
The persons and establishments covered by this chapter shall be all employees
of nonpremises beer establishments, limited restaurant licenses, on premises
taverns and special events licenses which provide live entertainment on the
premises, and class A, B, C and D private clubs which sell, serve and dispense
alcoholic beverages, including bartenders, waiters, waitresses, managers; those
engaged in the security or the checking of identification; and those providing
entertainment in such establishments are required to obtain a registration
card. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.18.030: OUT OF STATE ENTERTAINERS; GROUP WORK CARD:
It shall be the responsibility of a licensee of an establishment listed in
section
5.18.020 of this chapter desiring an out of state entertainer or entertainment
group to perform on the licensee's premises to ensure that the entertainer or
each member of the entertainment group has either obtained a work card or a
group work card for the entertainer or entertainment group, as appropriate. The
licensee shall submit the name, date of birth and address of each entertainer
or member of the entertainment group and shall verify that each entertainer or
each member of the entertainment group is over the age of twenty one (21). The
application for a group work card shall contain all information required by the
department and shall be submitted to the department by the licensee twenty four
(24) hours prior to the performance of the entertainer or the entertainment
group. The group work card shall be valid for only the performance of the
entertainer or entertainment group while at the licensee's premises, but in no
event shall it be valid for longer than ten (10) days. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.18.040: PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING CARD:
   A.   Prior to commencing employment, the employee must obtain a signed
registration application from the employer, and then submit himself to the
department to be photographed, or provide the department with two (2) one and
one-half inch by one and one- half inch (11/2" x 11/2") photographs.
   B.   Any applicant may be required to furnish satisfactory documented proof
of his or her age. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.18.050: FEES:
The fee for work cards shall be as specified in the fee schedule. (Ord. 05-14,
4-6-2005)
5.18.060: CARD NUMBERS TO BE REGISTERED BY EMPLOYER:
All department card numbers obtained under the provisions of this chapter are
to be registered by the employer personnel or payroll section and kept as a
part of the record of the employee. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.18.070: EXAMINATION OF EMPLOYEES' CARDS:
The person or persons designated by each establishment as the agent(s)
responsible for hiring and/or checking employees under the provisions of this
chapter shall examine each employee's or prospective employee's department card
for the purpose of determining the validity of the card for use in the
particular establishment concerned, such validity to be determined by the name
of the concerned establishment being stamped on the back side of the department
card in red ink. If the prospective employee's card is found to be invalid as
described above, he will be issued a new signed application form which must be
completed and presented along with his department card to the department for
validation, prior to commencing employment. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.18.080: POSSESSION OF CARD REQUIRED; CARDS NOT TRANSFERABLE:
All persons employed by an establishment governed by this chapter must have in
their possession a valid registration card. Registration cards are not
transferable. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.18.090: DENIAL CONDITIONS; APPEALS:
   A.   The police department may deny a registration card if the applicant:
      1.   Has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral
turpitude;
      2.   Has obtained a registration card by fraud or deceit;
      3.   Has failed to pay required fees; or
      4.   Has violated the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city
regulating the work of the applicant.
   B.   Any person who is denied a department registration card may appeal in
writing within fifteen (15) days from the date of denial to the city for a
hearing regarding issuance of the registration card. The city shall then
schedule a hearing in conformance with general business license denial
proceedings, as set forth in chapter 5.11 of this title, as amended. (Ord. 05-
14, 4-6-2005)
5.18.100: REVOCATION CONDITIONS; APPEALS:
   A.   The department may revoke or suspend registration cards if the holder:
      1.   Has been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral
turpitude;
      2.   Has obtained a registration card by fraud or deceit;
      3.   Has failed to pay required fees;
      4.   Has violated the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city
regulating the work of the permit holder;
      5.   Has procured, attempted to procure, or agreed to procure, for any
person:
         a.   Another person for the purpose of sexual intercourse or any
immoral act, or
         b.   A controlled substance, as defined in Utah Code Annotated section
58-37-1 et seq.;
      6.   Has utilized his registration card for the purpose of obtaining
credit, or as identification for cashing checks.
   B.   Any person whose registration card has been revoked or suspended by the
department may appeal within fifteen (15) days from the date of the suspension
or revocation to the city for a hearing regarding reinstatement of the
registration card. The city shall then schedule a hearing in conformance with
general license revocation proceedings, as set forth in chapter 5.11 of this
title, as amended. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.18.110: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person in violation of this chapter is guilty of a class C misdemeanor as
defined in state law. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.20
INSPECTIONS
SECTION:
5.20.010: Officers Authorized To Examine And Inspect Businesses; Powers And
Duties
5.20.020: Right Of Entry; Sampling Of Materials
5.20.030: Complaints And Citations For Violation
5.20.010: OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO EXAMINE AND INSPECT BUSINESSES; POWERS AND
DUTIES:
A police officer, the license official or members of his staff and the fire
chief and his designated representatives, are hereby appointed ex officio
license deputies who, in addition to the several duties of their respective
offices or positions, are hereby authorized and empowered to examine and
inspect all places of business subject to paying a license under the provisions
of this title as their duty shall bring them into contact with same, inspect
and verify all information listed on the license application and to see that
businesses covered and authorized by the license issued are carried on or
transacted in accordance with this title and other applicable law, and to
report to the license official the names of all persons doing business without
a license, and instances of the conduct by any party or business other than
that covered by the license issued. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.20.020: RIGHT OF ENTRY; SAMPLING OF MATERIALS:
   A.   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance
provision, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit
thereto, for the purpose of making the inspection, any officer, employee or
agent of the license official who is authorized and directed to make such
inspections at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
   B.   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to secure conformance with ordinance provisions, or to detect
violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee whose business is
governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee
requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity as are
necessary for analysis. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.20.030: COMPLAINTS AND CITATIONS FOR VIOLATION:
The license official and his authorized deputies shall, in the discharge and
performance of their official duties, have and exercise the power to issue
citations for the violation of any of the provisions of the license ordinances.
The license official shall further have the duty of cooperating with the city
attorney to cause complaints to be filed against all persons violating any of
the provisions of the license ordinances. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.22
ALARM SYSTEMS; INTRUSION AND PHYSICAL DURESS
SECTION:
5.22.010: Purpose And Scope
5.22.020: Definitions
5.22.030: Registration Required To Operate Alarm System Business And Automatic
Dialing Devices
5.22.040: Individual Employee's Registration
5.22.050: User Instructions
5.22.060: Response To Alarms; Permit Revocation
5.22.070: Interagency Communications
5.22.080: Deliberate False Alarms
5.22.090: Policies
5.22.100: City Liability Limitation
5.22.110: Penalties
5.22.010: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   The purpose of this section is to protect the emergency services of the
city from misuse.
   B.   This section governs intrusion and physical duress alarm systems,
requires permits and registration, establishes fees, provides for the
allocation of revenues and deficits, provides for revocation of the permit,
provides for punishment of violations and establishes a system of
administration. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.22.020: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM BUSINESS: The business by any individual, partnership, corporation or
other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, removing, moving, installing, planning the installation or assisting
in the installation of any alarm service.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to
signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring urgent
attention and to which peace officers are expected to respond.
ALARM USER: The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
or organization thereof of any kind in control of any building, structure or
facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: A device which is interconnected to a telephone line
and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by
voice message or code signal any emergency message indicating a need for
emergency response.
COORDINATOR: The individual designated by the police department to issue
permits and enforce the provisions of this section.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal eliciting a response by peace officers when a
situation requiring a response by them or other emergency response unit in fact
does not exist. It includes an alarm signal caused by conditions of nature
which are normal for that area and subject to control by the alarm business
operator or alarm user. "False alarm" does not include an alarm signal caused
by extraordinarily violent conditions of nature not reasonably subject to
control.
INTERCONNECT: To connect an alarm system, including an automatic dialing
device, to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device
that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to
transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.
INTRUSION ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry
into the area protected by the system.
LOCAL ALARM: Any noise making alarm device.
PHYSICAL DURESS SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling a robbery or other physical
endangerment.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The Taylorsville police department.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE: A telephone line serving the Valley 911 system or other
dispatch services that is designated to receive emergency calls.
VALLEY 911 AND POLICE DISPATCH: The governmental facilities used to receive
emergency and general information from the public to be dispatched to the
police department. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.22.030: REGISTRATION REQUIRED TO OPERATE ALARM SYSTEM BUSINESS AND AUTOMATIC
DIALING DEVICES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or
association to own, manage, conduct or carry on the business of selling,
leasing, installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, moving or
removing, or causing to be sold, leased, installed, serviced, maintained,
repaired, replaced, moved or removed in or on any building, residence or other
property within the city any device known as an intrusion, or physical duress
alarm system, or automatic dialing device connected to an answering service,
unless such person is licensed therefor in accordance with Utah Code Annotated
section 58-55-101 et seq., and any other applicable laws.
   B.   The fee for an intrusion or physical duress alarm system business
license shall be as specified on the fee schedule.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate, connect, or
allow maintaining, operating or connecting, any automatic dialing device which
automatically dials the police department and then relays any prerecorded
message to report any robbery, burglary, or other emergency. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-
2005)
5.22.040: INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYEE'S REGISTRATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person employed by a person having a valid license
as an alarm business or company under Utah Code Annotated section 58-55-101 et
seq., to engage directly in the selling, leasing, installing, servicing,
maintaining, repairing, moving or removing in or on any building or other
property within the city any intrusion or physical duress alarm system unless
such person shall first be licensed therefor in accordance with all applicable
laws. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.22.050: USER INSTRUCTIONS:
Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to any user an alarm system
which is installed on premises located in the city shall furnish the user with
written instructions that provide information to enable the user to operate the
alarm system properly. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.22.060: RESPONSE TO ALARMS; PERMIT REVOCATION:
Except for alarms at a wholesale or retail firearms business, intrusion alarm
response shall be dispatched by the police department only after a private
guard responder has confirmed that an attempted or actual crime has occurred at
the alarm site. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.22.070: INTERAGENCY COMMUNICATIONS:
A central station or other alarm dispatch center must provide the police
dispatch a toll free telephone number for the conducting of business and
contacting the central station dispatchers at the time of filing the alarm
report. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.22.080: DELIBERATE FALSE ALARMS:
No person shall cause to be transmitted any intrusion or physical duress alarm
knowing the same to be false or without basis in fact. Central stations shall
not request law enforcement officers to respond to alarm scenes when monitoring
equipment indicates an alarm system malfunction signal. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.22.090: POLICIES:
The city council may from time to time adopt or modify by ordinance written
policies governing the allocation of the city's law enforcement resources and
other emergency services to alarm systems. Such policies may, without
limitation, prohibit response by the city's law enforcement personnel to alarms
of specific types, specify the conditions under which the city's law
enforcement personnel will respond to alarms of specific types, or in any other
manner control and protect from misuse the city's emergency services. (Ord. 05-
14, 4-6-2005)
5.22.100: CITY LIABILITY LIMITATION:
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the timing of any response to an
alarm in any particular situation is dependent on a number of factors over
which the city has no control. Therefore, the city will have absolutely no
liability, contractual or otherwise, to any provider or to any alarm user, if
response to is not timely. Further, the city will not be liable for any defect
in the operation of intrusion or duress alarm systems. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.22.110: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor as defined by state law. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.24
ALCOHOL AND BEER
SECTION:
5.24.010: Adoption Of Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act
5.24.020: Definitions
5.24.030: Business License Required - Sales At Wholesale
5.24.040: Business License Required - Sales At Retail
5.24.050: Application For Alcoholic Product License
5.24.060: Alcoholic Product License Issuance
5.24.070: Alcoholic Product License Suspension And Revocation
5.24.080: Expiration Date
5.24.090: City License Requires State License
5.24.100: Licensee Qualifications
5.24.110: Fees
5.24.120: Alcoholic Product License Renewal
5.24.130: Name Changes
5.24.140: Civil Fine
(Previous Chapter 5.24 repealed and replaced by Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.010: ADOPTION OF UTAH ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT:
The alcoholic beverage control act, Utah Code Annotated sections 32B-1-101 et
seq., as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by this reference in its
entirety as if set forth in full herein. The alcoholic beverage control act as
adopted herein shall be construed to apply only to the incorporated areas of
the city and shall be interpreted and constructed where necessary to carry out
the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005; amd. Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.020: DEFINITIONS:
All words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the same meaning given to
them in the alcoholic beverage control act. In addition, the following words
and phrases shall have the following additional meanings, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
APPLICATION: A formal written request for the issuance of a city permit or
license.
CITY: The city of Taylorsville.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city.
FEE SCHEDULE: The city's fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title.
PLACE OF BUSINESS: Shall include cafes, restaurants, public dining rooms,
cafeterias, taverns, cabarets, and any other place where the general public is
invited or admitted for business purposes, and shall be deemed to include
private clubs, corporations and associations operating under charter or
otherwise wherein only the members, visitors and their guests are invited.
Occupied hotel(s) and motel(s) that are not open to the public shall not be
deemed to be places of business as herein defined.
PUBLIC PLACE: Means and refers to any of the following which are open to and
generally used by the public: streets, roads and alleys; state or county
highways or roads; buildings and grounds used for school purposes, and public
dance halls and adjacent grounds; any place of public resort or amusement;
lobbies, halls, and dining rooms of hotels, restaurants, theaters, stores,
garages, and service stations; any public conveyance and its depots and waiting
rooms which are open to unrestricted use and access by the public; publicly
owned bathing beaches, parks or playground; and all other places which under
this chapter have been declared to be a public place.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages
to the consumer.
WHOLESALER: Any person engaged in the importation for sale, or in the sale of
beer in wholesale or jobbing quantities to retailers, other than a small brewer
selling beer manufactured by that brewer. (Ord. 10-32, 11-10-2010; amd. Ord.
20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.030: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED - SALES AT WHOLESALE:
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling alcoholic
products at wholesale within the city without first obtaining(1) a license from
the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control; (2) a general business
license from the city; and (3) a wholesale alcoholic product license from the
city. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005; amd. Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.040: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED - SALES AT RETAIL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling
alcoholic products at retail within the city without first obtaining (1) a
license from the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control; (2) a general
business license from the city; and (3) a retail alcoholic product license from
the city. A separate retail alcoholic product license is required for each
location or place of business where alcoholic products are sold.(Ord. 05-14, 4-
6-2005; amd. Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.050: APPLICATION FOR ALCOHOLIC PRODUCT LICENSE:
   A.   Each person or entity interested in obtaining an alcoholic product
license shall file an alcoholic product license application with the city's
business license official.
   B.   All alcoholic product license applications submitted to the city shall
be referred to the Salt Lake County Health Department, which shall inspect the
premises to be licensed to assure sanitary compliance with the laws of the
state, the ordinances of the city, and health department rules and regulations
on the preparation, storage, distribution or sale of beer and food. If the Salt
Lake County Health Department determines that the premises fulfill all such
sanitary requirements, the Salt Lake County Health Department shall issue a
permit to the licensee, a copy of which shall be attached to the alcoholic
beverage product license application submitted to the city.
   C.   All alcoholic product license applications submitted to the city shall
also be referred to the Unified Police Department Taylorsville Precinct for
inspection and report. The Unified Police Department Taylorsville Precinct
shall, within ten (10) days after receiving an alcoholic product license
application, write a report detailing: (1) the nature and the kind of business
conducted by the applicant at the proposed location; (2) whether the proposed
location is or has been conducted in a lawful, quiet and orderly manner; (3)
the nature and kind of entertainment, if any, at the proposed location; (4)
whether gambling is or has been permitted at the proposed location or by the
applicant at any other place; (5) the proximity of such premises to any
community location; and (6) the police department's recommendation as to
whether or not the alcoholic product license application should be granted.
(Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.060: ALCOHOLIC PRODUCT LICENSE ISSUANCE:
If the applicant has: (1) complied with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations; (2) received a permit from the Salt Lake County Health Department;
and (3) received a positive recommendation from the Unified Police Department
Taylorsville Precinct, then the Business License Official shall issue the
alcoholic product license to the applicant.  (Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.070: ALCOHOLIC PRODUCT LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   The city may revoke an alcoholic product license if a violation of this
chapter or any applicable ordinance or law relating to alcoholic beverages is
committed by the licensee or occurs on the licensed premises. The city may also
revoke an alcoholic product license if the licensee no longer qualifies for an
alcoholic product license pursuant to this chapter. 
   B.   An alcoholic product license may be suspended and the licensed premises
closed by the Salt Lake County sheriff without a prior hearing. At the time of
a suspension, notice shall be given to the licensee of the cause(s) of such
suspension and of the licensee's right to petition the city for a hearing
within ten (10) days after the date of such suspension. If cause for the
suspension is established at the hearing, the suspension order may be continued
for up to one year in duration. However, no license shall be revoked or
suspended beyond the initial hearing without first establishing cause therefor,
nor shall any license be revoked without first giving the licensee an
opportunity for a hearing on the cause(s) specified for revocation.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages at the
licensed premises during such period of suspension, or after the revocation of
the person's alcoholic product license. (Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.080: EXPIRATION DATE:
Alcoholic product licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for
one (1) year from the date the license was issued. (Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.090: CITY LICENSE REQUIRES STATE LICENSE:
An alcoholic product license shall be issued by the city only in conjunction
with an applicable state license.  During any period an applicable state
license is not in effect for a given premises, whether by reason of suspension,
revocation or any other reason, the city license for the premises shall
automatically be suspended. Upon presentation of written proof that the
commission has reinstated or otherwise revalidated the applicable state
license, the city license shall be deemed to be valid and in full force and
effect. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or restrict the
city from enforcing state law or city ordinance as allowed by law regarding
alcoholic beverage sales and licensing in the city.  (Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.100: LICENSEE QUALIFICATIONS:
An alcoholic product license applicant shall be at least the age of twenty-one
(21) or over, a citizen of the United States or a permanent resident of the
United States (alien registration card required), and meet all applicable state
qualifications.
If an alcoholic product license applicant is a firm, partnership, association,
group, corporation, limited liability company, or any other business entity,
each partner, association member, corporate officer, director or any other
person having ownership interest in the business that is applying for a license
shall meet all of the foregoing restrictions as if such individuals were the
applicant. The operator or person having management responsibilities shall also
meet all of the foregoing restrictions. (Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.110: FEES:
Alcoholic product licenses shall be subject to all applicable fees as outlined
in section 5.06.040. (Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.120: ALCOHOLIC PRODUCT LICENSE RENEWAL:
Alcoholic product license renewal applications and all applicable renewal fees
as outlined in section 5.06.040 shall be submitted to the city at least thirty
(30) days prior to the expiration date of the then-issued alcoholic product
license. Any applicant who fails to submit a renewal application and all
applicable renewal fees before such deadline shall close the licensed premises
on the expiration date of the then-issued alcoholic product license and shall
keep the premises closed for any and all business involving the sale of
alcoholic beverages in the city until a new alcoholic product license is issued
by the city. (Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.130: NAME CHANGES:
An alcoholic product license holder who wishes to change the name of the
business establishment shall give written notice of the name change to the city
at least ten (10) days prior to the name change and shall pay all applicable
fees as outlined in section 5.06.040.  (Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.140: CIVIL FINE:
In addition to any civil or criminal remedy available to the city to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, a person who violates any provision of this
chapter is subject to a civil fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each violation. A civil fine is due and payable within twenty (20) days of
the date of citation from the city giving notice of the civil fine. Notice of a
civil fine shall be given by personal service or by posting in the United
States mail, postage paid, certified mail, return receipt requested. Unpaid
civil fines are a debt owed to the city and may be the subject of a civil
action filed in any court having legal jurisdiction. (Ord. 20-06, 7-1-2020)
5.24.150: REFERRAL TO POLICE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   All applications filed under section
5.24.130 of this chapter shall be referred to the police department or other
law enforcement contract provider for inspection and report. The police
department or other contract provider shall, within ten (10) days after
receiving such application, make report of:
      1.   The nature and the kind of business conducted at such place by the
applicant or by any other person or by the applicant at any other place;
      2.   Whether such place is or has been conducted in a lawful, quiet and
orderly manner;
      3.   The nature and kind of entertainment, if any, at such place;
      4.   Whether gambling is or has been permitted on the premises or by the
applicant at any other place; and
      5.   The proximity of such premises to any school or church.
   B.   The police department or other contract provider shall also add to such
report the recommendation as to whether or not the application should be
granted. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.28
AMUSEMENT DEVICES, BILLIARD HALLS, POOL HALLS, BOWLING ALLEYS, CARD AND GAME
ROOMS, GOLF COURSE, AND MINIATURE GOLF
SECTION:
5.28.010: Definitions
5.28.020: Amusement Devices, Golf Course, Or Miniature Golf Course License
Required; Fees
5.28.030: Issuance Conditions
5.28.040: Devices To Be Kept In Plain View
5.28.050: Inspection Of Premises And Devices
5.28.060: Gambling Devices Not Authorized
5.28.070: Billiard And Pool Halls License Required
5.28.080: Billiard And Pool Hall Fees
5.28.090: Billiard And Pool Hall Hours Of Operation
5.28.100: Visibility Of The Interior
5.28.110: Restrictions Concerning Minors
5.28.120: Bowling Alleys License Required
5.28.130: Bowling Alley Fee
5.28.140: Separation Of Bowling And Lounge Areas
5.28.150: Card And Game Rooms Individual License Requirements
5.28.160: License Application; Contents
5.28.170: Investigation By The Police Department
5.28.180: Card And Game Room Fee
5.28.190: Periodic Inspections
5.28.200: License Revocation
5.28.210: Card And Game Room Hours Of Operation
5.28.220: Unobstructed View Of Tables
5.28.230: Locked Doors And Alarm Devices Prohibited
5.28.240: Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited
5.28.250: Playing For Money Prohibited
5.28.260: Known Gamblers Prohibited
5.28.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine, whether mechanically or electronically operated,
that upon insertion of a coin, trade token, slug or similar object, or upon
payment of money or other consideration through use of a metered or similar
device, operates or may be operated as a game or contest of skill or amusement,
of any kind or description, and that contains no automatic payoff for the
return of money or trade tokens, or that makes no provision whatever for the
return of money to the player. An amusement device is further defined as any
machine, apparatus or contrivance that is used or that may be used as a game of
skill and amusement wherein or whereby the player initiates, employs or directs
any force generated by the machine, but specifically excludes a "musical
mechanical amusement device" as herein defined.
DISTRIBUTOR: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who sets
up for operation by another, leases, rents, sells, distributes, or in any way
provides for the purpose of operation any amusement device, whether for a fixed
charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such
devices, or otherwise.
GOLF COURSE: A tract of land laid out for playing golf.
MINIATURE GOLF COURSE: A tract of land laid out where a novelty version of golf
is played with a putter and golf balls, featuring various obstacles, such as
alleys, bridges, and/or tunnels.
MUSICAL MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Means and includes each machine vending
recorded music, or a period of radio or television entertainment in return for
the insertion or deposit therein of a coin, trade token, slug, or similar
object; provided, however, that this does not include coin operated radios or
television sets in private quarters. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.020: AMUSEMENT DEVICES, GOLF COURSE, OR MINIATURE GOLF COURSE LICENSE
REQUIRED; FEES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, operate
or maintain for public patronage or operation of an amusement device or musical
mechanical amusement device, golf course, or miniature golf course without
having first obtained a license therefor. Applications shall be made to the
license official.
   B.   The fee for such license shall be as specified on the fee schedule
adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.030: ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
One sticker shall be issued for each device licensed, and it shall be placed in
a conspicuous place and so affixed that it cannot be transferred from one
machine to another. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.040: DEVICES TO BE KEPT IN PLAIN VIEW:
All such devices shall at all times be kept in plain view of any person or
persons who may frequent or be in any place of business where such devices are
kept or used. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.050: INSPECTION OF PREMISES AND DEVICES:
The police department shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or
building in which any such device or devices are operated or set up for
operation, and shall periodically inspect, investigate and test such devices.
(Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.060: GAMBLING DEVICES NOT AUTHORIZED:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any
gambling device of any nature whatsoever. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.070: BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard
and pool hall open to the public without having first obtained a license
therefor as is required in this chapter. All applications for such licenses
shall state thereon the intended location of the place of business and the
number of tables to be used therein. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.080: BILLIARD AND POOL HALL FEES:
The annual license fee for billiard and pool tables shall be as specified on
the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.090: BILLIARD AND POOL HALL HOURS OF OPERATION:
No billiard and pool hall shall operate between the hours of two o'clock (2:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. If alcoholic beverages are sold on the
premises, the hours of operation shall be further limited (but not extended) to
the times specified in this code. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.100: VISIBILITY OF THE INTERIOR:
A clear, unobstructed view from the entrance of the entire interior of the
billiard and pool hall, excluding the restroom, shall be maintained by the
licensee at all times, nor shall the licensee erect or maintain any enclosed
booths, blinds or stalls within the interior of the licensed premises. (Ord.
10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.110: RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING MINORS:
In billiard and pool halls serving minors, no alcoholic beverages or cigarettes
shall be sold, dispensed, or consumed on or about the premises, which includes
the parking lot. Further, it is unlawful for licensees of billiard and pool
halls to operate the same in contravention of the curfew provisions outlined in
this code. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.120: BOWLING ALLEYS LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain a bowling alley open
to the public without having first secured a license therefor as is required in
this chapter. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the license
official and shall be in writing and state thereon the intended location of the
place of business and the number of alleys to be used. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.130: BOWLING ALLEY FEE:
The annual license fee for a bowling alley shall be as specified in the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
 5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.140: SEPARATION OF BOWLING AND LOUNGE AREAS:
It is unlawful to carry any alcoholic beverage into the area where bowling is
taking place. The above mentioned beverages shall be strictly confined to the
lounge area of the bowling alley. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.150: CARD AND GAME ROOMS INDIVIDUAL LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or operate in the city any room
where there is played any bingo, backgammon, cards, checkers, or other games of
similar nature, or any game played with beans, buttons, dice or similar
devices, or to keep, maintain or operate in the city any table on which such
games are played, where a charge is made for the use of the room, use of the
tables, or for the privilege of playing on such tables or in such room, without
first obtaining a license. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.160: LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
Applications shall be made to the license official and shall include a sworn
statement by the applicant showing the street and house number of the place
where it is proposed to maintain such room or table, the name of the place of
business and of any club, association or corporation operating the premises,
the number of tables used or intended to be used for playing games, and the
names and addresses of all officers of such organizations responsible for the
operation of the rooms or tables. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.170: INVESTIGATION BY THE POLICE DEPARTMENT:
The license official shall refer all applicants and sworn statements of
applicants to the police department office for an investigation and report. The
police department shall indicate the nature and kind of business conducted at
such place or at any other place by the applicant, and shall note whether
gambling of any description has been carried on or indulged in at the place,
whether known gamblers operate, supervise or play any game, or appear to be
employed in or about the card and game room, and whether the place is or has
been previously conducted in a lawful, orderly manner. The police department
shall make his recommendations as to the issuance or denial of the application.
(Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.180: CARD AND GAME ROOM FEE:
The annual license fee for conducting card and game rooms or tables for the
playing of cards shall be as specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to
section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.190: PERIODIC INSPECTIONS:
The police department shall, after license has been issued, make periodic
inspections of the licensed premises in order to ensure strict compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and particularly with such as govern the
issuance of a license in the first instance. Violations shall be promptly
reported to the city, which shall take such action with regard to revocation as
it deems necessary. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.200: LICENSE REVOCATION:
The license of any person for the operation of card and game tables may be
revoked by the city at any time upon notice and hearing for the violation of
any ordinance of this city, or law of the state, or for any other good and
sufficient reason. Any decision under this section may be appealed as set forth
in chapter 5.11 of this title, as amended. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.210: CARD AND GAME ROOM HOURS OF OPERATION:
It is unlawful for any licensee or agent thereof to permit the use of card or
game rooms for the playing of games enumerated in this chapter between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the same day.
(Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.220: UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW OF TABLES:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a card room where the view of the
tables from the entrance is blocked or obstructed by partitions or dividers of
any kind. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.230: LOCKED DOORS AND ALARM DEVICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of this
chapter to permit any game to be played behind locked, barred or barricaded
doors, or in such a place as is not readily accessible to law enforcement
officers.
   B.   No person shall keep upon such premises any lookout, signal, buzzer,
alarm or other device of any kind capable of use for the purpose of warning
occupants of the presence of law enforcement officers.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to play any game behind a locked, barred
or barricaded door, or under any conditions hereinabove specified in this
chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.240: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to sell, dispense or allow to be consumed
alcoholic beverages on the premises of any card room. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.250: PLAYING FOR MONEY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to operate a business for profit to play cards and games for
money or anything of value, or to engage in any kind of gaming or gambling.
(Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.28.260: KNOWN GAMBLERS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter, or
the agent, manager or representative of such licensee, knowingly to employ any
known gambler, to conduct any of the games enumerated in this chapter, or to
work in or about licensed premises. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.30
AUCTIONS
SECTION:
5.30.010: Definitions
5.30.020: Compliance With Chapter Requirements
5.30.030: Exemptions
5.30.040: Auctioneer's License Required
5.30.050: Fee
5.30.060: Record Keeping Requirements; Generally
5.30.070: By-Bidders Prohibited
5.30.080: False Representations Prohibited
5.30.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
AUCTION HOUSE: A place of business where auctions are conducted and personal
property sold at auction.
AUCTIONEER: A person who conducts a public, competitive sale of property,
except a person selling his own property shall not for purposes of this chapter
be considered an "auctioneer", not the auctioneer's own, by outcry to the
highest bidder.
TRANSIENT AUCTION HOUSE: Any place, whether indoors or outdoors, located within
the city, where any goods, wares, merchandise or articles of value are offered
for sale at auction, and which is neither the permanent place of business for
auction sales nor a permanent business that has an auction sale to dispose of
its inventory, furnishings and business equipment as it goes out of business.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.30.020: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIREMENTS:
No personal property (goods, wares or merchandise) shall be sold at auction in
the city, except in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.30.030: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any auction held by any court
or officer thereof or any sheriff's sale, nor shall it apply to any auction
held for charitable or benevolent purposes or for any church, fair, festival,
nor to an auction wherein the general public is not invited nor permitted to
participate as bidders, and where the bidding is restricted to wholesalers or
retailers purchasing for resale. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.30.040: AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to sell or cause to permit to be sold at auction any personal
property in the city unless such sale is conducted by an individual who has
applied for and obtained a temporary or regular business license from the city.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.30.050: FEE:
The fee for a license shall be as specified on the fee schedule. (Ord. 05-14,
4-6-2005)
5.30.060: RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS; GENERALLY:
In every case where an article is sold for seventy five dollars ($75.00) or
more, the licensee shall keep a complete record of all such sales made at an
auction, showing the name and address of each purchaser, a description of each
such article sold, including the number thereof and the date of each sale. The
record shall be open at all times for inspection by the license official or his
designee. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.30.070: BY-BIDDERS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to act at any sale by auction as a by-bidder or
booster, to buy in behalf of the auctioneer or owner, or to increase the price
of the article to be sold, or to make any false bid. However, the owner may set
a minimum bid requirement. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.30.080: FALSE REPRESENTATIONS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any auctioneer, when selling or offering for sale at public
auction any goods, wares or merchandise under the provisions of this chapter,
to describe the goods, wares or merchandise in any fraudulent, misleading,
untruthful or unwarranted manner tending to mislead bidders. It shall be
unlawful for any auctioneer or any person associated with him to substitute an
article sold for another. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.34
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS, NONCASH
(Rep. by Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.36
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
SECTION:
5.36.010: Financial Institution Defined
5.36.020: License Required
5.36.030: Fee
5.36.040: Compliance With Statutes And Regulations
5.36.010: FINANCIAL INSTITUTION DEFINED:
"Financial institution" means any institution subject to the jurisdiction of
the Utah department of financial institutions or institutions subject to
jurisdiction or the equivalent of such department or another state or the
federal government. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.36.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of a
financial institution in the city without first obtaining a license as required
in this chapter and registering with the Utah department of financial
institutions. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.36.030: FEE:
The annual license fee for a financial institution shall be as specified on the
fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.36.040: COMPLIANCE WITH STATUTES AND REGULATIONS:
Financial institutions shall comply with all other applicable state and federal
statutes, rules and regulations. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.38
CLUBS AND TEENAGE DANCE HALLS
SECTION:
5.38.010: Definitions
5.38.020: License Required
5.38.030: Exemptions
5.38.040: Issuance Conditions
5.38.050: Fee
5.38.060: Hours Of Operation
5.38.070: Supervision During Operation
5.38.080: Admittance; Age Restrictions
5.38.090: Proof Of Age To Be Shown
5.38.100: Pass-Out And Return Checks Prohibited
5.38.110: Lighting Of Premises And Parking Area
5.38.120: Unlawful Activities Designated
5.38.130: Alcoholic Beverages And Tobacco Prohibited
5.38.140: Access For Police Department Inspection
5.38.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
PUBLIC DANCE: Any dance to which the public generally may gain admission, with
or without the payment of a fee, but shall not include any dance conducted on
or in any public park, street or public grounds by permission of the city.
PUBLIC DANCE HALL: Any room, place or space in which a public dance is held or
in which classes in dancing are held and instruction in dancing is given for
hire.
PUBLIC TEENAGE DANCE HALL OR CLUB: Any room, house, building, structure or
place where dancing is permitted and public dancing is held, or in which
classes in dancing are held and instruction is given for hire and which is
designed or intended to attract or appeal to a teenage clientele, and to which
admittance may be gained by teenage persons, with or without payment or
admission.
An establishment will be regarded to be designed or intended to attract or
appeal to a teenage clientele when its name and decor, the type of music
provided, and the form and content of its advertising, together with any other
pertinent factors indicate such attraction or appeal is the intent or the
actual result thereof.
TEENAGE PERSON: Persons between the ages of thirteen (13) and nineteen (19),
inclusive. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to operate a public teenage dance hall or club in the city
unless such hall or club is duly licensed as provided in this section. Any
establishment seeking to obtain or maintain a license under the provisions of
this chapter shall conform to all standards hereinafter enumerated. (Ord. 05-
14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.030: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to dances, dance halls or clubs
conducted or sponsored by private or public schools, or by churches, for
students or members or invited guests thereof, even though an admission fee is
charged. All dances conducted in private homes on a private basis shall
likewise be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.040: ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
The police department shall examine and investigate all applicants and the
premises to be licensed under this chapter. Following such initial examination,
the recommendations of the police department shall be made in writing to the
license official. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.050: FEE:
The annual fee for a public teenage dance hall or club shall be as specified in
the fee schedule. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.060: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No establishment licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be open
later than eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M., on Fridays or Saturdays, or
later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on Sunday through Thursday during the
scheduled school year. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.070: SUPERVISION DURING OPERATION:
All establishments required to be licensed under this chapter must be
maintained under the direct control and supervision of responsible adults
furnished by and at the expense of the management, such supervision to include
not only the dancing area but all anterooms and parking lots of the
establishment. There shall be at least one adult supervisor for every fifty
(50) persons or fractional part thereof in attendance. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.080: ADMITTANCE; AGE RESTRICTIONS:
Admittance to a public teenage dance hall or club shall be limited to those
teenage persons, exclusive of supervisory personnel, between thirteen (13) and
nineteen (19) years of age, inclusive. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.090: PROOF OF AGE TO BE SHOWN:
The age of any person seeking admittance to a public teenage dance hall or club
shall be established by a showing of either a valid high or junior high school
activity card or a driver's license, indicating the age of the owner to be
within the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.100: PASS-OUT AND RETURN CHECKS PROHIBITED:
No pass-out or return checks shall be issued for use by persons who leave the
dance premises or any rooms thereof, and all persons leaving the dance premises
or any rooms thereof must be required to pay the regular admission fee before
being permitted to reenter the dance premises. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.110: LIGHTING OF PREMISES AND PARKING AREA:
All persons licensed pursuant to this section shall maintain throughout the
licensed premises and during all hours of operation, a constant minimum of one
candlepower of light, measured at a level of five feet (5') above the floor,
and shall, in addition, provide for the adequate lighting of any parking area
adjacent to the licensed premises. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.120: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES DESIGNATED:
It is unlawful for any licensee under the provisions of this chapter to allow
or permit on the licensed premises any lewd dress or act, or any conduct of a
gross, violent or vulgar character. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.130: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND TOBACCO PROHIBITED:
There shall be no liquor, beer or tobacco sold, used or allowed to be consumed
on the licensed premises or in its parking lot during operating hours. (Ord.
05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.38.140: ACCESS FOR POLICE DEPARTMENT INSPECTION:
The police department shall be permitted reasonable access to all premises
licensed or applying for a license under this chapter, shall make periodic
inspections of the premises after the licensing thereof, and shall report its
findings to the license official. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.40
EMPLOYMENT OFFICES
SECTION:
5.40.010: Employment Agent Defined; License Required
5.40.020: Exemptions
5.40.030: Fee
5.40.040: License Application; State License Required
5.40.050: Sending Workers To Certain Places Prohibited
5.40.060: Revocation Conditions
5.40.010: EMPLOYMENT AGENT DEFINED; LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to open, establish or operate within the
city any employment office for the purpose of procuring or obtaining, for money
or other valuable consideration, either directly or indirectly, any work,
employment or occupation for persons seeking the same, or otherwise to engage
in the business, or in any way to act as a broker or go between for employers
and persons seeking work, without first having obtained a license to do so.
   B.   Any person performing any of the foregoing enumerated services shall be
deemed to be an "employment agent" within the meaning hereof. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-
2005)
5.40.020: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any religious or
charitable association that may assist in procuring employment for persons
seeking the same, or the state department of work force services to obtain a
license to do so. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.40.030: FEE:
All persons required to have a license, as provided herein, shall pay to the
city an annual license fee as specified in the fee schedule. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-
2005)
5.40.040: LICENSE APPLICATION; STATE LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person applying for a license under the provisions hereof shall make
application to and pay the fee to the city and shall also file with the
application a duplicate copy of the license issued to such person by the state
labor commission. No license shall be issued by the city until the state
license has been granted and a copy of the same filed with the license
official. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.40.050: SENDING WORKERS TO CERTAIN PLACES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any employment agent, by himself, his agent or employee,
knowingly to send any help to any place for unlawful purposes. (Ord. 05-14, 4-
6-2005)
5.40.060: REVOCATION CONDITIONS:
The city may revoke any license upon proof of violation of any provisions of
this chapter, or for any other good and sufficient cause including, but not
limited to, a recommendation by the state labor commission that the license
should be revoked. The decision to revoke may be appealed pursuant to the
provisions of chapter 5.11 of this title. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.54
HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
5.54.010: Home Occupations Defined
5.54.020: License Required
5.54.030: Fees
5.54.040: Compliance With Regulations
5.54.050: Procedures For Obtaining A New Class D Home Occupation Business
License
5.54.060: Procedure For Renewing A Class D Home Occupation Business License
5.54.010: HOME OCCUPATIONS DEFINED:
"Home occupations" means a business or professional activity conducted within a
residential dwelling by bona fide occupants of the residence that is clearly
incidental, secondary, and subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling
and property and is generally for the production of income. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-
2010)
5.54.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   A license is required to operate or to be engaged in the operation of a
home occupation.
   B.   The licensing requirement includes, but is not limited to, any person
who uses all or part of their residence as a tax deduction with the government.
(Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.54.030: FEES:
The annual license fee for a class A, B, C, and D home occupation shall be as
specified in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.54.040: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
   A.   Home occupations are subject to compliance with the provisions of
section
13.11.040 of this code.
   B.   The uses identified in subsection
13.11.040J of this code shall not be permitted. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.54.050: PROCEDURES FOR OBTAINING A NEW CLASS D HOME OCCUPATION BUSINESS
LICENSE:
Applicants for a new class D home occupation, as well as owners, directors,
members of the governing body, employees, additional providers of care,
volunteers (except for parents of children enrolled in the programs at the
class D home occupation), and all adults residing in a residence where
childcare is provided shall submit to the department an FBI national criminal
history check. Such background check shall be in an original form as issued by
the Utah division of criminal investigation and technical services within the
department of public safety and issued within sixty (60) days of submitting the
application.
   A.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, the holder of a
class D home occupation may not permit a person who has been convicted, has
pleaded no contest, or is currently subject to a plea in abeyance or diversion
agreement for any felony or misdemeanor, or who has been adjudicated in
juvenile court of committing an act which if committed by an adult would be a
felony or a misdemeanor, to:
      1.   Provide childcare at the class D home occupation;
      2.   Provide volunteer services;
      3.   Reside at the premises whereat the class D home occupation; or
      4.   Function as an owner, director, or member of the governing body of a
class D home occupation.
   B.   Each person requesting a new class D home occupation license under this
section shall submit to the department the name, age and sex of any child age
twelve (12) through seventeen (17) who resides in the residence where the
childcare is provided.
   C.   The following convictions are exempt from subsection A of this section:
      1.   Any class B or C conviction under chapter 6, title 76, offenses
against property, Utah criminal code;
      2.   Any class B or C conviction under chapter 6a, title 76, pyramid
schemes, Utah criminal code;
      3.   Any class B or C conviction under chapter 8, title 76, offenses
against the administration of government, Utah criminal code;
      4.   Any class B or C conviction under chapter 9, title 76, offenses
against public order and decency, Utah criminal code, except for 76-9-301.8,
bestiality; 76-9-702, lewdness; and 76-9-702.5, lewdness involving child;
      5.   Any class B or C conviction under chapter 10, title 76, offenses
against public health, welfare, safety and morals, Utah criminal code, except
for 76-10-1201 to 1229.5, pornographic and harmful materials and performances;
76-10-1301 to 1314, prostitution; and 76-10-2301, contributing to the
delinquency of a minor; and
      6.   Any other conviction that is determined to be exempt to the
restrictions of Utah Code Annotated section 26-39-107(3) by the Utah department
of health pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 26-39-107(4).
   D.   Parents of children enrolled in the programs at any class D home
occupation who perform volunteer services at the said home occupation and have
not submitted to the department an FBI national criminal history check, shall
be supervised by the licensed daycare provider at all times while performing
volunteer duties at the class D home occupation. (Ord. 07-36, 12-5-2007)
5.54.060: PROCEDURE FOR RENEWING A CLASS D HOME OCCUPATION BUSINESS LICENSE:
   A.   Each person requesting a class D home occupation license renewal under
this section shall submit to the department the following information in
addition to all required fees, applications, and forms:
      1.   Class D1:   BCI background check issued within sixty (60) days of
submitting the application for renewal for all applicants, owners, directors,
members of the governing body, employees, additional providers of care,
volunteers (except for parents of children enrolled in the programs at the
class D home occupation), and all adults residing in a residence where
childcare is provided.
      2.   Class D2: Demonstration of current state licensing.
      3.   Class D3: Demonstration of current state licensing.
      4.   Class D4:   BCI background check issued within sixty (60) days of
submitting the application for renewal for all applicants, owners, directors,
members of the governing body, employees, additional providers of care,
volunteers (except for parents of children enrolled in the programs at the
class D home occupation), and all adults residing in a residence where
childcare or preschool is provided.
   B.   Except as provided in subsection D of this section, the holder of a
class D home occupation may not permit a person who has been convicted, has
pleaded no contest, or is currently subject to a plea in abeyance or diversion
agreement for any felony or misdemeanor, or who has been adjudicated in
juvenile court of committing an act which if committed by an adult would be a
felony or a misdemeanor, to:
      1.   Provide childcare at the class D home occupation;
      2.   Provide volunteer services;
      3.   Reside at the premises whereat the class D home occupation; or
      4.   Function as an owner, director, or member of the governing body of a
class D home occupation.
   C.   Each person requesting a renewal of a class D home occupation license
under this section shall submit to the department the name, age, and sex of any
child age twelve (12) through seventeen (17) who resides in the residence where
the childcare is provided.
   D.   The following convictions are exempt from subsection B of this section:
      1.   Any class B or C conviction under chapter 6, title 76, offenses
against property, Utah criminal code;
      2.   Any class B or C conviction under chapter 6a, title 76, pyramid
schemes, Utah criminal code;
      3.   Any class B or C conviction under chapter 8, title 76, offenses
against the administration of government, Utah criminal code;
      4.   Any class B or C conviction under chapter 9, title 76, offenses
against public order and decency, Utah criminal code, except for 76-9-301.8,
bestiality; 76-9-702, lewdness; and 76-9-702.5, lewdness involving child; and
      5.   Any class B or C conviction under chapter 10, title 76, offenses
against public health, welfare, safety and morals, Utah criminal code, except
for 76-10-1201 to 1229.5, pornographic and harmful materials and performances;
76-10-1301 to 1314, prostitution; and 76-10-2301, contributing to the
delinquency of a minor.
      6.   Any other conviction that is determined to be exempt to the
restrictions of Utah Code Annotated section 26-39-107(3) by the Utah department
of health pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 26-39-107(4).
   E.   Parents of children enrolled in the programs at any class D home
occupation who perform volunteer services at the said home occupation and have
not submitted to the department an FBI national criminal history check, shall
be supervised by the licensed daycare provider at all times while performing
volunteer duties at the class D home occupation. (Ord. 07-36, 12-5-2007)
CHAPTER 5.60
HOTELS OR MOTELS
SECTION:
5.60.010: Definition
5.60.020: License Requirements
5.60.030: License Fees
5.60.040: Register To Be Kept
5.60.010: DEFINITION:
A "motel" or "hotel" means public facility where sleeping accommodations are
furnished for a period of one or more days for a fee. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.60.020: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful to conduct or operate a hotel or motel without first having
obtained a license therefor. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.60.030: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for such license shall be as specified in the fee schedule
adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.60.040: REGISTER TO BE KEPT:
It is unlawful to knowingly permit any fugitive from justice to stay in any
hotel or motel. Each hotel or motel proprietor shall keep or cause to be kept a
register of guests. Such registration or list shall be available for inspection
by any member of the police department. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.62
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
5.62.010: Definitions
5.62.020: License Required
5.62.030: Fees
5.62.040: Application And Issuance Restrictions
5.62.050: Display Required
5.62.060: Exemptions
5.62.070: License Revocation
5.62.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: The practice of massage therapy as defined in Utah Code
Annotated 58-47b-102.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN OR MASSEUR: A person who engages in, conducts, or carries on
the giving of treatment by the application of mechanical and/or manual
manipulation or massage of the soft tissues of the human body, and is licensed
by the state of Utah to engage in or to teach the practice of massage for a
fee, for a gratuity, or for a free demonstration. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.62.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate, conduct, or carry on or maintain a
massage establishment or engage in the business of a massage technician or
masseur in the city without first obtaining a license from the state of Utah as
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 58-476-301, as amended. (Ord. 05-14, 4-
6-2005)
5.62.030: FEES:
The annual fee for a massage establishment or massage technician or masseur
shall be as specified in the fee schedule. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.62.040: APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE RESTRICTIONS:
Each individual desiring a business license to operate a massage establishment
or to engage in the business of a massage shall submit proof of his license
from the state of Utah. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.62.050: DISPLAY REQUIRED:
   A.   Every massage establishment licensed under this chapter shall display
its business license in a conspicuous place on the premises.
   B.   Every massage technician or masseur employed by a licensed massage
establishment shall maintain in his possession or immediate presence, his state
massage technician or masseur license. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.62.060: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those individuals listed as
exempt from license pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 58-47b-304, as
amended. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.62.070: LICENSE REVOCATION:
Upon a showing that a massage establishment has been operated or maintained or
that any employee of a massage establishment has performed massage contrary to
state statute or city ordinance, contrary to the public health or the health of
the patrons or customers of the establishment or without due regard to proper
sanitation or hygiene shall be grounds for the revocation of the
establishment's license in accordance with the procedures established by the
city. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.64
MOBILE HOME PARKS
SECTION:
5.64.010: Definitions
5.64.020: License Required
5.64.030: License Application
5.64.040: License Fee
5.64.050: Mobile Homes; Permanent Use Outside Mobile Home Parks Or Mobile Home
Subdivisions
5.64.060: Mobile Homes; Alteration Restrictions
5.64.070: Land Use Ordinances Regulating Mobile Homes
5.64.080: Permit Required To Move Mobile Home
5.64.090: Permit Application; Contents
5.64.100: Abandonment
5.64.110: Permit Fee
5.64.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
MOBILE HOME: A transportable structure in one or more sections with the
plumbing, heating and electrical systems contained within the unit, which when
erected on a site, may be used with or without a permanent foundation as a
family dwelling.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any tract of land that complies with applicable land use
ordinances on which two (2) or more spaces for mobile homes are leased or
offered for lease or rent to accommodate mobile homes for residential purposes
that complies with land use ordinances.
SALVAGE OR DISPOSAL FACILITY: A facility or site that complies with applicable
zoning ordinances that is used or intended to be used for the salvage or
disposal of mobile homes.
STORAGE FACILITY: A facility or site that complies with applicable zoning
ordinances that is used or intended to be used for the storage of a mobile
home. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
5.64.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to establish, maintain or operate in the city any "mobile home
park", as defined in building and construction ordinance without first having
obtained a business license from the city. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.64.030: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the license official
in compliance with ordinances relating to license applications, and shall
contain the name of the applicant, the location of the proposed park, and the
number of mobile homes to be accommodated. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.64.040: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a mobile home park shall be as specified on the fee schedule
adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.64.050: MOBILE HOMES; PERMANENT USE OUTSIDE MOBILE HOME PARKS OR MOBILE HOME
SUBDIVISIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain any mobile home, used for human
habitation, upon any plot of ground in the city except as provided in land use
ordinances, or in a licensed mobile home park or an approved mobile home
subdivision. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
5.64.060: MOBILE HOMES; ALTERATION RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to remove the wheels or other transporting device
from any mobile home or otherwise to affix such mobile home permanently to the
ground so as to prevent ready removal of such mobile home unless a permit to do
so is obtained as required for the construction of a new building. Any such
alteration shall be construed as converting the mobile home into a building and
subject to the requirements of the land use and building ordinances. (Ord. 10-
01, 1-20-2010; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
5.64.070: LAND USE ORDINANCES REGULATING MOBILE HOMES:
No provision of this chapter is intended nor shall it be construed to authorize
a mobile or manufactured home (regardless of whether the wheels have been
removed or it has been placed on the ground or a foundation) to be located on a
parcel of ground outside of a mobile home park or subdivision in violation of
land use ordinances. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
5.64.080: PERMIT REQUIRED TO MOVE MOBILE HOME:
It is unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved a mobile home from a
mobile home park without first making application for and obtaining the
required permit from the city. It is also unlawful for the owner of a mobile
home park, agent, employee or a representative of the owner to allow a mobile
home to be moved out of such mobile home park, without verification that a
permit required by this chapter has been obtained. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.64.090: PERMIT APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
   A.   Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made in
writing to the city's license office. Each application shall state the name of
the business; the name of the applicant; the current location of the mobile
home; the future location for the mobile home; the name and address of the
business agent who is authorized to receive service of process and any
communication regarding the applicant's permit via certified mail, return
receipt requested; and such additional information as may be needed for the
purpose of guidance of the city officials in the issuing of the permit. Any
change in the above information furnished by the permit applicant shall be
forwarded, in writing, before the movement of any mobile home.
   B.   Forms for such permit and application therefor, shall be prepared and
kept on file with the license official. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.64.100: ABANDONMENT:
It is unlawful to move a mobile home within the city except as allowed under
section
5.64.080 of this chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.64.110: PERMIT FEE:
The fee for a permit required hereunder shall be as specified on the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.66
MOVIE THEATERS
SECTION:
5.66.010: License Required
5.66.020: License Fees
5.66.010: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to show any movie to which a fee is charged for admission,
unless the movie is shown under the supervision of a religious, educational or
charitable organization, without securing a license. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.66.020: LICENSE FEES:
The annual fee for the license required in this chapter shall be as specified
in the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.68
MULTIPLE DWELLING RENTAL UNITS
(Rep. by Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.70
NURSING, CONVALESCENT, ASSISTED LIVING, RESIDENTIAL OR SPECIAL CARE, AND GROUP
HOMES
SECTION:
5.70.010: Definitions
5.70.020: License Required
5.70.030: License Fee
5.70.040: Exemptions
5.70.050: Compliance With Governing Regulations
5.70.010: DEFINITIONS:
   A.   "Nursing, convalescent, assisted living, residential or special care
and group homes" mean any institution used for the reception and care of
persons having physical limitations because of health or age who are harbored
for care, medical treatment or other treatment, or in which the liberty of the
occupants is restricted. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.70.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or conduct a
nursing, convalescent, assisted living, residential care, special care, or
group home in the city without first having obtained a business license. (Ord.
10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.70.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for a nursing, convalescent, assisted living,
residential care, special care, or group home shall be as specified in the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
 5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.70.040: EXEMPTIONS:
Facilities where care is given without compensation do not require a license.
(Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.70.050: COMPLIANCE WITH GOVERNING REGULATIONS:
Nursing, convalescent, assisted living, residential care, special care, or
group home operations shall be subject to compliance with all federal, state
and city ordinances and regulations including, but not limited to, land use
ordinances. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 5.72
OUTDOOR ADVERTISERS
SECTION:
5.72.010: Definitions
5.72.020: Prohibition
5.72.030: Penalty For Noncompliance
5.72.040: Costs
5.72.050: Existing Billboards
5.72.010: DEFINITIONS:
BILLBOARD: Any freestanding ground sign that is designed or intended to direct
attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity that is
not sold, offered, or existing on the property where the sign is located and
each billboard shall be considered a separate business.
EXISTING, NONCONFORMING BILLBOARD: A billboard physically constructed, in place
and being used for advertising purposes at the time this chapter is passed.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.72.020: PROHIBITION:
All billboards are prohibited within the city. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.72.030: PENALTY FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
Any person, firm, corporation or other business entity, whether acting as owner
or occupant of the premises involved, or contractor, or otherwise, who violates
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine and to a term of imprisonment to the maximum amount
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-703. A separate offense shall be
deemed to be committed on each day an offense occurs or continues. (Ord. 05-14,
4-6-2005)
5.72.040: COSTS:
Costs incurred by the city in removing any billboard erected in violation of
this chapter shall be charged to the owner or the entity having charge, control
or benefit of the billboard. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.72.050: EXISTING BILLBOARDS:
Existing, nonconforming billboards are exempt from this section. (Ord. 05-14,
4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.75
PAWNBROKERS
SECTION:
5.75.010: Definitions
5.75.020: License Required
5.75.030: License; Application; Issuance Conditions
5.75.040: License Fees
5.75.050: Relocation Of Business; License Required
5.75.060: Reporting Changes In License Information
5.75.070: License Denial, Suspension Or Revocation
5.75.080: Hearing On License Denial, Suspension Or Revocation
5.75.090: Record Keeping Requirements, Generally
5.75.100: Record Keeping; Legibility And Access For Inspection
5.75.110: Certificate Copies To Police Department
5.75.120: Regulations To Be Posted
5.75.130: Hours Of Closure
5.75.140: Property Holding Period Before Disposition
5.75.150: Stolen Goods Reports
5.75.160: Computer Reporting
5.75.170: Premises Partition Requirements
5.75.180: Liability Of Licensee
5.75.190: Dealing With Minors Prohibited
5.75.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings as defined
in this section:
PAWNBROKER: Any person who loans money on deposit of personal property, or
deals in the purchase, exchange or possession of personal property on condition
of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor, or who loans or
advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon
and takes or receives such personal property into his possession, and who sells
the unredeemed pledges, together with such new merchandise as will facilitate
the sale of same.
REGISTERED CUSTOMER: Any person who is registered with the dealer and who the
dealer knows to be a reputable person in the community. A registered customer
must complete a registered customer form supplied by the police department and
maintained in the dealer's records. The registered customer form shall have
positive identification sections and a section stating that the registered
customer certifies that property he will sell to the dealer meets the
requirements of subsection
 5.75.090C1 of this chapter. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate as a pawnbroker, without first
obtaining a license to do so. A separate license shall be required for each
location and for the conduct of the business of a dealer. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-
2005)
5.75.030: LICENSE; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Each application for a license shall be made on the form that the city
license official requires, and the applicant shall certify that the information
given is true and correct under the penalties of perjury.
   B.   Each application for a pawnbroker license shall contain such
information as deemed necessary by the police department and the license
official.
   C.   Only individuals may apply for a pawnbroker license:
      1.   If an application is made on behalf of a corporation, limited
partnership, LLC or other business entity, the license shall be applied for by
and issued to the president of the corporation or members of the partnership
who are authorized to act for it.
      2.   If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the license
shall be applied for by and issued to all of the partners who are authorized to
act for the partnership. Where any partner is a corporation, limited
partnership, LLC or the like, the application shall be made by and issued to
the president of the corporation or members of the limited partnership, LLC or
other entity who are authorized to act for it.
   D.   Each individual who applies for a pawnbroker's license under this
chapter assumes, as an individual, all responsibilities of the pawnbroker and,
as an individual, is subject to all conditions, restrictions and requirements
imposed on pawnbrokers.
   E.   Each individual applying for a pawnbroker license shall not be issued a
license until such time as the police department has conducted a background
investigation on the applicant pursuant to section
5.08.070 of this title. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.040: LICENSE FEES:
The license fee for the following occupations shall be as specified in the fee
schedule: pawnbroker. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.050: RELOCATION OF BUSINESS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   A pawnbroker may conduct the licensed business only from the fixed
permanent location as specified in the application for the license, which shall
be other than a motel or hotel room generally used by transients.
   B.   A pawnbroker may not remove or relocate the location specified in the
license for the business, or open any additional location unless the person has
applied for and obtained a separate license from the license official. (Ord.
05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.060: REPORTING CHANGES IN LICENSE INFORMATION:
If, during any license year, there is a change in the information that a
pawnbroker gave in obtaining or renewing a license under this chapter, the
pawnbroker shall report the change to the license official within thirty (30)
days after the change occurs, and certify that the information given is true
and correct under the penalties of perjury. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.070: LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The license official may refuse to grant a license to any pawnbroker, and may
suspend, revoke or refuse to renew the license of any pawnbroker if it finds:
   A.   The pawnbroker has violated or is attempting to violate any provisions
of this chapter;
   B.   A similar license issued to the pawnbroker has been suspended, revoked
or refused in another jurisdiction for a reason which would justify such action
under this chapter;
   C.   Any officer, manager, agent or employee of the pawnbroker has violated
or is attempting to violate any provisions of this chapter unless the person or
pawnbroker:
      1.   Had no knowledge of the wrongful conduct and in the exercise of
reasonable diligence could not have known of the conduct; and
      2.   Was unable to prevent the violation or attempted violation with the
exercise of reasonable diligence; or
   D.   The pawnbroker has been convicted of theft or receiving stolen property
on one or more occasions within the past five (5) years. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.080: HEARING ON LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Before revoking, suspending or refusing to grant or renew any license, the
applicant, employee or pawnbroker shall be informed of an opportunity to appeal
such decision in accordance with the provisions of chapter 5.11 of this title.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.090: RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS, GENERALLY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any pawnbroker licensed by this chapter to fail to
use a computer information system approved by the police department, in which
he shall enter at the time of purchase, in the English language:
      1.   The name, date of birth, address and physical description of the
person selling the property;
      2.   The driver's license number or any other positive form of
identification containing a numerical identifier and a photograph of the person
selling the property;
      3.   The date and time of the transaction;
      4.   The identification of the person making the record entry;
      5.   A description of the item purchased or obtained by the pawnbroker,
including, but not limited to, a description of the metallic composition, any
jewels, stones or glass, and a listing of all numbers, marks, monograms,
trademarks, manufacturer's names, serial numbers, and any other marks of
identification appearing on the item;
      6.   The weight of the item or items, where payment is based on weight;
and
      7.   The consideration paid for the item or, if pawned, the amount of
money loaned or advanced.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, pawnbrokers who process
fewer than fifty (50) transactions per month may request written permission
from the police department to use a noncomputerized alternative standardized
format written in ink in a legible manner specified and approved by the police
department for reporting the information required in subsection A of this
section.
   C.   In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section, a
pawnbroker shall also obtain and keep the following:
      1.   A written certificate, on forms prescribed by the police department
that the person delivering the property has the legal right to sell such
property; and
      2.   If the value of the property exceeds twenty dollars ($20.00), a
pawnbroker, or an agent, employee, or representative of a pawnbroker or person
who buys, receives, or obtains such property shall also require the seller or
person delivering the property, whether known or not, to give a legible
fingerprint, preferably the right thumb, at the bottom of the written
certificate next to his signature, and a copy of at least one other positive
form of picture identification.
   D.   Any pawnbroker shall also comply with any record keeping requirements
of Utah law. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.100: RECORD KEEPING; LEGIBILITY AND ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
   A.   All records of all pawnbrokers defined in this chapter shall be open to
inspection by any peace officer as defined by Utah Code Annotated, section 53-
13-102.
   B.   Upon request to do so by any peace officer as defined by Utah Code
Annotated, section 53-13-102, all goods, articles or other things pawned,
pledged, sold or delivered to such pawnbroker must be retained and held until
released by the police department or delivered to the police department upon
consent of the dealer or pursuant to the terms of any search warrant issued to
the police department, and served upon such pawnbroker. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.110: CERTIFICATE COPIES TO POLICE DEPARTMENT:
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to fail to have available to a police officer
the records required to be maintained by this chapter on the business day
following the transaction. It is also unlawful for any pawnbroker to fail to
retain the records required by this chapter for three (3) years following the
transaction at his place of business and provide such records for inspection by
the police department. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.120: REGULATIONS TO BE POSTED:
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to conduct or transact business licensed
under this chapter unless he shall keep conspicuously posted at his place of
business a copy of these provisions. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.130: HOURS OF CLOSURE:
It is unlawful for any dealer licensed under this chapter to keep his place of
business open for trade before the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., unless prior written permission is received from the
police department. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.140: PROPERTY HOLDING PERIOD BEFORE DISPOSITION:
   A.   It is unlawful for any pawnbroker licensed under this chapter to sell,
melt, change (except for customary testing), take apart, destroy, obliterate
identification marks, or dispose of any property purchased or obtained by a
pawnbroker until thirty (30) days have elapsed from the date of compliance with
the reporting requirements of sections
 5.75.090 and
5.75.100 of this chapter, or for such additional time as to any specific item
or items as may be directed by the police department or their designee. All
items being so stored shall be segregated from other items and shall be
identified by a tag attached to the property, numbered in a manner to
correspond with the number of the transaction description in the business
records required to be kept by section
5.75.090 of this chapter. Items purchased in bulk may be tagged in bulk. Items
may be stored at other locations in the city approved by the police department.
The pawnbroker shall produce these items at the business location within one
hour of a request to do so by the police department. Where compliance is
impossible because of the close of business hours, the item shall be produced
within one hour of the opening of business on the next business day.
   B.   The requirements of subsection A of this section shall not be
applicable to any unidentifiable secondhand precious metals which have been
inspected and received written clearance for earlier disposition by the police
department. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.150: STOLEN GOODS REPORTS:
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police department any
article sold, or which it is sought to sell, if he shall have reason to believe
that the article was stolen, or lost or found by the person attempting to sell
it in the case of a lost article. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.160: COMPUTER REPORTING:
The police department is authorized to transfer the information received
pursuant to this chapter into a computer information system and to report the
information in such forms as the police department may determine is useful for
law enforcement purposes. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.170: PREMISES PARTITION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to keep or maintain his pawnbroker business
in the same room or rooms with any other business. Patrons must enter and take
their exit from all pawnbrokers' places of business through outside doors or
entrances. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.180: LIABILITY OF LICENSEE:
The holder of a pawnbroker license is liable for any and all acts of his
employees for any violation by them of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.75.190: DEALING WITH MINORS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker under this section, by himself, his agents or
servants, to purchase or receive any personal property, or any articles
whatsoever, from any person under eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-
2005)
CHAPTER 5.76
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT
SECTION:
5.76.010: Definition
5.76.020: License Requirements
5.76.030: Application For License
5.76.040: License Fee
5.76.045: License Fee For Family Rentals
5.76.050: Multiple Licenses
5.76.060: Good Landlord Program
5.76.070: Review Process
5.76.080: Minimum Requirements For Participants In The Good Landlord Program
5.76.090: Lease Agreement
5.76.100: Consent To Enter
5.76.110: Effect Of License Issuance
5.76.120: Appeals Of The Provisions Of The Good Landlord Program
5.76.010: DEFINITION:
"Rental dwelling unit" means a building or portion of a building that is used
or designated for use as a home or residence by one or more persons and
available to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired out, with or without
consideration, for a period of one month or longer or arranged, designed, or
built to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired out for a period of one month or
longer, whether or not an owner, agent, or rental manager is in residence.
(Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.76.020: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, as an owner, lessee, or agent thereof,
to own, operate, or maintain any rental dwelling unit within the city without a
valid license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   If there is more than one owner, including purchasers under contract,
each owner shall be jointly and severally liable to obtain the business license
for a rental dwelling unit.
   C.   A business license for a rental dwelling unit is not transferable
between persons or structures.
   D.   A business license for a rental dwelling unit shall not be required for
a rental dwelling unit which is ordinarily owner occupied but is temporarily
rented because:
      1.   The owner is placed in a hospital, nursing home, assisted living
facility, or other similar facility; or
      2.   The owner has a bona fide, temporary absence of three (3) years or
less for activity as temporary job assignments, sabbaticals, or voluntary
service. Indefinite periods of absence from the dwelling shall not qualify for
this exemption.
      3.   As used in this subsection, "owner occupancy" means:
         a.   A retired person who possesses fifty percent (50%) ownership or
more in the dwelling and said dwelling is the primary residence of such person;
or
         b.   A family trust created for the primary purpose of estate planning
by a trustor who created the trust, placing the dwelling in such trust, and
whose primary residence is such dwelling. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.76.030: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for a rental dwelling license shall be made in writing on forms
provided by the city, which shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
   A.   The street address of all buildings containing rental dwellings,
   B.   The number of buildings and the number of rental dwelling units in each
building,
   C.   The maximum number of occupants per unit, and
   D.   A signed statement certifying that all such rental dwelling units
comply with applicable safety and building code. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.76.040: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for rental dwelling units shall be specified in section
5.06.040 of this title. A disproportionate service fee shall be paid for each
rental dwelling unit as specified in section
5.06.040 of this title. Participants in the good landlord program shall be
eligible for a discount on such disproportionate fee. Any owner or authorized
agent of a rental dwelling unit may apply for admission into the good landlord
program. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.76.045: LICENSE FEE FOR FAMILY RENTALS:
The annual license fee for rental dwelling units rented to family members shall
be specified in section
5.06.040 of this title, provided the owner of the rental dwelling unit
satisfies the requirements of section
5.76.080 of this chapter, certifies that the rental is to a family member, and
executes and delivers a good landlord program agreement. For purposes of this
section, "family members" shall mean people related by blood, marriage, or
adoption. (Ord. 12-07, 4-25-2012)
5.76.050: MULTIPLE LICENSES:
Owners of multiple rental dwelling units or multiple buildings containing
rental dwelling units shall be required to obtain only one regulatory business
license for the operation and maintenance of those rental dwelling units. (Ord.
10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.76.060: GOOD LANDLORD PROGRAM:
The city shall establish a good landlord program that provides discounts toward
the participant of certain business licensing fees to owners of rental dwelling
units who actually implement a good landlord program to control and prevent
illegal activity in rental dwelling units and keep their properties free of
code violations. In order to participate in the good landlord program, the
applicant must complete the landlord worksheet, execute and deliver a good
landlord program agreement, satisfy the requirements of section
5.76.080 of this chapter, and attend and complete a landlord training program
that is acceptable to the city every two (2) years. Said training shall be
preapproved by the license official and issue an official certificate of
participation. Refresher courses may substitute for full training sessions
every other two (2) year period. Full training sessions shall be a minimum of
four (4) full hours of class time and refresher courses shall be a minimum of
two (2) full hours of class time. First time applicants and new owners shall be
required to attend and complete such program within six (6) months of the date
of application. If through change in employment or ownership of the rental
property the attendee of the required training program becomes no longer
associated with the said rental property, a new representative of the property
shall be required to attend an authorized good landlord training program within
three (3) months of the change. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.76.070: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   The discount provided herein is conditioned upon the owner's compliance
with the requirements of the good landlord program during the term of the
licensing year for which the discount is granted.
   B.   If it is determined that an owner, lessee, or agent of a rental
dwelling unit, is not in compliance with the requirements of the good landlord
program during any portion of the licensing period for which the discount was
given, the owner, together with all his rental dwelling units, shall be
disqualified from the program and the discount shall be disallowed and the
owner shall be required to pay the full fee for each rental dwelling unit
listed on their license application for the year of disqualification.
   C.   After disqualification, the owner may resubmit an application to
participate in the good landlord program for the next licensing year, only if
the owner has corrected the problems leading to the disqualification and paid
all amounts due with respect to the disqualification. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.76.080: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR PARTICIPANTS IN THE GOOD LANDLORD PROGRAM:
Participants in the good landlord program shall operate and manage rental
dwelling units in accordance with the following requirements:
   A.   Provide at least one operable sink, toilet, tub, and shower, free from
leaks and in a sanitary condition with hot water of at least one hundred ten
degrees Fahrenheit (110°F).
   B.   Provide at least one operable smoke detector for each room that is
occupied or intended for sleeping purposes.
   C.   Provide operable heating facilities sufficient to adequately heat the
rental dwelling unit to a temperature of at least seventy two degrees
Fahrenheit (72°F).
   D.   Provide kitchen facility with at least one operative sink, free from
leaks with hot water of at least one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit (110°F) and
cooking oven or stove.
   E.   Provide and maintain windows in working order with operable locks and
free from cracks or breaks in the glass. Windows shall fit the window openings
and be weathertight.
   F.   Assure that the rental dwelling unit is free from insects, termites,
and rodents and be responsible for pet control measures when necessary.
   G.   Provide adequate locks to all exterior doors.
   H.   Provide and maintain appropriate garbage receptacles.
   I.   Maintain paint, siding, stucco, brick, etc., in good repair, free from
peeling, holes, or cracks.
   J.   Maintain sidewalks, driveways, and walkways in good repair, free from
unsafe conditions.
   K.   Maintain fences in good repair, free from graffiti, peeling paint,
damage, and able to stand upright as designed without propping or additional
support.
   L.   Provide at least two (2) hard surface off street parking spaces for
each rental dwelling unit. Such off street parking shall not be on landscaping.
   M.   Assure that the rental dwelling unit is in compliance with the
requirements of this code.
   N.   Assure that the rental dwelling unit is not a "nuisance" as defined in
title 9, chapter 9.08 of this code.
   O.   Require criminal background checks for each new tenant over eighteen
(18) years of age.
   P.   Assure that landlord will pursue prompt eviction of any tenant for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
   Q.   Initiate prompt eviction where legally permissible of any tenant for
committing any crime related to property damage, illegal drug sales or
trafficking, prostitution, violence of any kind, assault, or crimes involving
weaponry.
   R.   Encourage annual meetings for rental dwelling tenants, initiated by the
rental dwelling owner or the owner's agent, to discuss tenant concerns and
review rental dwelling licensing rules.
   S.   Assure no tenant will be retaliated against as a result of reporting
violations of a lease agreement, rental dwelling management agreement, or this
code. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.76.090: LEASE AGREEMENT:
All landlords participating in the good landlord program shall execute a lease
agreement that includes a provision or addendum that explains the provisions
and requirements of the program. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.76.100: CONSENT TO ENTER:
Upon reasonable cause, the city or its authorized representative shall
investigate reports of violations to the provisions of the good landlord
program. Submitting an application to participate in the good landlord program
constitutes irrevocable consent to the city and its authorized representatives
to enter such rental dwelling units and make an inspection to enforce
provisions of this chapter. The city or authorized representative shall provide
the property owner or property owner's representative a minimum of twenty four
(24) hours' prior notice before the inspection. Prior notice shall be in
writing and delivered via certified mail. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.76.110: EFFECT OF LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The issuance of a rental dwelling unit license shall not have the effect of
changing the legal status of a rental dwelling, including, but not limited to:
a) legalizing an illegally created dwelling unit, use, or other circumstances;
or b) recognizing the nonconforming use, structure, or other nonconformity.
(Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.76.120: APPEALS OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE GOOD LANDLORD PROGRAM:
   A.   Any person shall have the right to appeal to the administrative law
judge any decision rendered by the license official regarding any provision of
the good landlord program. Such appeal must be submitted in writing within
fourteen (14) calendar days of the license official's decision stating the
reason for the appeal and requesting a hearing before the administrative law
judge. Upon receipt of the appeal request the administrative law judge shall
set a date for a public meeting to consider the request.
   B.   The administrative law judge after proper review of the decision by the
license official may affirm, reverse, or alter the decision of the license
official. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
CHAPTER 5.77
RESTAURANTS
SECTION:
5.77.010: Restaurant Defined
5.77.020: License Required
5.77.030: License Fee
5.77.040: Applications; Referral To Health Department
5.77.050: License Revocation Conditions
5.77.060: Compliance With Health Ordinances Required
5.77.070: Entertainment; Hours When Restricted
5.77.080: Offensive Behavior Prohibited
5.77.010: RESTAURANT DEFINED:
"Restaurant" means any place where food is prepared or served for sale or sold
for human consumption on or off the premises. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.77.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operations of a
restaurant in the city without first obtaining a license as required in this
chapter. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.77.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for a restaurant shall be as specified in the fee
schedule. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.77.040: APPLICATIONS; REFERRAL TO HEALTH DEPARTMENT:
All applications for a license under this chapter shall be referred to the Salt
Lake Valley health department for investigation and recommendation. (Ord. 05-
14, 4-6-2005)
5.77.050: LICENSE REVOCATION CONDITIONS:
The license granted by this chapter may be revoked by the mayor at any time
upon notice and hearing, for violation of any ordinance of the city or law of
the state of Utah. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.77.060: COMPLIANCE WITH HEALTH ORDINANCES REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operations of a
restaurant in the city without complying strictly with the regulations of the
Salt Lake Valley health department. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.77.070: ENTERTAINMENT; HOURS WHEN RESTRICTED:
It is unlawful for the owner or manager of any restaurant to permit any
singing, dancing, playing of musical instruments or any other form of amusement
or entertainment to be carried on in such restaurant or public dining room, or
in any room, booth or other place connected therewith on or after one o'clock
(1:00) A.M. and before eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of the same day. (Ord. 05-14,
4-6-2005)
5.77.080: OFFENSIVE BEHAVIOR PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for the owner or manager of any restaurant to permit any
person to conduct himself or herself, by word or act therein, or in any room,
booth or other place connected therewith, in such manner as to constitute
disturbing the peace, disorderly conduct, or a public nuisance under this code.
   B.   It is unlawful to permit any dancer, entertainer or other person to
appear in or on such place of business in a state of nudity as defined in
chapter 5.82 of this title. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.79
SECONDHAND, COIN, AND JUNK DEALERS
SECTION:
5.79.010: Definitions
5.79.020: Exemptions
5.79.030: License Required
5.79.040: License; Application; Issuance Conditions
5.79.050: License Fees
5.79.060: Relocation Of Business; License Required
5.79.070: Reporting Changes In License Information
5.79.080: License Denial, Suspension Or Revocation
5.79.090: Hearing On License Denial, Suspension Or Revocation
5.79.100: Hours Of Closure
5.79.110: Stolen Goods Reports
5.79.120: Computer Reporting
5.79.130: Record Keeping Requirements, Generally
5.79.140: Junkyard Premises; Barriers Required
5.79.150: Junkyard Premises Enclosure
5.79.160: Junk Dealer Vehicles
5.79.170: Liability Of Licensee
5.79.180: Secondhand Dealer Business Restrictions
5.79.190: Dealing With Minors Prohibited
5.79.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings as
defined in this section:
ANTIQUE DEALER: Any person engaged in the business of selling old or archaic
items which are indicative of an older culture.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS: Any organization, group or church which receives
personal property or secondhand goods from persons, groups or businesses but
does not pay money or any other thing of value in return for received personal
property or secondhand goods. Charitable organizations are not to be licensed
or regulated by this section.
COIN DEALER: Any person who engages in the business of buying or selling coins
having numismatic value.
DEALER: All businesses or a person licensed under this chapter, and does not
include a pawnbroker.
JUNK COLLECTOR: Any person not having a fixed place of business in the city who
goes from house to house or place to place gathering, collecting, buying,
selling or otherwise dealing in old rags, papers, metals or other articles
commonly known as junk.
JUNK DEALER: Any person who engages in buying or selling old metals (other than
precious metals), glass, rags, rubber, paper or other junk from a fixed place
of business.
MAJOR APPLIANCES: Common major kitchen and washing appliances, such as
refrigerators, ovens, dishwashers, washer/dryers, etc., excluding microwaves,
stereos, television sets, etc.
PROCESSOR: Any person who engages in refining or otherwise altering the form of
precious metal not found in a natural state (i.e., raw ore).
REGISTERED CUSTOMER: Any person who is registered with the dealer and who the
dealer knows to be a reputable person in the community. A registered customer
must complete a registered customer form supplied by the police department and
maintained in the dealer's records. The registered customer form shall have
positive identification sections and a section stating that the registered
customer certifies that property he will sell to the dealer meets the
requirements of subsection
 5.79.130C1 of this chapter.
SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person who keeps a store, office or place of business
for the purchase, barter or exchange or sale of any secondhand merchandise of
value, or who engages in the business of dealing in secondhand goods. For the
purpose of this section, a "secondhand dealer" shall not include any persons
who deal in the purchase, barter, exchange or sale of used motor vehicles and
trailers, but shall include any person who buys or sells five (5) or more
firearms per year or buys or sells five (5) or more compact discs or DVDs per
year.
SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METAL DEALER/PROCESSOR OR PRECIOUS GEM DEALER: Any person
who engages in buying, selling or processing gold, silver (excluding coins),
platinum, other precious metals, secondhand articles containing any of such
metals, secondhand precious gems, or any articles containing any precious gems.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.020: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter are inapplicable to:
      1.   Any merchant or dealer whose principal business is the selling of
new merchandise and secondhand merchandise is taken in as a trade incident to
the sale of new or secondhand merchandise;
      2.   Any dealer who receives secondhand merchandise in trade for other
secondhand merchandise of a higher value; or
      3.   Any dealer whose principal business is servicing and rebuilding
major appliances, who receives used major appliances and adds value thereto
through refurbishing and repairing the merchandise for resale. (Ord. 05-14, 4-
6-2005)
5.79.030: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate as a secondhand dealer, secondhand
precious metal and/or precious gem dealer, junk dealer, junk collector, antique
dealer, coin dealer, or processor, without first obtaining a license to do so.
A separate license shall be required for each location and for the conduct of
the business of a dealer. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.040: LICENSE; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Each application for a license shall be made on the form that the city
license official requires, and the applicant shall certify that the information
given is true and correct under the penalties of perjury.
   B.   Each application for a dealer's license shall contain such information
as deemed necessary by the police department and the license official.
   C.   Only individuals may apply for a dealer's license:
      1.   If an application is made on behalf of a corporation, limited
partnership, LLC or other business entity, the license shall be applied for by
and issued to the president of the corporation or members of the partnership
who are authorized to act for it.
      2.   If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the license
shall be applied for by and issued to all of the partners who are authorized to
act for the partnership. Where any partner is a corporation, limited
partnership, LLC or the like, the application shall be made by and issued to
the president of the corporation or members of the limited partnership, LLC or
other entity who are authorized to act for it.
   D.   Each individual who applies for a dealer's license under this chapter
assumes, as an individual, all responsibilities of the dealer and, as an
individual, is subject to all conditions, restrictions and requirements imposed
on dealers.
   E.   Each individual applying for a secondhand dealer or secondhand precious
metal/gem dealer license shall not be issued a license until such time as the
police department has conducted a background investigation on the applicant
pursuant to section
5.08.070 of this title. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.050: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee for the following occupations shall be as specified in
the fee schedule: secondhand dealer, secondhand precious metal dealer/processor
and/or gem dealer, antique dealer, junk dealer, junk collector, or coin dealer.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.060: RELOCATION OF BUSINESS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   A dealer may conduct the licensed business only from the fixed
permanent location as specified in the application for the license, which shall
be other than a motel or hotel room generally used by transients.
   B.   A dealer may not remove or relocate the location specified in the
license for the business, or open any additional location unless the person has
applied for and obtained a separate license from the license official. (Ord.
05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.070: REPORTING CHANGES IN LICENSE INFORMATION:
If, during any license year, there is a change in the information that a person
gave in obtaining or renewing a license under this chapter, the person shall
report the change to the license official within thirty (30) days after the
change occurs, and certify that the information given is true and correct under
the penalties of perjury. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.080: LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
The license official may refuse to grant a license to any individual, and may
suspend, revoke or refuse to renew the license of any dealer if it finds:
   A.   The dealer has violated or is attempting to violate any provisions of
this chapter;
   B.   A similar license issued to the dealer has been suspended, revoked or
refused in another jurisdiction for a reason which would justify such action
under this section;
   C.   Any officer, manager, agent or employee of the individual or dealer has
violated or is attempting to violate any provisions of this chapter, unless the
person or dealer:
      1.   Had no knowledge of the wrongful conduct and in the exercise of
reasonable diligence could not have known of the conduct, and
      2.   Was unable to prevent the violation or attempted violation with the
exercise of reasonable diligence; or
   D.   The person or dealer has been convicted of theft or receiving stolen
property on one or more occasions within the past five (5) years. (Ord. 05-14,
4-6-2005)
5.79.090: HEARING ON LICENSE DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
Before revoking, suspending or refusing to grant or renew any license, the
applicant, employee or dealer shall be informed of an opportunity to appeal
such decision in accordance with the provisions of chapter 5.11 of this title,
as amended. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.100: HOURS OF CLOSURE:
It is unlawful for any dealer licensed under this chapter to keep his place of
business open for trade before the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., unless prior written permission is received from the
police department. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.110: STOLEN GOODS REPORTS:
It shall be the duty of every dealer to report to the police department any
article sold, or which it is sought to pledge with him, if he shall have reason
to believe that the article was stolen, or lost or found by the person
attempting to sell it in the case of a lost article. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.120: COMPUTER REPORTING:
The police department is authorized to transfer the information received
pursuant to this chapter into a computer information system and to report the
information in such forms as the police department may determine is useful for
law enforcement purposes. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.130: RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS, GENERALLY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer licensed by this chapter to
fail to use a computer information system approved by the police department, in
which he shall enter at the time of purchase, in the English language:
      1.   The name, date of birth, address and physical description of the
person selling the property;
      2.   The driver's license number or any other positive form of
identification containing a numerical identifier and a photograph of the person
selling the property;
      3.   The date and time of the transaction;
      4.   The identification of the person making the record entry;
      5.   A description of the item purchased or obtained by the secondhand
dealer, including, but not limited to, a description of the metallic
composition, any jewels, stones or glass, and a listing of all numbers, marks,
monograms, trademarks, manufacturer's names, serial numbers, and any other
marks of identification appearing on the item;
      6.   The weight of the item or items, where payment is based on weight;
and
      7.   The consideration paid for the item.
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, secondhand dealers who
process fewer than fifty (50) transactions per month may request written
permission from the police department to use a noncomputerized alternative
standardized format written in ink in a legible manner specified and approved
by the police department for reporting the information required in subsection A
of this section.
   C.   In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section, a
secondhand dealer shall also obtain and keep the following:
      1.   A written certificate, on forms prescribed by the police department
that the person delivering the property has the legal right to sell such
property; and
      2.   If the value of the property exceeds twenty dollars ($20.00), a
secondhand dealer, or an agent, employee, or representative of a secondhand
dealer or person who buys, receives, or obtains such property shall also
require the seller or person delivering the property, whether known or not, to
give a legible fingerprint, preferably the right thumb, at the bottom of the
written certificate next to his signature, and a copy of at least one other
positive form of picture identification.
   D.   Any secondhand dealer shall also comply with any recordkeeping
requirements of Utah law. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.140: JUNKYARD PREMISES; BARRIERS REQUIRED:
Any licensee under this chapter who is the owner of, occupant of or has control
of any lot, yard or any other premises within the city limits, and who keeps,
collects, permits, maintains or stores in the open thereon any metal, glass,
bottles, rags, cans, sacks, rubber, paper or other articles commonly known as
junk, or any articles known as secondhand goods, wares or merchandise, shall
comply with all applicable board of health rules and regulations and city land
use ordinances mandating solid visual barriers enclosing such lot, yard or
premises. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
5.79.150: JUNKYARD PREMISES ENCLOSURE:
Any premises, area or piece or parcel of land licensed and used as a junkyard
shall have not more than two (2) entrances and two (2) exits, each of which
shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in width at the perimeter of the premises.
Such premises, areas, pieces or parcels of land shall be enclosed with either a
solid nontransparent wall or fence, or link weave steel wire or combination
thereof with a minimum height of seven feet (7') from the ground level,
excepting entrances and exits. The fence or wall shall not contain any poster
or advertising of any kind excepting one sign of the licensee not exceeding one
hundred (100) square feet in size. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.160: JUNK DEALER VEHICLES:
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear
thereon, in legible characters, the name and address of the owner and
proprietor thereof. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.170: LIABILITY OF LICENSEE:
The holder of a dealer's license is liable for any and all acts of his
employees for any violation by them of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.180: SECONDHAND DEALER BUSINESS RESTRICTIONS:
No person licensed under this chapter as a secondhand dealer shall purchase,
barter, exchange or sell any secondhand merchandise other than that of the same
type and character which comprise his principal business, or act as a
pawnbroker. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.79.190: DEALING WITH MINORS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any licensee under this section, by himself, his agents or
servants, to purchase or receive any personal property, or any articles
whatsoever, from any person under eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-
2005)
CHAPTER 5.80
SERVICE STATIONS
SECTION:
5.80.010: Definitions
5.80.020: License Required
5.80.030: License Fee
5.80.040: Compliance With Governing Regulations
5.80.010: DEFINITIONS:
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS: Those products dispensed by a system specifically designed,
licensed and periodically certified for the specific product offered for sale.
SERVICE STATION: A place of business where petroleum products, gasoline, or any
other volatile fuels for motor vehicles or internal combustion engines are sold
or offered for sale. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.80.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or conduct a
service station in the city without having first obtained a business license.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.80.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for operating a service station shall be as specified in
the fee schedule. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.80.040: COMPLIANCE WITH GOVERNING REGULATIONS:
Product storage tanks and dispensing unit systems shall be subject to
compliance with all federal, state and city ordinances, laws and regulations
including, but not limited to, zoning, building or fire regulations. (Ord. 05-
14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.82
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING
SECTION:
5.82.010: Title
5.82.020: Purpose
5.82.030: Definitions
5.82.040: License Required
5.82.050: Location And Zoning Restrictions
5.82.060: Additional Restrictions
5.82.070: Premises Location And Name
5.82.080: Issuance Of License
5.82.090: License Display
5.82.100: Fees
5.82.110: Inspection
5.82.120: Expiration Of License
5.82.130: License Suspension
5.82.140: License Revocation
5.82.150: Hearing; License Denial, Revocation, And Suspension; Appeal
5.82.160: Transfer Of License
5.82.170: Hours Of Operation
5.82.180: Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films Or Videos
5.82.190: Loitering And Exterior Lighting And Monitoring Requirements
5.82.200: Penalties And Enforcement
5.82.210: Additional Regulations Concerning Live Public Nudity
5.82.220: Severability
5.82.010: TITLE:
This chapter may be referred to as the TAYLORSVILLE SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.020: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in
order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses
within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable
access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first
amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.030: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined in this
section. Words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the
singular include the plural and the plural the singular. The words and phrases
defined in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them unless a
different meaning is clearly indicated by the context.
ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image
producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial
establishment which has significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space
to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the
following:
   A.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas";
   B.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or
marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others.
ADULT CABARET: A commercial establishment or juice bar, or similar
establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly
features: a) persons who appear seminude, b) live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified
sexual activities", or c) films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
ADULT MOTEL: A motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which: a)
offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and which
regularly provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions
which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and which
advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from
the public right of way, or by means of any off premises advertising,
including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets,
radio or television, and b) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of
time less than ten (10) hours.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which
are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly
shown for any form of consideration.
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons
who appear in a state of seminudity or live performances which are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of "specified anatomical
areas" or "specified sexual activities".
BUSINESS LICENSE OFFICIAL OR LICENSE OFFICIAL: The city's community development
director or a designee appointed by the city.
CONTROLLING INTEREST: The power, directly or indirectly, to direct the
operation, management or policies of a business or entity, or to vote twenty
percent (20%) or more of any class of voting securities of a business. The
ownership, control, or power to vote twenty percent (20%) or more of any class
of voting securities of a business shall be presumed, subject to rebuttal, to
be the power to direct the management, operation or policies of the business.
DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON: The dominant or principal
theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phase
refers to films which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of "specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas", the films so described are those whose dominant or principal
character and theme are the exhibition or description of "specified anatomical
areas" or "specified sexual activities".
EMPLOY, EMPLOYEE, AND EMPLOYMENT: Describe and pertain to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full
time, part time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an
employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not
include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
ESCORT: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISH OR ESTABLISHMENT: Shall mean and include any of the following:
   A.   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
   B.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
   C.   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
   D.   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
HEARING OFFICER: The mayor of the city of Taylorsville or his designee.
LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an
applicant on the application or renewal application for a sexually oriented
business license. In case of an "employee", it shall mean the person in whose
name the sexually oriented business employee license has been issued.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: The live showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a
fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or areola.
OPERATE OR CAUSE TO OPERATE: To cause to function or to put or keep in a state
of doing business.
OPERATOR: Any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is
authorized to exercise overall operational control of the sexually oriented
business or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the
sexually oriented business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to
be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an
owner, part owner, or licensee of the sexually oriented business.
PERSON: Individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, limited liability partnership, association, or other legal entity.
REGULARLY FEATURED OR REGULARLY SHOWN: A consistent or substantial course of
conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial
portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business
of the sexually oriented business.
SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person, who regularly appears in a
state of seminudity, is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons for money or any form of
consideration. It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this chapter
that a person appearing in a state of nudity or seminudity did so in a modeling
class operated:
   A.   By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;
   B.   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
   C.   In a structure:
      1.   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a seminude person is available for viewing;
and
      2.   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three (3) days in advance of the class.
SEMINUDE OR STATE OF SEMINUDITY: A state of dress in which opaque clothing
covers no more than the genitals, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area,
vulva, and the nipple and areola of the female breast. This definition shall
not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by
a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel
provided that the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT: A business or commercial establishment, that as
one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a
place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of "specified sexual activities" or when one or more of the persons
is seminude.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, escort service, adult
motion picture theater, adult theater, seminude model studio, or sexual
encounter establishment. The definition of sexually oriented business shall not
include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITY: The sale, rental, or exhibition for
any form of consideration, of books, films, videocassettes, magazines,
periodicals, or live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure or display of specified sexual activity.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Human genitals, anus, cleft of the buttocks, or the
female breast.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: Any of the following offenses:
   A.   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity
or illegal pornography; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a
minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; lewdness; sexual battery; rape; indecent exposure; indecency with
a child; engaging in organized criminal activity relating to a sexually
oriented business; sexual assault; molestation of a child; or distribution of a
controlled substance; criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit
any of the foregoing offenses or offenses involving the same elements from any
jurisdiction regardless of the exact title of the offense; for which:
      1.   Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, or the last
date of probation or parole, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is
of a misdemeanor offense;
      2.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, or the last date of
probation or parole, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
felony offense; or
      3.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, or
the last date of probation or parole, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of
misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty four (24) month period.
   B.   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY: Actual or simulated acts of any of the following:
   A.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, including, but not limited to, human
sexual intercourse, sexual copulation between a person or an animal,
cunnilingus, bestiality, buggery, pederasty, sodomy, oral copulation, or
masturbation; or
   B.   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the
activities described above.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any of the
following:
   A.   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
   B.   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
   C.   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
VIEWING ROOM: The room, booth, or area where a patron of sexually oriented
business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette,
or other video reproduction. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.040: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented
business in the city of Taylorsville without a valid sexually oriented business
license.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to be an "employee" of a sexually
oriented business in the city of Taylorsville without a valid sexually oriented
business employee license.
   C.   An applicant or renewal applicant for a sexually oriented business
license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person
at the office of the city recorder a completed application made on a form
provided by the city. The application shall be signed by the applicant and
notarized.
   D.   An application or renewal shall be considered complete when it contains
the following information:
      1.   The applicant's full true name and any other names used in the
preceding five (5) years.
      2.   Current mailing address and street address of the applicant.
      3.   Written proof of age and birth date, in the form of a copy of a
birth certificate or driver's license or other picture identification document
issued by a governmental agency.
      4.   If the application or renewal is for a sexually oriented business
license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and
phone number (if one currently exists) of the proposed sexually oriented
business.
      5.   If the application or renewal is for a sexually oriented business
license, the name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized
to receive service of process.
      6.   A waiver consenting to a criminal background check.
      7.   A statement of whether the applicant has been convicted or has pled
guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of
each. The statement shall also disclose whether the applicant has had a
previous sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business employee
license under this chapter or other sexually oriented business ordinances from
another city or county denied, suspended, or revoked within the past two (2)
years, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for
which the permit was denied, suspended, or revoked, as well as the date of the
denial, suspension, or revocation, and whether the applicant has been a partner
in a partnership or an officer, director, or stockholder with a controlling
interest in a corporation that is licensed under this chapter whose license has
previously been denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location
of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended,
or revoked as well as the date of the denial, suspension, or revocation.
The information provided pursuant to subsections D1 through D7 of this section
shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the city within ten (10) working days after a change of circumstances which
would render such information false or incomplete.
   E.   An application or renewal for a sexually oriented business license
shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to
a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6"). Applicants who are
required to comply with section
 5.82.180 of this chapter shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of
that section.
   F.   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he shall sign the application or renewal for a license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
other than an individual, each officer, director, general partner, manager or
other person who will participate directly in decisions relating to management
and control of the business shall sign the application or renewal for a license
as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section
5.82.080 of this chapter and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a
license is granted.
   G.   A license or permit required by this chapter is in addition to any
other licenses or permits required by the city, county, state or federal laws
to engage in the business or occupation. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
   H.   Any person engaged in the operation of a sexually oriented business or
in the employment of a sexually oriented business shall comply with all other
applicable local, state and federal laws, orders and statutes including, but
not limited to, land use ordinances. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012)
   I.   The information provided by an applicant in connection with an
application or renewal for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by
the city on a confidential basis, except that such information may be disclosed
only to law enforcement agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public
safety function, or as may be required by governing law or court order. (Ord.
05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.050: LOCATION AND ZONING RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to operate at any location
within the city that is not zoned for sexually oriented businesses. Sexually
oriented businesses shall be allowed to do business in areas zoned for such
use. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.060: ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to sell or permit the
consumption of any alcoholic beverage or beer, or to be located within six
hundred sixty feet (660') of a business licensed for the consumption of alcohol
or liquor. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.070: PREMISES LOCATION AND NAME:
   A.   It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business or sexually oriented
business employee licensee to operate a business at any location other than the
licensed premises.
   B.   It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business or sexually oriented
business employee licensee to do business in the city under any name other than
the business name specified on the license. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.080: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Within three (3) business days of filing a completed application for a
sexually oriented business license, the city shall issue a temporary license to
the applicant. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of
the license official to deny or grant the sexually oriented business license.
Within thirty (30) days of the initial filing date of the completed
application, the license official shall issue a sexually oriented business
license to the applicant or issue to the applicant a letter of intent to deny
the application. The license official shall approve the issuance of a sexually
oriented business license unless one or more of the following is found by a
preponderance of evidence to be true:
      1.   An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   An applicant has failed to provide information as required by
section
 5.82.040 of this chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
      3.   The fee required by section
5.82.100 of this chapter has not been paid.
      4.   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, or
has been shown to have committed a violation of section
5.82.110, subsection
5.82.140B, or section
5.82.210 of this chapter within the previous year.
      5.   In the case of a sexually oriented business license application, the
premises are not in compliance with applicable building, fire and health
ordinances or codes and the interior configuration requirements of this
chapter.
   B.   Within three (3) business days of filing of a completed application for
a sexually oriented business employee license, the city shall issue a temporary
sexually oriented business license to the applicant. The temporary sexually
oriented business license shall expire upon the final decision of the license
official to deny or grant the license. Within thirty (30) days of the initial
filing date of the receipt of a completed application, the license official
shall either issue a sexually oriented business license or issue a written
notice of intent to deny a sexually oriented business license to the applicant.
The license official shall approve the issuance of a sexually oriented business
license unless one or more of the following is found by a preponderance of
evidence to be true:
      1.   The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   The applicant has failed to provide information as required by
section
5.82.040 of this chapter for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
      3.   The fee required by section
5.82.100 of this chapter has not been paid.
      4.   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity,
or has been shown to have committed a violation of section
5.82.110, subsection
5.82.140B or section
5.82.210 of this chapter within the previous year.
   C.   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and, if the license is
for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented
business. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.090: LICENSE DISPLAY:
The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be
easily read at any time. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the
employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee
is then working or performing and shall produce such license for inspection
upon request by a law enforcement officer or other city official performing
functions connected with the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-
2005)
5.82.100: FEES:
The fee for engaging in, carrying on, or conducting a sexually oriented
business or employee license shall be as specified on the fee schedule. (Ord.
05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.110: INSPECTION:
   A.   Sexually oriented business operators and sexually oriented business
employees shall permit law enforcement officers or agents of the city who are
performing functions connected with the enforcement of this chapter to inspect
the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are
permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter, at any
time the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or open for
business. A licensee's knowing or intentional refusal to permit such an
inspection shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   B.   Inspections authorized by this section do not apply to areas of an
adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a
permanent or temporary habitation. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.120: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
Each license shall remain valid for the term unless otherwise suspended or
revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application as provided in
section
5.82.040 of this chapter and paying the fee as provided in section
 5.82.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.130: LICENSE SUSPENSION:
The city shall issue a notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business
license if it is determined that the sexually oriented business licensee has
knowingly violated this chapter or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate
this chapter. The city shall issue a notice of intent to suspend a sexually
oriented employee license if it is determined that the employee has knowingly
violated this chapter. Such suspension shall not exceed thirty (30) days. (Ord.
05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.140: LICENSE REVOCATION:
   A.   The city shall issue a notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented
business license or a sexually oriented business employee license if a cause
for suspension pursuant to section
5.82.110 of this chapter occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding twelve (12) months.
   B.   The city shall issue a notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented
business license or, in the case of an employee, a sexually oriented business
employee license, if the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of
evidence that:
      1.   The licensee has knowingly given false or misleading information in
the application or renewal for the license.
      2.   The sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises, or in the
case of an employee, the sexually oriented business employee licensee has
knowingly engaged in the possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on
the premises. It shall be a defense to a revocation proceeding under this
subsection that such possession, use, or sale occurred pursuant to a valid
medical prescription.
      3.   The sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises or, in the case of an employee, the sexually
oriented business employee licensee has engaged in prostitution on any licensed
premises.
      4.   The sexually oriented business licensee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was
suspended or, in the case of an employee, the sexually oriented business
employee licensee has been employed as a sexually oriented business employee at
a time when the employee's license was suspended.
      5.   The sexually oriented business licensee committed an act in
violation of 18 USC section 2257 in or on the premises, or in the case of an
employee, the sexually oriented business employee licensee committed an act in
violation of 18 USC section 2257 in or on the premises.
      6.   The sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly allowed any
specified sexual activity to occur in or on the premises or, in the case of an
employee, the sexually oriented business employee licensee has engaged in any
specified sexual activity in or on any licensed premises.
   C.   The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.
   D.   For the purposes of this chapter, if an act by any employee constitutes
grounds for revocation of that employee's license and the hearing officer
determines by a preponderance of evidence that an officer, director, or general
partner, or an employee who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of
the business, knowingly allowed such act to occur on the premises, then the
hearing officer may review the employee's license.
   E.   When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section
5.82.150 of this chapter, the hearing officer revokes a license, the revocation
shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license for a
period of one year from the date revocation becomes effective, provided that,
if the conditions of subsection 5.82.150B of this chapter have been satisfied,
a provisional license will be granted pursuant to that subsection. If,
subsequent to a revocation based solely on subsection B1 of this section, the
hearing officer finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or
abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days
have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was
revoked under subsection B2, B3, B4, B5, or B6 of this section, an applicant
may not be granted another sexually oriented business license or sexually
oriented business employee license until at least one year has elapsed. (Ord.
05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.150: HEARING; LICENSE DENIAL, REVOCATION, AND SUSPENSION; APPEAL:
   A.   If the city determines that facts exist for denial, suspension, or
revocation of a license under this chapter, the city shall notify the applicant
or licensee (respondent) in writing of the city's intent to deny, suspend or
revoke such license, including the grounds therefor, by personal delivery, or
by certified mail.
      1.   The notification shall be directed to the most current business
address or other mailing address on file with the city for the respondent.
Within twenty (20) days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide
to the city a written response that shall include a statement of reasons why
the respondent believes the license should not be denied, suspended, or
revoked.
      2.   Within five (5) days of the receipt of respondent's written
response, the city shall notify respondent in writing of the hearing date on
respondent's denial, suspension, or revocation proceeding. At such hearing, the
hearing officer shall conduct a hearing at which respondent shall have the
opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by
counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross examine
any of the city's witnesses. The hearing officer shall issue a written opinion
within five (5) days after the hearing.
      3.   If a written response from respondent is not received by the city
within the time stated in subsection A1 of this section, or if after a hearing,
the hearing officer concludes that grounds exist for denial, suspension, or
revocation of the license, then such denial, suspension, or revocation shall
become final five (5) days after the hearing officer sends, by certified mail,
written notice to the respondent that the license has been denied, suspended,
or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising the respondent of
the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the
city hearing officer finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or
revocation of the license, then within five (5) days after the hearing, the
hearing officer shall immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or
revoke the license and shall notify the respondent in writing by certified mail
of such action. If the hearing relates to a denial of a license, the hearing
officer shall contemporaneously order that the license be issued.
   B.   An applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a
license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall
have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   Sexually oriented businesses or sexually oriented business employees
operating or working under temporary licenses shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.160: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another person or location, nor
shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented
business license application. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.170: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented business to allow such
establishment to remain open for business, or to permit any employee to engage
in the performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide
a service, or solicit a service, before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. of any particular day. It shall be unlawful for any
employee of a sexually oriented business to engage in a performance, solicit a
performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a
service, before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. or after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
of any particular day. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.180: EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS:
   A.   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space,
films, videocassettes, or other video reproductions characterized by an
emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall
contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all managers'
stations, viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, video cameras and monitors
installed for monitoring purposes and restrooms, and shall designate all
portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms
shall not contain video reproduction equipment. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be
oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus six inches (±6"). The license official may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has
not been altered since it was prepared.
      2.   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      3.   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station or viewing room may be made without the prior approval of the license
official.
      4.   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of
the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection A1 of this section.
      5.   The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle as
measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any
employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or
open for business.
      6.   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no specific sexual activity occurs in or on the
licensed premises.
      7.   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that not more than one person is present in a
viewing room at any time. No person shall enter a viewing room that is occupied
by another person.
      8.   It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present
on the premises, to ensure that no openings of any kind exist between viewing
rooms. No person shall make an attempt to make an opening of any kind between
viewing rooms.
      9.   It shall be the duty of the operator, or of any employee who
discovers two (2) or more patrons in a viewing room or discovers any person
making or attempting to make an opening of any kind between viewing rooms, to
immediately escort such persons from the premises.
      10.   It shall be the duty of the operator, or of any employee, who
discovers an opening of any kind between viewing rooms to immediately secure
such rooms, and prevent entry into them by any patron until such time as the
wall between the rooms has been repaired to remove the opening. Removal and
repairing openings between viewing rooms shall be in a manner that is as
structurally substantial as the original wall construction.
      11.   It shall be the duty of the operator, at least once each business
day, to inspect the walls between viewing rooms for openings of any kind.
      12.   It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in
well lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following:
         a.   That no loitering is permitted in viewing rooms.
         b.   That the occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one person.
         c.   That specific sexual activity on the premises is prohibited.
         d.   That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited.
         e.   That violators will be required to leave the premises.
         f.   That violations of subsections A12b, A12c and A12d of this
section are unlawful.
      13.   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that floor coverings
in viewing rooms are nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or
carpeting.
      14.   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that all wall
surfaces and seating surfaces in viewing rooms are constructed of or
permanently covered by nonporous easily cleanable material.
      15.   It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that premises are
clean and sanitary. Such duty shall be fulfilled if the operator complies with
the following cleaning procedures:
         a.   The operator shall maintain a regular cleaning schedule of at
least two (2) cleanings per day, documented by appropriate logs.
         b.   The operator shall provide an employee to check all areas for
garbage, trash, body fluids and excrement and to remove and clean all areas
with a disinfectant. All solid waste generated by the business shall be
collected from the premises for disposal at a lawful solid waste disposal
facility at least once each week. Prior to collection solid waste shall be
stored in a manner that prevents access by animals or members of the public and
which will not facilitate the creation of a health nuisance.
         c.   Thorough cleaning of the entire interior of any room providing
patron privacy shall be done using a disinfectant. Cleaning shall include
floors, walls, doors, seating, monitors, video cameras, and windows and other
surfaces.
      16.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises in which patrons are permitted, including the interior of each
viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose. A manager's station shall not exceed forty (40) square feet of
floor area. If the premises has two (2) or more managers' stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the managers'
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight
from the manager's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at
least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all
times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator,
and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to
ensure that the view area specified in this subsection remains unobstructed by
any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or
enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.190: LOITERING AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING AND MONITORING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business
to: 1) initiate and enforce a no loitering policy within the external
boundaries of the real property upon which the sexually oriented businesses are
located; 2) post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on
such property; 3) designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of
persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once
every ninety (90) minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras
and monitors; and 4) provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for
visual inspection or provide video monitoring to prohibit loitering. If used,
video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the
premises is open for business. The monitors shall be installed within a
manager's station.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to
knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.200: PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
In addition to suspension or revocation of a license, it is unlawful for any
person to knowingly violate, disobey, omit, neglect, or refuse to comply with
or resist the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter. Each day
the violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.210: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING LIVE PUBLIC NUDITY:
It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business licensee to knowingly violate
the following regulations or to knowingly allow an employee or any other person
to violate the following regulations:
   A.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a patron, employee, or any
other person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business,
appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public nude conduct is
expressive in nature.
   B.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person to knowingly or
intentionally in a sexually oriented business appear in a seminude condition
unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, shall be at least six
feet (6') from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet (2')
from the floor.
   C.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee, while
seminude in a sexually oriented business, to knowingly or intentionally receive
any pay or gratuity directly from any patron or customer, or for any patron or
customer to knowingly or intentionally pay or give any gratuity directly to any
employee, while said employee is seminude in a sexually oriented business.
   D.   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee, while
seminude, to knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a
customer.
A sign in a form to be prescribed by the city and summarizing the provisions of
subsections A, B, C, and D of this section, shall be posted near the entrance
of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to
patrons upon entry. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.82.220: SEVERABILITY:
Each section and provision of this chapter are hereby declared to be
independent divisions and subdivisions and, notwithstanding any other evidence
of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative
intent that if any provisions of said chapter, or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or
provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or
circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be
affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions
would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to
be invalid. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.84
SHOOTING RANGES
SECTION:
5.84.010: Definitions
5.84.020: License Required
5.84.030: License Fees
5.84.040: Compliance With Governing Regulations
5.84.010: DEFINITIONS:
"Shooting range" means an area designed and operated for practice for the use
of rifles, shotguns, pistols, silhouettes, skeet, traps, black powder, archery
or any other shooting activities. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.84.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or conduct a
shooting range of any kind in the city without having obtained a license
therefor. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.84.030: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee for a shooting range shall be as specified in the fee
schedule. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.84.040: COMPLIANCE WITH GOVERNING REGULATIONS:
All shooting ranges shall comply with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations regarding lead contamination. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.86
RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION
SECTION:
5.86.010: Purpose
5.86.020: No Other City License Or Approval Required
5.86.030: Definitions
5.86.040: Exemptions From Chapter
5.86.050: Solicitation Prohibited
5.86.060: Registration Of Solicitors
5.86.070: Application Form
5.86.080: Written Disclosures
5.86.090: When Registration Begins
5.86.100: Issuance Of Permits
5.86.110: Permit Form And Identification Badge
5.86.120: Maintenance Of Registry
5.86.130: Nontransferability Of Permits
5.86.140: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of A Permit Of Registration
5.86.150: Appeal
5.86.160: Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
5.86.170: "No Solicitation" Notice
5.86.180: Duties Of Solicitors
5.86.190: Time Of Day Restrictions
5.86.200: Buyer's Right To Cancel
5.86.210: Penalties
5.86.010: PURPOSE:
Residents of the city have an inalienable interest in their personal safety,
well being, and privacy in their residences, as well as their ability to
provide or receive information regarding matters of personal belief, political
or charitable activities, and goods and services lawfully in commerce. The city
has a substantial interest in protecting the well being, tranquility, personal
safety, and privacy of its citizens, which includes the ability to protect
citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential property. The city also has
a substantial interest in protecting citizens from fraud or otherwise unfair
consumer sales practices as well as criminal activity.
There must be a balance between these substantial interests of the city and its
citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this chapter on the rights of
those who are regulated. Based on the collective experiences of city officials
derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons and property from
criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens regarding door to
door solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement officers and those
affected by door to door canvassing and solicitation, as well as judicial
decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional protections afforded and
denied persons seeking to engage in door to door solicitation, the city adopts
this chapter to promote the city's substantial interests in:
   A.   Respecting citizens' decisions regarding privacy in their residences;
   B.   Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
   C.   Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against religious
belief, political position, or charitable activities; and
   D.   Permitting truthful and nonmisleading door to door solicitation
regarding lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
The city finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in this
chapter are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the city interests
referred to herein while at the same time balancing the rights of those
regulated. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
5.86.020: NO OTHER CITY LICENSE OR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Registered solicitors and persons exempt from registration need not
apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the city
to engage in door to door solicitation.
   B.   Any business licensed by the city under another city ordinance that
uses employees, independent contractors, or agents for door to door
solicitation in an effort to provide any tangible or intangible benefit to the
business, shall be required to have such solicitors obtain a permit, unless
otherwise exempt from registration.
   C.   Those responsible persons or entities associated with registered
solicitors need not apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or
registration from the city, provided they do not establish a temporary or fixed
place of business in the city.
   D.   Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any other
requirement of federal, state, or other local government law regarding any
license, permit, or certificate that a registered solicitor is otherwise
required to have or maintain. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
5.86.030: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ADVOCATING: Speech or conduct intended to inform, promote, or support religious
belief, political position, or charitable activities.
APPEALS OFFICER: The city council or designee of the city responsible for
receiving the information from the city and appellant regarding the denial or
suspension of a permit and issuing a decision as required by this chapter.
APPELLANT: The person or entity appealing the denial or suspension of a permit,
either personally as an applicant or registered solicitor, or on behalf of the
applicant or registered solicitor.
APPLICANT: An individual who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and not a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity who
applies for a permit permitting door to door solicitation.
APPLICATION FORM: A standardized form provided by the city to an applicant to
be completed and submitted as part of registration.
BCI: An original or copy, dated no older than one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to the date of the application, of either: a) a Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification verified criminal history report
personal to the applicant; or b) verification by the Utah department of public
safety bureau of criminal identification that no criminal history rising to the
level of a disqualifying status exists for the applicant.
BUSINESS: A commercial enterprise licensed by the city as a person or entity
under this title, having a fixed or temporary physical location within the
city.
CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES: Advocating by persons or entities that either are, or
support, a charitable organization.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Includes any person, joint venture, partnership,
limited liability company, corporation, association, group, or other entity:
   A.   That is a benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic,
humane, patriotic, religious or eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy,
public health, environmental or conservation, or civic organization:
      1.   For the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter
fraternal association; or
      2.   Established for any charitable purpose; and
   B.   That is tax exempt under applicable provisions of the internal revenue
code of 1986, as amended, and qualified to solicit and receive tax deductible
contributions from the public for charitable purposes.
   C.   Charitable organization includes a chapter, branch, area, or office, or
similar affiliate or any person soliciting contributions within the state for a
charitable organization that has its principal place of business outside the
city or state of Utah 1 .
COMPETENT INDIVIDUAL: A person claiming or appearing to be at least eighteen
(18) years of age and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage
in rational thought, conversation, and conduct.
COMPLETED APPLICATION: A fully completed application form, a BCI, two (2)
copies of the original identification relied on by the applicant to establish
proof of identity, and the tendering of fees.
CRIMINALLY CONVICTED: The final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of no
contest, guilty, entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not
been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal
conviction is that offense of which the applicant or registered solicitor was
convicted, without regard to the reduced status of the charge after completion
of conditions of probation or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea in
abeyance or diversion agreement.
DISQUALIFYING STATUS: Anything specifically defined in this chapter as
requiring the denial or suspension of a permit, and any of the following:
   A.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of:
1) felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a
minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4) sexual
assault of any kind;
   B.   Criminal charges currently pending against the applicant or registered
solicitor for: 1) felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or
exploiting a minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4)
sexual assault of any kind;
   C.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of
a felony within the last ten (10) years;
   D.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been incarcerated in a
federal or state prison within the past five (5) years;
   E.   The applicant or registered solicitor has been criminally convicted of
a misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of: 1) moral
turpitude, or 2) violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
   F.   A final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant or
registered solicitor within the last five (5) years indicating that: 1) the
applicant or registered solicitor had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of the applicant or registered solicitor
was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)
(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
   G.   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently on parole or
probation to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including
being under house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
   H.   The applicant or registered solicitor has an outstanding arrest warrant
from any jurisdiction; or
   I.   The applicant or registered solicitor is currently subject to a
protective order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION: The practice of engaging in or attempting to engage
in conversation with any person at a residence, whether or not that person is a
competent individual, while making or seeking to make or facilitate a home
solicitation sale, or attempting to further the sale of goods and/or services.
ENTITY: Includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or
other lawful entity, organization, society or association.
FEES: The cost charged to the applicant or registered solicitor for the
issuance of a permit and/or identification badge, which shall not exceed the
reasonable costs of processing the application and issuing the permit and/or
identification badge.
FINAL CIVIL JUDGMENT: A civil judgment that would be recognized under state law
as a judgment to which collateral estoppel would apply.
GOODS: One or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise, perishables
of any kind, subscriptions, or manufactured products offered, provided, or
sold.
HOME SOLICITATION SALE: To make or attempt to make a sale of goods or services
by a solicitor at a residence by means of door to door solicitation, regardless
of:
   A.   The means of payment or consideration used for the purchase;
   B.   The time of delivery of the goods or services; or
   C.   The previous or present classification of the solicitor as a solicitor,
peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or similar designation.
LICENSE OFFICIAL: The city community development director or other designee
appointed by the city to be responsible for receiving from an applicant or
registered solicitor the completed application and either granting, suspending,
or denying the applicant's permit.
NO SOLICITATION SIGN: A reasonably visible and legible sign that states "No
Soliciting", "No Solicitors", "No Salespersons", "No Trespassing", or words of
similar import.
PERMIT: A temporary, annual, or renewal permit permitting door to door
solicitation in the city applied for or issued pursuant to the terms of this
chapter.
POLITICAL POSITION: Any actually held belief, or information for, against, or
in conjunction with any political, social, environmental, or humanitarian
belief or practice.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has been issued a current permit by the
city.
REGISTRATION: The process used by the city license official to accept a
completed application and determine whether or not a permit will be denied,
granted, or suspended.
RELIGIOUS BELIEF: Any sincerely held belief, or information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption, presumption
or position, or religious doctrine, dogma, or practice regardless of whether or
not the belief or information is endorsed by any other person or public or
private entity.
RESIDENCE: Any living unit contained within any building or structure that is
occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the
city, together with the lot or other real property on which the living unit is
located. This does not include the sidewalk, public street or public rights of
way.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON OR ENTITY: That person or entity responsible to provide the
following to an applicant, registered solicitor, and the competent individual
in a residence to whom a sale of goods or services is made or attempted to be
made by means of a home solicitation sale:
   A.   Maintaining a state sales tax number, a special events sales tax
number, computing the sales taxes owing from any sale of goods or services,
paying the sales taxes, and filing any required returns or reports;
   B.   Facilitating and responding to requests from consumers who desire to
cancel the sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law; and
   C.   Refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card charges to those
persons who timely rescind any sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights
or law.
SALE OF GOODS OR SERVICES: The conduct and agreement of a solicitor and the
competent individual in a residence regarding a particular good(s) or service
(s) that entitles the consumer to rescind the same within three (3) days under
any applicable federal, state, or local law.
SERVICES: Those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided, or
sold to a competent individual of a residence.
SOLICITING OR SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION: Any of the following activities:
   A.   Seeking to obtain sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or
consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought;
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase
insurance, subscriptions to publications, or publications;
   C.   Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value
for the benefit of any person or entity;
   D.   Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or
services;
   E.   Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a residence for the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding
religious belief, political position, charitable conduct, or a home
solicitation sale;
   F.   Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of
soliciting, such as hawking or peddling.
SOLICITOR OR SOLICITORS: A person(s) engaged in door to door solicitation.
SUBMITTED IN WRITING: The information for an appeal of a denial or suspension
of a permit, submitted in any type of written statement to the city offices by
certified, registered, priority, overnight or delivery confirmation mail,
facsimile, or hand delivery.
SUBSTANTIATED REPORT: An oral, written, or electronic report:
   A.   That is submitted to and documented by the city by any of the
following:
      1.   A competent individual who is willing to provide law enforcement or
other city employees with publicly available identification of their name,
address, and any other reliable means of contact;
      2.   City law enforcement or license official; or
      3.   Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any level
of government;
   B.   That provides any of the following information regarding a registered
solicitor:
      1.   Documented verification of a previously undisclosed disqualifying
status of a registered solicitor;
      2.   Probable cause that the registered solicitor has committed a
disqualifying status which has not yet been determined to be a disqualifying
status;
      3.   Documented, eyewitness accounts that the registered solicitor has
engaged in repeated patterns of behavior that demonstrate failure by the
registered solicitor to adhere to the requirements of this chapter; or
      4.   Probable cause that continued licensing of the registered solicitor
creates exigent circumstances that threaten the health, safety, or welfare of
any individuals or entities within the city.
WAIVER: The written form provided to applicant by the city wherein applicant
agrees that the city may obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on
the applicant for licensing purposes under this chapter, and which contains
applicant's notarized signature. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. Charitable solicitation act UCA §§ 13-22-2(1)(a), (b).
5.86.040: EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER:
The following are exempt from registration under this chapter:
   A.   Persons specifically invited to a residence by a competent individual
prior to the time of the person's arrival at the residence;
   B.   Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the
state of Utah permits them to engage in door to door solicitation to offer
goods or services to an occupant of the residence;
   C.   Persons delivering goods to a residence pursuant to a previously made
order, or persons providing services at a residence pursuant to a previously
made request by a competent individual;
   D.   Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any religious belief, or political position regardless of
whether goods, services, or any other consideration is offered or given, with
or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge, or purchase;
and
   E.   Persons representing a charitable organization. The charitable
exemption shall apply to students soliciting contributions to finance
extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs,
provided that the solicitation has been approved in writing by the school
administration, and that such student solicitors carry current picture student
identification from the educational institution for which they are soliciting.
Those persons exempt from registration are not exempt from the duties and
prohibitions outlined in sections
5.86.170,
5.86.180, and
 5.86.190 of this chapter while advocating or soliciting. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-
2006)
5.86.050: SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the terms and
provisions of this chapter, the practice of being in and upon a private
residence within the city by solicitors, for the purpose of home solicitation
sales or to provide goods or services, is prohibited and is punishable as set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
5.86.060: REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS:
Unless otherwise exempt under this chapter, all persons desiring to engage in
door to door solicitation within the city, prior to doing so, shall submit a
completed application to the license official and obtain a permit. (Ord. 06-38,
9-6-2006)
5.86.070: APPLICATION FORM:
The license official shall provide a standard application form for use for the
registration of solicitors. Upon request to the license official, or as
otherwise provided, any person or entity may obtain in person, by mail, or
facsimile, a copy of this application form. Each application form shall require
disclosure and reporting by the applicant of the following information,
documentation, and fee:
   A.   Review Of Written Disclosures: An affirmation that the applicant has
received and reviewed the disclosure information required by this chapter.
   B.   Contact Information:
      1.   Applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former names
or aliases used during the last ten (10) years;
      2.   Applicant's telephone number, home address and mailing address, if
different;
      3.   If different from the applicant, the name, address, and telephone
number of the responsible person or entity; and
      4.   The address by which all notices to the applicant required under
this chapter are to be sent.
   C.   Proof Of Identity: An in person verification by the license official of
the applicant's true identity by use of any of the following which bear a
photograph of said applicant:
      1.   A valid driver's license issued by any state;
      2.   A valid passport issued by the United States or other country;
      3.   A valid identification card issued by any state;
      4.   A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States
military.
Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted to
establish proof of identity shall be returned to the applicant.
   D.   Proof Of Registration With Department Of Commerce: The applicant shall
provide proof that either the applicant, or the responsible person or entity,
has registered with the Utah state department of commerce.
   E.   Special Events Sales Tax Number: The applicant shall provide a special
events sales tax number for either the applicant, or for the responsible person
or entity for which the applicant will be soliciting.
   F.   Marketing Information:
      1.   The goods or services offered by the applicant, including any
commonly known, registered or trademarked names;
      2.   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses, permits,
registrations, or other qualifications required by federal or state law to
promote, provide, or render advice regarding the offered goods or services.
   G.   BCI Background Check: The applicant shall provide:
      1.   An original or a copy of a "BCI" background check as defined in
section
5.86.030 of this chapter; and
      2.   A signed copy of a waiver whereby applicant agrees to allow the city
to obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on applicant for purposes
of enforcement of this chapter 1 .
   H.   Responses To Questions Regarding "Disqualifying Status": The applicant
shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements on the
application form:
      1.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of: a) felony homicide,
b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, c) the sale or
distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual assault of any kind;
      2.   Are any criminal charges currently pending against the applicant
for: a) felony homicide, b) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting
a minor, c) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or d) sexual
assault of any kind;
      3.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a felony within the
last ten (10) years;
      4.   Has the applicant been incarcerated in a federal or state prison
within the past five (5) years;
      5.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within
the past five (5) years involving a crime of: a) moral turpitude, or b) violent
or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
      6.   Has a final civil judgment been entered against the applicant within
the last five (5) years indicating that: a) the applicant had either engaged in
fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or b) that a debt of the applicant was
nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4),
(a)(6), or (a)(19);
      7.   Is the applicant currently on parole or probation to any court,
penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest
or subject to a tracking device;
      8.   Does the applicant have an outstanding arrest warrant from any
jurisdiction; or
      9.   Is the applicant currently subject to a protective order based on
physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   I.   Fee: The applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by the
city, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application
and issuing the permit and/or identification badge.
   J.   Execution Of Application: The applicant shall execute the application
form, stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on
the present knowledge and belief of the applicant, the information provided is
complete, truthful and accurate. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See UCA § 53-10-108(1)(b).
5.86.080: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES:
The application form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the
applicant of the following:
   A.   The applicant's submission of the application authorizes the city to
verify information submitted with the completed application including:
      1.   The applicant's address;
      2.   The applicant's and/or responsible person's or entity's state tax
identification and special use tax numbers, if any;
      3.   The validity of the applicant's proof of identity;
   B.   The city may consult any publicly available sources for information on
the applicant, including, but not limited to, databases for any outstanding
warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments;
   C.   Establishing proof of identity is required before registration is
allowed;
   D.   Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by applicant
with a completed application;
   E.   The applicant must submit a BCI background check with a completed
application;
   F.   To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, the applicant's
BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not
available for public inspection;
   G.   The city will maintain copies of the applicant's application form,
proof of identity, and identification badge. These copies will become public
records available for inspection on demand at the city offices whether or not a
permit is denied, granted, or renewed;
   H.   The criteria for disqualifying status, denial, or suspension of a
permit under the provisions of this chapter;
   I.   That a request for a temporary permit will be granted or denied the
same business day that a completed application is submitted. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-
2006)
5.86.090: WHEN REGISTRATION BEGINS:
The license official shall not begin the registration process unless the
applicant has submitted a completed application. The original identification
submitted to establish proof of identity shall be returned after the license
official verifies the applicant's identity. A copy of the identification may be
retained by the license official. If an original BCI background check is
submitted by the applicant, the license official shall make a copy of the BCI
and return the original to the applicant. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
5.86.100: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
The license official shall review the completed application submitted by the
applicant and issue a permit in accordance with the following:
   A.   Temporary Permit:
      1.   A temporary permit shall issue allowing the applicant to immediately
begin door to door solicitation upon the following conditions:
         a.   Applicant's submission of a completed application;
         b.   Applicant's submission of the required fee;
         c.   Applicant establishes proof of identity;
         d.   The applicant's representations on the application form do not
affirmatively show a disqualifying status;
         e.   The BCI does not affirmatively show a disqualifying status; and
         f.   The applicant has not previously been denied a permit by the
city, or had a permit revoked for grounds that still constitute a disqualifying
status under this chapter.
      2.   A temporary permit will automatically expire after twenty five (25)
calendar days from issuance, or upon grant or denial of an annual permit,
whichever period is shorter.
   B.   Annual Permit: Within twenty five (25) calendar days of the issuance of
a temporary permit the city shall:
      1.   Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the
truthfulness and completeness of the information submitted by the applicant,
including, but not limited to, those disclosed with the application form.
      2.   Issue written notice to the applicant and the responsible person or
entity, if any, that the applicant either:
         a.   Will be issued an annual permit, eligible for renewal one year
from the date of issuance of the temporary permit; or
         b.   Will not be issued an annual permit for reasons cited in section
5.86.140 of this chapter.
   C.   Renewal Permit: An annual permit shall be valid for one year from the
date of issuance of the temporary permit and shall expire at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight on the anniversary date of issuance. Any annual permit that is
not suspended, revoked, or expired may be renewed upon the request of the
registered solicitor and the submission of a new completed application and
payment of the fee, unless any of the conditions for the denial, suspension or
revocation of a permit are present as set forth in section
5.86.140 of this chapter, or a disqualifying status is present. (Ord. 06-38, 9-
6-2006)
5.86.110: PERMIT FORM AND IDENTIFICATION BADGE:
   A.   Permit Form: Should the license official determine that the applicant
is entitled to a permit, the license official shall issue a permit to the
applicant. The permit shall list the name of the registered solicitor and the
responsible person or entity, if any, and the date on which the permit expires.
The permit shall be dated and signed by the license officer. The permit shall
be carried by the registered solicitor at all times while soliciting in the
city.
   B.   Identification Badge: With both the temporary and annual permits, the
city shall issue each registered solicitor an identification badge that shall
be worn prominently on his or her person while soliciting in the city. The
identification badge shall bear the name of the city and shall contain: 1) the
name of the registered solicitor; 2) address and phone number of the registered
solicitor, or the name, address, and phone number of the responsible person or
entity is provided; 3) a recent photograph of the registered solicitor; and 4)
the date on which the permit expires. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
5.86.120: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The license official shall maintain and make available for public inspection a
copy or record of every completed application received and the permit or
written denial issued by the city. The applicant's BCI background check shall
remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public
inspection. The license official may furnish to the head of the city's law
enforcement agency a listing of all applicants, those denied, and those issued
a permit. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
5.86.130: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF PERMITS:
Permits shall be issued only in the name of the applicant and shall list the
responsible party or entity, if any. The permit shall be nontransferable. A
registered solicitor desiring to facilitate or attempt to facilitate home
solicitation sales with different: a) goods or services; or b) responsible
person or entity, from those designated in the originally submitted completed
application, shall submit a written change request to the license official. A
new permit based on the amended information shall issue for the balance of time
remaining on the solicitor's previous permit before the amendment was filed.
Before the new permit is given to the registered solicitor, the registered
solicitor shall obtain a revised identification badge from the city, after
payment of the fee for the identification badge. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
5.86.140: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A PERMIT OF REGISTRATION:
   A.   Denial: Upon review, the license official shall refuse to issue a
permit to an applicant for any of the following reasons:
      1.   Denial Of Temporary Permit:
         a.   The application form is not complete;
         b.   The applicant fails to: 1) establish proof of identity, 2)
provide a BCI or 3) pay the fees;
         c.   The completed application or BCI indicates that the applicant has
a disqualifying status; or
         d.   The applicant has previously been denied a permit by the city, or
has had a permit revoked for grounds that still constitute a disqualifying
status under this chapter.
      2.   Denial Of Annual Permit:
         a.   The information submitted by the applicant at the time of the
granting of the temporary permit is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
         b.   Since the submission of the completed application, the applicant
is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
         c.   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
         d.   Since the submission of the application, the city has received a
substantiated report regarding the past or present conduct of the applicant;
         e.   Since the submission of the application, the city or other
governmental entity has either criminally convicted or obtained a civil
injunction against the applicant for violating this chapter or similar federal,
state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a disqualifying
status; or
         f.   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of
the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523
(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
      3.   Denial Of Annual Permit Renewal:
         a.   The information submitted by the applicant when seeking renewal
of a permit is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
         b.   Since the submission of the renewal application, the applicant is
subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown disqualifying status;
         c.   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
         d.   Since the submission of the application or granting of a permit,
the city has received a substantiated report regarding the past or present
conduct of the solicitor;
         e.   The city or other governmental entity has either criminally
convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the applicant for violating
this chapter or similar federal, state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to
the level of a disqualifying status; or
         f.   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment
has been entered against the applicant indicating that: 1) the applicant had
either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of
the applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523
(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation: The city shall either suspend or revoke a
permit when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a permit occurs.
   C.   Notice Of Denial Or Suspension: Upon determination of the license
official to deny an applicant's completed application or to suspend a
registered solicitor's permit, the city shall cause written notice to be sent
to the applicant or registered solicitor by the method indicated in the
completed application. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial or
suspension, the documentation or information the city relied on to make the
decision, the availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon
one business day's notice to the city, and the date upon which the denial or
suspension of the permit shall take effect. It shall further state that the
applicant or registered solicitor shall have ten (10) business days from the
receipt of the notice of denial or suspension to appeal the same. The denial or
suspension of the permit shall be effective no sooner than two (2) calendar
days from the date the notice is sent, unless that suspension is because of
exigent circumstances outlined in subsection C4 of the definition of
"substantiated report" in section
5.86.030 of this chapter, in which case, the suspension is effective
immediately. The denial or suspension shall remain effective unless and until
the order is rescinded, overturned on appeal, or determined by a court to be
contrary to equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a permit
automatically results in its revocation. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
5.86.150: APPEAL:
An applicant or registered solicitor whose permit has been denied or suspended
shall have the right to appeal to the city council or its designee. Any appeal
must be submitted by either the applicant, the responsible person or entity, or
legal counsel for either who: a) documents the relationship with the applicant
or responsible person or entity; or b) is licensed or authorized by the state
of Utah to do so, and makes the assertion of an agency relationship. The
following procedures and requirements shall apply:
   A.   Any appeal must be submitted in writing to the city recorder with a
copy to the license officer within ten (10) business days of the decision from
which the appeal is taken. Such appeal shall describe in detail the nature of
the appeal, the action complained of and the grounds for appeal.
   B.   Upon request of the applicant or registered solicitor, within one
business day, the city will make available any information upon which it relied
in making the determination to either deny or suspend the permit.
   C.   The appeals officer shall review, de novo, all written information
submitted by the applicant or registered solicitor to the license official, any
additional information relied upon by the license official as the basis for
denial, suspension or revocation, and any additional information supplied by
the city, applicant or registered solicitor. Any additional information
submitted by any party to the appeal to the appeals officer shall be
simultaneously submitted to the opposing party. If desired, any party shall
have three (3) business days to submit rebuttal documentation to the appeals
officer regarding the additional information submitted by the opposing party.
   D.   The appeals officer will render a decision no later than fifteen (15)
calendar days from the date the appeal was taken, unless an extension of time
is agreed upon by the parties. In the event that any party to the appeal
submits rebuttal information as allowed in subsection C of this section, the
fifteen (15) calendar days shall be extended to include the additional three
(3) days for rebuttal.
      1.   The denial or suspension of the permit shall be reversed by the
appeals officer if upon review of the written appeal and information submitted,
the appeals officer finds that the license official made a material mistake of
law or fact in denying or suspending the applicant's or registered solicitor's
permit.
      2.   If the written appeal and information submitted indicates that the
license official properly denied or suspended the permit of the applicant or
registered solicitor, the denial or suspension of the permit shall be affirmed
and constitute a determination that the suspended permit is revoked.
      3.   The decision of the appeals officer shall be delivered to the
applicant or registered solicitor by the means designated in the completed
application, or as otherwise agreed upon when the appeal was filed.
   E.   After the ruling of the appeals officer, the applicant or solicitor is
deemed to have exhausted all administrative remedies with the city.
   F.   Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with the applicant's,
solicitor's, or city's right to seek relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
5.86.160: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or
fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
   B.   A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to
face solicitation: 1) the name of the solicitor; 2) the name and address of the
entity with whom the solicitor is associated; and 3) the purpose of the
solicitor's contact with the person and/or competent individual. This
requirement may be satisfied through the use of the badge and an informational
flyer.
   C.   No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other
than his or her true and correct name.
   D.   No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the
granting of a permit of registration implies any endorsement by the city of the
solicitor's goods or services or of the individual solicitor. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-
2006)
5.86.170: "NO SOLICITATION" NOTICE:
   A.   Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse
solicitors by displaying a "no solicitation" sign which shall be posted on or
near the main entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to the
sidewalk leading to the residence.
   B.   The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute
notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to
receive and/or does not invite solicitors.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each residence
for the presence of any such notice.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall apply also to solicitors who are
exempt from registration pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 06-
38, 9-6-2006)
5.86.180: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS:
   A.   Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each residence for
any "no soliciting" sign or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a
solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but not limited to, "no
solicitation" signs. If such sign or placard is posted such solicitor shall
desist from any efforts to solicit at the residence or dwelling and shall
immediately depart from such property. Possession of a permit of registration
does not in any way relieve any solicitor of this duty.
   B.   It is a violation of this chapter for any person soliciting or
advocating to knock on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner
attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a "no
solicitation" sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or
attempting to engage in advocating, a home solicitation sale, door to door
soliciting, or soliciting.
   C.   It is a violation of this chapter for any solicitor through ruse,
deception, or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit, to take action
calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.
   D.   Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence or
dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart.
   E.   The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical
contact with, or touch another person without the person's consent.
   F.   The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence without their
explicit consent.
   G.   The solicitor shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person
and/or competent individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally their
lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor.
   H.   The solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures. (Ord. 06-38,
9-6-2006)
5.86.190: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at a
residence before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
Mountain Time, unless the solicitor has express prior permission from the
resident to do so. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
5.86.200: BUYER'S RIGHT TO CANCEL:
In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor to
provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the seller or
solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain buyer's signature to a written
statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the third
business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of "buyer's
right to cancel" shall be in the form required by section 70C-5-103, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953, or a current version thereof or any state or federal law
modifying or amending such provision. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
5.86.210: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any term or provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class B misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or a jail sentence of not to exceed six (6)
months. (Ord. 06-38, 9-6-2006)
CHAPTER 5.87
SWAP MEETS AND FLEA MARKETS
SECTION:
5.87.010: Definitions
5.87.020: License Required
5.87.030: License Application
5.87.040: License Fee
5.87.050: Swap Meet Licensee; Right To Issue Daily Business Licenses
5.87.060: Pawnbroker And Secondhand Dealer Restrictions
5.87.070: License Revocation
5.87.080: Posting Of Regulations Concerning Lost Property
5.87.090: Sales Subject To Law; Prohibited Sales Designated
5.87.100: Sellers' Licensing Requirements
5.87.110: Time And Procedure For Sales
5.87.120: Liability Of Principal
5.87.130: Recordkeeping Requirements, Generally
5.87.140: Lists Of Lost Or Stolen Property
5.87.150: Report Of Suspected Lost Or Stolen Goods
5.87.160: Reports To Police Department
5.87.170: Violation; Penalty
5.87.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
FLEA MARKET: Means and shall be considered a swap meet.
SWAP MEET: Any event where temporary sellers meet or gather to sell, barter
and/or exchange goods.
SWAP MEET LICENSEE: Any person who rents, lends or leases his premises to
temporary sellers for use as a marketplace to barter and exchange goods. (Ord.
05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or charity to hold a swap meet
or flea market without having first obtained a license therefor as is provided
in this chapter. The license fee for a charity may be waived by the city upon
application. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.030: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for a swap meet license shall be made to the license official, and
shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the place of business, and the
number of employees intended to be engaged, type of sale to be conducted,
description of the place where such sale is to be held, itemized list of goods,
wares and merchandise to be offered for sale (including those on order and not
received), where and from whom such stock was purchased or acquired, and if not
purchased, the manner of such acquisition, and such other additional
information as the license official may require. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.040: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for a swap meet license shall be as specified in the fee
schedule, which shall be in addition to the general business license fee. (Ord.
05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.050: SWAP MEET LICENSEE; RIGHT TO ISSUE DAILY BUSINESS LICENSES:
A swap meet licensee shall have the right to issue daily business licenses to
resident sellers upon receiving the required fee (refer to fee schedule adopted
pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title), and the signed, certified license applications listing
the goods to be sold or exchanged. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.060: PAWNBROKER AND SECONDHAND DEALER RESTRICTIONS:
No swap meet licensee shall conduct the business of pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer without having obtained the licenses required for such dealers in
addition to his swap meet license. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.070: LICENSE REVOCATION:
In addition to other penalties provided by law, any swap meet licensee
violating the provisions of this chapter may have his license revoked or
suspended. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.080: POSTING OF REGULATIONS CONCERNING LOST PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to conduct a swap meet unless he shall keep
conspicuously posted in his place of business copies of this chapter and Utah
Code Annotated section 76-6-407 (or any amendments thereto) dealing with lost
property converted by a finder. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.090: SALES SUBJECT TO LAW; PROHIBITED SALES DESIGNATED:
All swap meet sales shall be in accordance with the law. No sales of
pyrotechnics, explosives, alcoholic beverages or medicines shall be made by
sellers on the swap meet licensee's premises. No seller under the age of
eighteen (18) shall be entitled to sell or dispose of goods at the swap meet.
(Ord. 15-06, 11-4-2015)
5.87.100: SELLERS' LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All sellers shall apply to the swap meet licensee for a license to sell
on the premises of a swap meet licensee. Each seller must furnish to the swap
meet licensee a signed statement containing the required information outlined
in section
5.87.030 of this chapter along with the following certification:
I certify that I am the lawful and legal owner of the listed property which is
free and clear from all liens and encumbrances. I further certify that the
property descriptions are true and correct and I am aware that the use of a
fictitious name or furnishing false information on this form is punishable by
law. I am also aware that a copy of this application shall be forwarded to the
police department within 24 hours after it is submitted to the owner or manager
of the premises where the sale is held.
   B.   Upon receiving the required fee and application form, the swap meet
licensee shall furnish to the seller a daily business license permit which will
allow the seller to sell on the day requested, subject to revocation by the
police department for the violation of any provisions of this chapter. Any
seller having his license revoked by the police department may appeal such
revocation pursuant to the provisions of chapter 5.11 of this title, as
amended. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.110: TIME AND PROCEDURE FOR SALES:
   A.   Resident sellers must apply for a daily business license no less than
ten (10) days in advance of the day they wish to utilize a swap meet licensee's
premises. Nonresident sellers must apply to the police department for the
screening of all goods to be sold on a swap meet licensee's premises, and the
issuance of a nonresident seller's license prior to the date of the sale.
However, if the swap meet licensee employs, at its own expense, a police
department official to enforce and administer the licensing provision of this
article, then resident sellers may utilize the swap meet licensee's premises on
the same day application is made for daily business permits.
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, "resident" means a person or entity that
has a valid Utah driver's license, a Utah university or college ID containing a
resident seller's picture, or a Utah business license. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.120: LIABILITY OF PRINCIPAL:
The holder of a swap meet license is liable for any and all acts of his
employees, and for any violation by them of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.130: RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS, GENERALLY:
   A.   Every swap meet licensee doing business in the city shall keep a record
of all sellers wishing to utilize his premises. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.140: LISTS OF LOST OR STOLEN PROPERTY:
The police department shall circulate a list of reported lost and stolen
property to all swap meet licensees. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.150: REPORT OF SUSPECTED LOST OR STOLEN GOODS:
It shall be the duty of every swap meet licensee to report to the police
department any article he has reason to believe was stolen, or lost and found
by the person attempting to sell it. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.160: REPORTS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT:
It is unlawful for any swap meet licensee to fail to deliver on the date of
application to the police department, a legible and accurate copy of the
records required under section
5.87.130 of this chapter along with the seller's daily business license permit
fee. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
5.87.170: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
In addition to other penalties provided by law, any person violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. No seller
shall be deemed to have substantially complied with these provisions if:
   A.   He fails to list all the property proposed to be sold or exchanged; or
   B.   He fails to list the correct serial number or identifying mark(s) of
such property; and
   C.   He gives false information as to his identity or the property's
identity, even though such information is not specifically required by this
chapter. (Ord. 05-14, 4-6-2005)
CHAPTER 5.88
CONSTRUCTION AND MANUFACTURING TRADES
SECTION:
5.88.010: Defined
5.88.020: License Required
5.88.030: License Fee
5.88.010: DEFINED:
"Construction and manufacturing trades" means an entity primarily engaged in
the construction of building or engineering projects, preparation of sites for
new construction, subdividing land for sale as business sites, establishments
engaged in mechanical, physical, or chemical transformation of materials,
substance, or compounds into new products. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.88.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of
construction or manufacturing trades without first obtaining the licenses
required by this chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.88.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for construction and manufacturing trades shall be as
specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.89
CONVENIENCE STORES WITH GASOLINE
SECTION:
5.89.010: Defined
5.89.020: License Required
5.89.030: License Fee
5.89.010: DEFINED:
"Convenience stores with gasoline" means an entity that features ease of access
and carries a limited line of merchandise designed for the convenience of
shoppers and includes operations of gasoline pumps. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.89.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of a
convenience store with gasoline without first obtaining the licenses required
by this chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.89.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for convenience stores with gasoline shall be as
specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.90
DEPARTMENT STORE/BIG BOX
SECTION:
5.90.010: Defined
5.90.020: License Required
5.90.030: License Fee
5.90.010: DEFINED:
"Department store/big box" means an entity that engages in retailing a wide
range of products with no one merchandise line predominating. Such wide range
of products includes, but is not limited to, apparel, furniture, appliances,
and home furnishings and selected additional items such as paint, hardware,
toiletries, cosmetics, photographic equipment, jewelry, toys, and sporting
goods. Merchandise lines are normally arranged in separate departments. These
entities generally include warehouse clubs, superstores, or supercenters. (Ord.
10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.90.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of a
department store/big box without first obtaining the licenses required by this
chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.90.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for a department store/big box shall be as specified on
the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.92
SMALL RETAIL AND WHOLESALE
SECTION:
5.92.010: Defined
5.92.020: License Required
5.92.030: License Fee
5.92.010: DEFINED:
"Small retail and wholesale" means an entity that engages in retailing and/or
wholesaling one line of merchandise, such as jewelry, floral, shoes, musical
instruments, bread, beauty supplies, etc. These establishments generally
provide specialty or boutique type services and generally do not exceed seven
thousand (7,000) square feet. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.92.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of
small retail and wholesale without first obtaining the licenses required by
this chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.92.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for small retail and wholesale shall be as specified on
the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.93
MEDIUM RETAIL AND WHOLESALE SALES
SECTION:
5.93.010: Defined
5.93.020: License Required
5.93.030: License Fee
5.93.010: DEFINED:
"Medium retail and wholesale sales" means an entity that engages in retailing
and/or wholesaling one or more lines of merchandise, such as furniture or
hardware, and generally is larger than seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
(Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.93.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of
medium retail and wholesale sales without first obtaining the licenses required
by this chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.93.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for medium retail and wholesale sales shall be as
specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.94
PROFESSIONAL AND BUSINESS SERVICES
SECTION:
5.94.010: Defined
5.94.020: License Required
5.94.030: License Fee
5.94.010: DEFINED:
"Professional and business services" means an entity that provides business
type of services, including, but not limited to, accounting, consulting, and
brokering, chiropractic, computer services, repair, and training, copy
services, counseling, data processing, dental services, employment services,
engineering, family medical/outpatient services/medical services, income tax
services, financial services, law services, mortgage services, optical
services, oral surgery, orthopedics, orthodontist, physical therapy, real
estate services, security services, telemarketing, traveling agencies, and
advertising agencies. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.94.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of
professional and business services without first obtaining the licenses
required by this chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.94.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for professional and business services shall be as
specified on the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.95
FAMILY SERVICES EXCLUDING RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY PERSONS AND
PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY
SECTION:
5.95.010: Defined
5.95.020: License Required
5.95.030: License Fee
5.95.010: DEFINED:
"Family services excluding residential facilities for elderly persons and
persons with a disability" means an entity comprised of establishments that
offer services to family units, including, but not limited to, commercial
daycare, childcare, preschool, and private schools (K - 12). (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-
2010)
5.95.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of
family services excluding residential facilities for elderly persons and
persons with a disability without first obtaining the licenses required by this
chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.95.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for family services excluding residential facilities for
elderly persons and persons with a disability shall be as specified on the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.96
FOOD SERVICES
SECTION:
5.96.010: Defined
5.96.020: License Required
5.96.030: License Fee
5.96.010: DEFINED:
"Food services" means an entity that prepares meals, snacks, and beverages for
immediate consumption. Food services does not include civic and social
organizations, amusement and recreational parks, movie theaters, or other
recreational or entertainment facilities that provide food and beverage
services. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.96.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of food
services without first obtaining the licenses required by this chapter. (Ord.
10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.96.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for food services shall be as specified on the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.97
AUTOMOTIVE
SECTION:
5.97.010: Defined
5.97.020: License Required
5.97.030: License Fee
5.97.010: DEFINED:
"Automotive" means an entity that retails new or used automobiles and light
trucks, sports utility vehicles, passenger cars, and cargo vans; provides
repair, maintenance, or inspection services for such vehicles; or cleaning,
washing, and/or waxing such vehicles or trailers. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.97.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of
automotive without first obtaining the licenses required by this chapter. (Ord.
10-33, 11-10-2010)
5.97.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for automotive shall be as specified on the fee schedule
adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-33, 11-10-2010)
CHAPTER 5.98
FULL SERVICE GROCERY STORES
SECTION:
5.98.010: Defined
5.98.020: License Required
5.98.030: License Fee
5.98.010: DEFINED:
"Full service grocery stores" means an entity primarily engaged in retailing a
general line of food, including, but not limited to, canned and frozen foods,
fresh fruits and vegetables, and fresh and prepared meats, fish, and poultry,
and may include household merchandise but is not a department store/big box.
(Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.98.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of full
service grocery stores without first obtaining the licenses required by this
chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.98.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for full service grocery stores shall be as specified on
the fee schedule adopted pursuant to section
5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
CHAPTER 5.99
PERSONAL SERVICES
SECTION:
5.99.010: Defined
5.99.020: License Required
5.99.030: License Fee
5.99.010: DEFINED:
"Personal services" means an entity that provides services that are not
professional services and include, but are not limited to, instructional
services (dance, karate, tutoring), barbers, repair shops, rental shops,
funeral homes, laundromats, pet care, and tanning salons. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-
2010)
5.99.020: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or be engaged in the operation of
personal services without first obtaining the licenses required by this
chapter. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
5.99.030: LICENSE FEE:
The annual license fee for personal services shall be as specified on the fee
schedule adopted pursuant to section
 5.06.040 of this title. (Ord. 10-01, 1-20-2010)
TITLE 6
RESERVED
TITLE 7
RESERVED
TITLE 8
ANIMALS
Definitions   8.04
Administration   8.08
Permits   8.12
Pet Licensing   8.16
Rabies Control   8.20
Problems And Nuisances   8.24
Impoundment   8.28
Cruelty To Animals   8.32
Wild, Dangerous And Exotic Animals   8.36
Enforcement And Penalties   8.40
Fee Schedule   8.99
CHAPTER 8.04
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
8.04.005: Abandonment
8.04.006: Allow
8.04.010: Animal
8.04.020: Animal At Large
8.04.025: Animal Boarding Establishment
8.04.026: Animal Control Officer
8.04.027: Animal Exhibition
8.04.030: Animal Grooming Parlor
8.04.035: Animal Shelter
8.04.045: Attack
8.04.050: Bite
8.04.055: Breeder
8.04.060: Cat
8.04.065: Cattery
8.04.070: City
8.04.075: Commercial Animal Establishment
8.04.080: Custody
8.04.085: Dangerous Animal
8.04.086: Director
8.04.087: Division
8.04.090: Dog
8.04.095: Domestic Animals
8.04.096: Ear Tip
8.04.100: Enclosure
8.04.105: Euthanasia
8.04.110: Exotic Animal
8.04.111: Feral Cat
8.04.112: Feral Cat Colony
8.04.113: Ferret
8.04.115: Fierce
8.04.116: Guard Dog
8.04.124: Handler
8.04.125: Harbor
8.04.126: Health Department
8.04.130: Holding Facility
8.04.140: Humane Treatment
8.04.145: Hybrid
8.04.150: Identification
8.04.155: Impoundment
8.04.160: Kennel
8.04.170: Leash Or Lead
8.04.175: Livestock
8.04.184: Nuisance
8.04.185: On Site Impound
8.04.190: On Site Redemption
8.04.195: Overwork
8.04.200: Owner (Custodian/Caretaker)
8.04.204: Performing Animal Exhibition
8.04.205: Person
8.04.210: Pet Or Companion Animal
8.04.215: Pet Shop
8.04.220: Protective Custody
8.04.225: Provoke
8.04.230: Public Place
8.04.240: Quarantine
8.04.245: Restraint
8.04.250: Riding School Or Stable
8.04.253: Seamless Banded Pigeon
8.04.255: Set
8.04.260: Shelter
8.04.265: Species Subject To Rabies
8.04.280: Stray
8.04.285: Trap
8.04.290: Veterinarian
8.04.291: Veterinary Hospital
8.04.295: Vicious Animal
8.04.300: Wild Animal
8.04.305: Working Day
8.04.310: Worry
8.04.315: Zoological Park
8.04.005: ABANDONMENT:
"Abandonment" means placing an animal in an unsafe or dangerous environment
where the animal is separated from basic needs such as food, water, shelter, or
necessary medical attention, for a period longer than twenty four (24) hours,
or to intentionally deposit, leave, or drop off any live animal.
Abandonment includes the failure to reclaim an animal seventy two (72) hours
beyond the time agreed upon with a kennel, grooming service, veterinary
hospital, or animal shelter.
Abandonment includes the failure or refusal to either reclaim a pet from an
animal shelter or to sign relinquishment authorization. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.006: ALLOW:
"Allow", for the purpose of this title, shall include human conduct that is
intentional, deliberate, careless, inadvertent or negligent in relation to the
actions of an animal. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.010: ANIMAL:
"Animal" means any and all types of nonhuman creatures, both domestic and wild,
male and female, singular and plural. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.020: ANIMAL AT LARGE:
"Animal at large" means any animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, which is
not under restraint imposed by the owner or handler. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.025: ANIMAL BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT:
"Animal boarding establishment" means any establishment that takes in animals
for boarding for profit. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.026: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
"Animal control officer" means the city's animal control services contract
provider, any person designated by the state of Utah as a peace officer or any
other person designated by the city as an officer who is authorized to perform
the duties specified by this title. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.027: ANIMAL EXHIBITION:
"Animal exhibition" means any display, event or contest involving animals.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.030: ANIMAL GROOMING PARLOR:
"Animal grooming parlor" means any commercial establishment maintained for the
purpose of offering cosmetic services for animals for a fee. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-
2009)
8.04.035: ANIMAL SHELTER:
"Animal shelter" means any facility owned, operated, or maintained for the care
and custody of seized, stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned, unwanted
animals or animals held for the purpose of protective custody under the
authority of this title or state law. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.045: ATTACK:
"Attack" means any bite, attempted bite, or similar fierce behavior by an
animal which places a person or another animal in danger of immediate physical
harm. Actual physical contact is not required to constitute an attack. (Ord.
09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.050: BITE:
"Bite" means an actual puncture, tear or abrasion of the skin, inflicted by the
teeth of an animal. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.055: BREEDER:
"Breeder" is anyone who causes or allows the breeding of any pet identified
within this title or makes that pet available to be bred. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-
2009)
8.04.060: CAT:
"Cat" means any feline of the domesticated types more than four (4) months of
age. Any feline of the domesticated types less than four (4) months of age is a
kitten. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.065: CATTERY:
"Cattery" means an establishment where cats are boarded, bred, bought, sold, or
groomed for a fee. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.070: CITY:
"City" means the city of Taylorsville, Salt Lake County, state of Utah and all
the territory within its future municipal boundaries and shall include any
additions thereto by annexation or other legal means or any name change
thereto. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.075: COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT:
"Commercial animal establishment" means any pet shop, animal grooming parlor,
guard dog location or exhibition, riding school or stable, zoological park,
circus, rodeo, animal exhibition, cattery, kennel, or animal breeding or
housing facility. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.080: CUSTODY:
"Custody" means ownership, possession of, harboring, or exercising control over
any animal. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.085: DANGEROUS ANIMAL:
"Dangerous animal" means any animal that is a hazard to the public health and
safety by virtue of training, treatment, physical condition, or has a known
propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, or any animal which, because of
its size, predatory, or vicious nature or other characteristics, would
constitute an unreasonable danger to human life, health, or property if not
kept, maintained, or confined in a safe and secure manner. For the purpose of
this title, constrictor snakes over ten feet (10') in length will be considered
a dangerous animal, and any other constrictor snake found to be in violation of
this title. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.086: DIRECTOR:
"Director" means the director of the city's designated animal control services
contract provider or any other person designated by the city as an officer who
is authorized to perform the duties of the director specified by this title.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.087: DIVISION:
"Division" means the city's designated animal control services contract
provider or any other person, agency, or entity designated by the city to
perform the duties of the division specified by this title. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-
2009)
8.04.090: DOG:
"Dog" means any Canis familiaris more than four (4) months of age. Any Canis
familiaris less than four (4) months of age is a puppy. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.095: DOMESTIC ANIMALS:
"Domestic animals" means animals accustomed to living in or about the
habitation of man, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, ferrets, and
livestock. "Domestic animals", however, shall not include "exotic animals".
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.096: EAR TIP:
"Ear tip" means while a feral cat is under anesthesia a very small portion of
one ear is removed horizontally to indicate the feral cat has been spayed/
neutered. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.100: ENCLOSURE:
"Enclosure" means any structure that prevents an animal from escaping its
primary confines. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.105: EUTHANASIA:
"Euthanasia" means the humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method
approved by the most recent report of the American Veterinary Medical
Association panel on euthanasia that results in unconsciousness and immediate
death, or by a method that causes painless loss of consciousness and death
during such loss of consciousness. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.110: EXOTIC ANIMAL:
"Exotic animal" means any animal whose native habitat is not indigenous to the
continental United States, excluding Alaska, except tropical fish, furbearing
animals commercially bred for the furrier trade, birds, and dangerous animals.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.111: FERAL CAT:
"Feral cat" means any homeless, free roaming, wild or untamed cat. (Ord. 09-21,
5-6-2009)
8.04.112: FERAL CAT COLONY:
"Feral cat colony" means a group of feral cats living or growing together.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.113: FERRET:
"Ferret" means any domestic Mustela putorius (except the black footed ferret)
more than four (4) months of age. Any Mustela putorius less than four (4)
months of age is a kit. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.115: FIERCE:
"Fierce" means violent, hostile or aggressive temperament. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-
2009)
8.04.116: GUARD DOG:
"Guard dog" means any dog that will detect and warn its handler that an
intruder is present in or near an area that is being secured and will attack a
human pursuant to training or its handler's command. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.124: HANDLER:
"Handler" is any person who has physical control, i.e., the charge, care,
control, custody, or possession, or responsibility for the same, of an animal
at any given time. An "owner" shall be presumed to have ultimate responsibility
for the physical control of the animal and may divest himself of such
responsibility only by the transferring of, or giving permission for, actual
physical control of the animal to a legally responsible adult person of age
eighteen (18) or more. Whenever such other person of the requisite age has
responsibility for physical control of the animal, such person shall be the
"handler". At all other times, the "owner" shall be presumed to be the
"handler". (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.125: HARBOR:
"Harbor" means housing, feeding, or caring for someone else's pet within a
person's house, yard, or premises for more than twenty four (24) hours without
the permission of the owner. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.126: HEALTH DEPARTMENT:
"Health department" means the Salt Lake Valley health department. (Ord. 09-21,
5-6-2009)
8.04.130: HOLDING FACILITY:
"Holding facility" means any pet shop, kennel, cattery, animal grooming parlor,
riding school, stable, animal shelter, veterinary hospital, humane
establishment, or any other such facility used for holding animals. (Ord. 09-
21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.140: HUMANE TREATMENT:
"Humane treatment" means ensuring the provision of appropriate food, human
interaction, and care, and of protecting any animal from danger, mistreatment,
neglect, or abuse. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.145: HYBRID:
"Hybrid" means any animal, however tame or docile, that is the offspring of a
breeding between a domestic animal and a wild animal, a domestic animal and a
hybrid, or two (2) hybrid animals. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.150: IDENTIFICATION:
"Identification" means a pet license or identification tag which is attached to
the collar or harness of an animal; a microchip implanted as recommended by the
manufacturer for the specific species; or a tattoo on the animal's right ear or
on its inside right thigh or groin, or other livestock identification such as
ear tags, brands, etc. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.155: IMPOUNDMENT:
"Impoundment" means being taken into the custody of an animal control agency,
police agency or an agent thereof. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.160: KENNEL:
"Kennel" means a commercial establishment having three (3) or more dogs for the
purpose of boarding, breeding, buying, grooming, letting for hire, training for
a fee, or selling said dogs. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.170: LEASH OR LEAD:
"Leash" or "lead" means any chain, rope or device of sufficient strength used
to restrain an animal. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.175: LIVESTOCK:
"Livestock" means animals kept for husbandry, including, but not limited to,
fowl, rabbits, horses, mules, burros, asses, cattle, sheep, goats, llamas,
swine, and other farm, hoofed domesticated animals, excluding dogs, cats, and
ferrets. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.184: NUISANCE:
"Nuisance" means any animal or animals that unreasonably annoy humans, endanger
the life or health of other animals or humans, or substantially interfere with
humans', other than their owner's, enjoyment of life or property, or as defined
in chapter 8.24 of this title. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.185: ON SITE IMPOUND:
"On site impound" means to place an animal under seizure by police department
personnel, animal services personnel or an agent thereof, on a property other
than an animal services sheltering facility pending transportation or court
seizure order. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.190: ON SITE REDEMPTION:
"On site redemption" means to return an impounded animal to the owner or
caretaker prior to transportation to the sheltering facility upon collection of
all applicable impound and/or license fees. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.195: OVERWORK:
"Overwork" means to work or exercise any animal to a point of physical harm.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.200: OWNER (CUSTODIAN/CARETAKER):
"Owner" means any person, partnership, or corporation keeping, possessing,
maintaining, having an ownership interest in, or having control or custody of
an animal. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.204: PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBITION:
"Performing animal exhibition" means any spectacle, display, act, or event in
which animals are used to provide a performance whether a fee is charged or
not. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.205: PERSON:
"Person" means a natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited
to, a corporation, limited liability corporation, firm, partnership, or trust.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.210: PET OR COMPANION ANIMAL:
"Pet" or "companion animal" means any animal of a species that has been
domesticated to live in or about the habitation of humans, is dependent on
humans for food and shelter and is kept by its owner for pleasure rather than
utility and/or commercial purposes. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.215: PET SHOP:
"Pet shop" means any commercial establishment properly licensed to maintain,
keep or display dogs, cats, birds, or other household pets for sale. Pet shop
does not include government animal shelters, humane shelters as defined by
statute or veterinary clinics whose major business is veterinary medicine.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.220: PROTECTIVE CUSTODY:
"Protective custody" means seizing or receiving an animal into the care of the
division, the animal services or an authorized agent or representative thereof,
in order to hold the animal as evidence of a violation of the law or to protect
the animal(s) from further threat or danger. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.225: PROVOKE:
"Provoke" means any deliberate act by a person toward a dog or any other animal
done with the intent to tease, torment, abuse, assault, or otherwise cause a
reaction by the dog or other animal; provided, however, that any act by a
person done with the intent to discourage or prevent a dog or other animal from
attacking or molesting shall not be considered provocation. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-
2009)
8.04.230: PUBLIC PLACE:
"Public place" means any location which is accessible to members of the general
public, where members of the public gather, engage in business, or have free
access. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.240: QUARANTINE:
"Quarantine" means the isolation of an animal in an enclosure so that the
animal cannot have physical contact with other animals or persons without
recognized authority to be near or about the quarantined animal. (Ord. 09-21,
5-6-2009)
8.04.245: RESTRAINT:
"Restraint" means any animal under the physical control of its owner or person
over the age of twelve (12) years having charge, care, custody, or control of
the animal, by the means of a leash, tether, or other physical control device
or enclosure. A leash or tether shall not exceed eight feet (8') in length when
in close proximity to other animals or people. Animals confined in or upon a
motorized vehicle shall be considered restrained, providing that the animal's
body parts cannot extend beyond two inches (2") from the vehicle, when the
vehicle is not in motion and not more than the length of the distance from the
animal's shoulders to the tip of its muzzle when the vehicle is in motion.
Animals upon real property of their owner, or upon the real property of another
(with prior permission of the property owner) and under direct adult
supervision shall be considered under restraint, provided, however, that an
animal shall not be considered under restraint within the real property limits
of the owner or upon the real property of another (with prior permission of the
property owner) if an individual engaged in a normal and expected activity may
come in conflict with such animal. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.250: RIDING SCHOOL OR STABLE:
"Riding school" or "stable" means an establishment which offers boarding and/or
riding instruction for any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro, or which offers
the use of such animals for hire. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.253: SEAMLESS BANDED PIGEON:
"Seamless banded pigeon" means a pigeon that is banded by a recognized
association of pigeon fanciers. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.255: SET:
"Set" means to cock, open or put a trap in such a condition that it would close
when an object, animal or person touches a triggering device. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-
2009)
8.04.260: SHELTER:
"Shelter" means a structure which is substantial in construction and provides
protection from moisture, wind and other factors of weather, and is of a size
appropriate to the particular animal to ensure retention of body heat within
the enclosure. Any shelter will be maintained to ensure a clean, dry, healthy
environment for the animal being housed. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.265: SPECIES SUBJECT TO RABIES:
"Species subject to rabies" means any species that has been reported to the
health department or the centers for disease control and prevention to have
contracted the rabies virus and become a host for that virus. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-
2009)
8.04.280: STRAY:
"Stray" means any "animal at large", as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 09-21,
5-6-2009)
8.04.285: TRAP:
"Trap" means an apparatus designed to come together with force so as to clamp
or close upon an animal, person, or object when the spring or triggering device
is activated. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.290: VETERINARIAN:
"Veterinarian" means any person properly licensed under the laws of the state
of Utah to practice veterinary medicine. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.291: VETERINARY HOSPITAL:
"Veterinary hospital" means any establishment operated by a licensed
veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment of disease and injuries to
animals. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.295: VICIOUS ANIMAL:
"Vicious animal" means:
   A.   Any animal which, in an aggressive, terrorizing or threatening manner,
approaches any person in apparent attitude of attack;
   B.   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked or to cause injury or otherwise endanger the safety of human beings
or other animals; or
   C.   Any animal which bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks
a human being or domestic animal on public or private property, except in the
case of an injured animal or an animal which is deliberately provoked.
Whether an animal has been properly licensed under the provisions of this title
shall have no relevance to the determination of whether an animal is a "vicious
animal" as defined herein. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.300: WILD ANIMAL:
"Wild animal" means any animal of a species that in its natural life is usually
untamed and undomesticated, including hybrids, and animals which, as a result
of their natural or wild condition, cannot be vaccinated for rabies. These
animals include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Alligators and crocodiles;
   B.   Bears (Ursidae). All bears, including grizzly bears, brown bears, black
bears, etc.;
   C.   Cat family (Felidae). All except the commonly accepted domesticated
cats, including cheetah, leopard, lion, lynx, panther, mountain lion, tiger,
wildcat, etc.;
   D.   Constrictor snakes;
   E.   Dog family (Canidae). All except domesticated dogs, including wolf,
part wolf, fox, part fox, coyote, part coyote, dingo, etc.;
   F.   Lizards;
   G.   Porcupine (Erethizontidae);
   H.   Primate (Hominidae). All nonhuman primates;
   I.   Raccoon (Procyonidae). All raccoons, including eastern raccoon, desert
raccoon, ringtailed cat, etc.;
   J.   Skunks;
   K.   Venomous fish and piranha;
   L.   Venomous snakes or lizards;
   M.   Weasels (Mustelidae). All including martens, wolverines, black footed
ferrets, badgers, otters, ermine, mink, mongoose, etc.
For the purpose of this section, animals that are kept commercially or ranched
shall not be wild animals. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.305: WORKING DAY:
"Working day" means any day the West Valley City animal services sheltering
facility is open to the general public. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.310: WORRY:
"Worry" means to harass or intimidate by barking or baring of teeth, growling,
biting, shaking or tearing with the teeth; or approaching any person in an
apparent attitude of attack or any aggressive behavior which would cause a
reasonable person to feel they were in danger of immediate physical attack.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.04.315: ZOOLOGICAL PARK:
"Zoological park" means any facility properly and lawfully licensed by
applicable federal, state, or local law, operated by a person, partnership,
corporation, or government agency, other than a pet shop, kennel, or cattery,
displaying or exhibiting one or more species of nondomesticated animals. (Ord.
09-21, 5-6-2009)
CHAPTER 8.08
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
8.08.010: Enforcement Authority
8.08.020: Provider; Powers And Duties
8.08.030: Animal Control Officers; Powers And Duties
8.08.040: Right Of Entry For Enforcement
8.08.050: Interfering With Officers Prohibited
8.08.010: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
The division, other agent designated by the city, or any police officer, are
hereby authorized and empowered to enforce this title and to apprehend, to
transport and impound any animal found in violation of this title, including
licensable animals for which no license has been procured in accordance with
this title, or any licensed or unlicensed animals for any other violation
thereof and to issue criminal citations. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.08.020: PROVIDER; POWERS AND DUTIES:
The division, or other agent designated by the city, or any police officer,
shall:
   A.   Enforce this title and perform other responsibilities inherent thereto;
   B.   Supervise the animal shelter(s) under his jurisdiction;
   C.   Keep records of all animals impounded in said shelter(s);
   D.   Keep accounts of all monies collected and received in accordance with
governing law;
   E.   Establish rules and regulations for the training of all persons hired
as animal control officers to assure professional conduct of said persons and
compliance with governing law. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.08.030: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS; POWERS AND DUTIES:
Each animal control officer shall be authorized to enforce this title in all
respects pertaining to animal control within the city, including, but not
limited to, the apprehension, transport and impoundment of animals found to
warrant such action; the care of animals; the prevention of cruelty to animals;
the administrative code enforcement hearing program established by title 18 of
this code; and the issuance of criminal citations. Animal control officers
shall further carry out all lawful duties prescribed or delegated by the city
by contract or otherwise. (Ord. 13-37, 12-18-2013)
8.08.040: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR ENFORCEMENT:
In the enforcement of this title, each animal control officer is authorized to
enter into the open premises of any person to secure or take possession of any
animal which is reasonably deemed by said officer to then and there, in the
presence of said officer or official, be in violation of this title and issue
criminal citations for violations of this title to the owner or handler of said
animal. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.08.050: INTERFERING WITH OFFICERS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally interfere with any
animal control officer in the lawful discharge of his duties as prescribed in
this title. For the purpose of this section, interfering with animal control
officers shall include, but not be limited to, failing to hand over to or
release to an officer an identifiable animal which has been pursued but not
captured by said officer, failing to make payment of agreed upon fees, and
knowingly and intentionally failing to comply with an abatement order lawfully
issued by the city or the division. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
CHAPTER 8.12
PERMITS
SECTION:
8.12.010: Commercial Permit; Requirements
8.12.020: Regulatory Authority Of Division
8.12.030: Procedures
8.12.040: Requirements For Catteries And Kennels
8.12.050: Requirements For Pet Shops
8.12.055: Requirements For Animal Grooming Parlors
8.12.060: Requirements For Stables
8.12.070: Requirements For Animal Exhibitions
8.12.080: Requirements For Guard Dogs
8.12.090: Fancier's Permit; Authorized When
8.12.100: Hobby Permit
8.12.110: Permit For Foster Animals
8.12.120: Exotic Animal Permit
8.12.130: Dangerous Animal Permit
8.12.135: Feral Cat Colony Permit
8.12.137: Maintaining A Registered Feral Cat Colony; Additional Requirements
8.12.140: Backyard Chicken Permit
8.12.150: Exemptions
8.12.160: Permits; Display Requirements
8.12.170: Permit Fees; Expiration; Renewal
8.12.180: Establishments; Rules And Regulations
8.12.190: Establishments; Inspections And Reports
8.12.200: Unlawful Activities; Notice Requirements
8.12.210: Permits; Suspension Or Revocation; Grounds
8.12.220: Permits; Suspension Or Revocation; Procedure
8.12.230: Emergency Suspension Of Permits
8.12.240: Notice Of Suspension Of Permits; Service Procedures
8.12.010: COMMERCIAL PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a commercial holding
facility or any similar establishment, except a licensed veterinary hospital or
clinic, unless such person first obtains a regulatory permit from the division,
in addition to all other required licenses. All applications for permits to
operate such establishments shall be submitted, together with the required
permit fee, on a printed form provided by the division. Before the permit is
issued, approval must be granted by the health department, the appropriate
zoning authority, and the director. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.020: REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF DIVISION:
The director shall have the authority to promulgate regulations for the
issuance of permits and shall include requirements for humane care of all
animals and for compliance with the provisions of this title and other
applicable laws. Such regulations may be amended from time to time as deemed
desirable for public health and welfare and for the protection of animals.
Regulations promulgated under this delegation of authority shall not extend the
power of the director or the division beyond that reasonably necessary to carry
out the requirements of this title. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.030: PROCEDURES:
   A.   All applications for permits to operate a commercial animal
establishment or animal shelter shall be submitted to the director on a form
provided by the director.
   B.   Upon submission of an application, the director will verify with the
health department, appropriate zoning authority, and appropriate business
licensing division that the applicant is in compliance with applicable rules,
regulations, ordinances and laws.
   C.   Applications must be accompanied by the fee in accordance with the fee
schedule in chapter 8.99 of this title. The fee schedule in chapter 8.99 of
this title may be modified from time to time as deemed necessary by the
director and upon approval of the city council by resolution. The current fee
schedule as set forth in chapter 8.99 of this title shall be available from the
director.
   D.   Each permit issued under this chapter shall expire as outlined in
section
8.12.170 of this chapter.
   E.   Permits issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable.
   F.   A permit issued under this chapter shall be prominently displayed in
the business office of the commercial animal establishment or animal shelter.
   G.   Late applications for the permits required by this chapter shall be
subject to the late fee set forth in the fee schedule in chapter 8.99 of this
title. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.040: REQUIREMENTS FOR CATTERIES AND KENNELS:
In addition to obtaining the permit required by this chapter, all catteries and
kennels within the city shall comply with all zoning requirements and shall:
   A.   Be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance;
   B.   Provide an isolation area for boarded animals which are sick or
diseased, sufficiently removed so as not to endanger the health of other
animals;
   C.   Retain for a period of one year the name, address and telephone number
of the owner and license number of each dog or cat boarded;
   D.   Retain for a period of three (3) years the name and address of each
person selling, trading or giving any animal to the kennel or cattery;
   E.   Keep all boarded animals caged or under control of the owner or
operator of the kennel or cattery;
   F.   Care for all animals in the kennel or cattery, whether or not owned by
the kennel or cattery, and comply with all the requirements of this title for
the general care of animals;
   G.   Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and all
regulations respecting kennels and catteries which are adopted by the city and
in effect from time to time; and
   H.   Supply the purchaser, residing in the licensing authority of this
title, of any dog, cat or ferret with an application for animal license, the
form of which is prescribed by the city. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.050: REQUIREMENTS FOR PET SHOPS:
In addition to obtaining the permit required by this chapter, all pet shops
within the city shall comply with all zoning requirements and shall:
   A.   Be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance;
   B.   Provide an isolation area for animals which are sick or diseased,
sufficiently removed so as not to endanger the health of other animals;
   C.   Keep all animals caged or under the control of the owner or operator of
the pet store;
   D.   With respect to all animals in the pet shop, comply with all provisions
of this title providing for the general care of animals;
   E.   Not sell animals which are unweaned or so young or weak that their sale
poses a serious risk of death or inadequate development to them;
   F.   Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and all
regulations respecting pet shops that are adopted by the city and in effect
from time to time;
   G.   Supply any purchaser, residing within the city, of any dog, cat or
ferret with an application for animal license, the form of which is prescribed
by the city; and
   H.   Provide the purchaser of an animal with written instructions as to the
proper care and control of that species. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.055: REQUIREMENTS FOR ANIMAL GROOMING PARLORS:
In addition to obtaining the permit required by this chapter, all grooming
parlors within the city shall comply with all zoning requirements and shall:
   A.   Be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance;
   B.   Provide an isolation area for animals which are sick or diseased,
sufficiently removed so as not to endanger the health of other animals;
   C.   Keep all animals caged or under the control of the owner or operator of
the grooming parlor;
   D.   With respect to all animals in the grooming parlor, comply with all
provisions of this title providing for the general care of animals;
   E.   Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and all
regulations respecting grooming parlors that are adopted by the city and in
effect from time to time; and
   F.   Supply applications for animal licenses, the form of which is
prescribed by the city. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.060: REQUIREMENTS FOR STABLES:
In addition to obtaining the permit required by this chapter, all stables
within the city shall comply with all zoning requirements and shall:
   A.   Be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance;
   B.   Provide an isolation area for animals which are sick or diseased,
sufficiently removed so as not to endanger the health of other animals;
   C.   Keep all animals confined or under the control of the owner or operator
of the stable;
   D.   Care for all animals in the stable, and comply with all the
requirements of this title for the general care of animals; and
   E.   Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, and all
regulations respecting stables that are adopted by the city and in effect from
time to time. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.070: REQUIREMENTS FOR ANIMAL EXHIBITIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate, sponsor or conduct
an animal exhibition within the city without first obtaining a mass gathering
permit and, if required, a temporary business license permit issued by the
city.
   B.   No animal exhibition shall occur within the city in which any animal is
exhibited, paraded or allowed to participate in a contest:
      1.   Under conditions which cause physical injury to such animal;
      2.   Under conditions that place spectators at risk of being harmed; or
      3.   Unless all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations,
and standards adopted by reputable, nationally recognized associations
organized for the operation of such exhibitions and acceptable to the city are
complied with by the operator of the exhibition.
   C.   A person owning, operating or sponsoring an animal exhibition within
the city without first obtaining the permit therefor required by this chapter
shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. Each day of violation of this section
shall be a separate offense. The city may also seek to obtain an injunction
against an animal exhibition through a court with jurisdiction over the matter.
   D.   The application for an animal exhibition permit required by this
section shall:
      1.   Describe the type of exhibition or contest and the kind and number
of animals to be on exhibition or involved in the contest and list the sites
and dates of the event(s); and
      2.   Contain such other information as may be required under regulations
established by the director; and include a sworn statement by the applicant
that the provisions of this title pertaining to animal exhibitions will be
complied with at all times.
   E.   No permit required by this section shall be issued until the applicant
completes the application form, pays the applicable fees as set forth in the
fee schedule in chapter 8.99 of this title, and receives the written approval
of the director of the provisions made for the safety, well being and comfort
of the animals involved.
   F.   Animal exhibition permits issued pursuant to this section shall be
effective only for the period specified in the permit, not to exceed thirty
(30) days.
   G.   A permit issued pursuant to this section shall not be transferable.
   H.   A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be displayed prominently
at the site of the animal exhibition.
   I.   The city may waive the permit fee for an animal exhibition that is
sponsored by a bona fide nonprofit organization, a governmental entity or a
school if the purpose is a city public purpose or a charitable purpose.
   J.   Animal exhibitions permitted under this section shall provide immediate
access to animal control officers, health department agents, and/or Utah state
officials, for the purpose of compliance inspections. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.080: REQUIREMENTS FOR GUARD DOGS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own a guard dog without first
obtaining a guard dog permit as provided hereafter. It shall be unlawful for
any person to hire the use of a guard dog that has not been issued a guard dog
permit.
   B.   A permit required by this section shall be obtained from the division.
The application shall set forth the type of dog, the site(s) where said dog
shall be used, the hours of use of said dog, and any other information the
director deems appropriate.
   C.   Permits are not transferable from one owner to another or from one site
to another.
   D.   On the premises where a guard dog is used, conspicuous warning signs
shall be posted at each door or gate that gives access to the guard dog, and
shall contain the following wording: "Warning: A guard dog is guarding this
property. Entry herein may cause said dog to attack your person and cause
significant injury, even death. To reach the handler for said dog, call (enter
telephone number)." The telephone number contained in the warning required by
this subsection must provide a twenty four (24) hour per day access to the
guard dog's owner or handler.
   E.   A guard dog shall not be allowed to become a nuisance.
   F.   A guard dog shall, in addition to licensing, be microchipped and the
microchip number shall be registered with the division. The license shall be
attached to a one inch (1") wide red or orange collar with the word "Danger"
written or embroidered in black lettering three-fourths inch (3/4") in height.
The collar must be on the dog at all times.
   G.   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor. Each day a guard dog is deployed for use by any person for
the detection of intruders and/or protection of premises, in violation of any
provision of this section, shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 09-21, 5-
6-2009)
8.12.090: FANCIER'S PERMIT; AUTHORIZED WHEN:
   A.   Where permitted by the land use ordinances, owners of purebred dogs and
cats may obtain a permit to keep more than two (2) dogs or cats in a
residential area, provided: (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
      1.   Such pets are individually licensed;
      2.   Such pets are registered with a national registry, such as, but not
limited to, the AKC, UKC or Field Dog;
      3.   Compliance with zoning requirements, the health department and the
director;
      4.   Approval is granted by the health department and the director;
      5.   Adequate areas for shelter and confinement are provided; and
      6.   All other provisions of this title are complied with, and no pet or
premises is deemed to be a nuisance.
   B.   The holder of a permit issued under this section may keep one litter
intact until the animals reach five (5) months of age; one animal from the
litter may be retained until it reaches twelve (12) months of age. At no time
may the holder of a permit retain more animals than is indicated on the permit.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.100: HOBBY PERMIT:
Where permitted by the land use ordinances, owners of dogs, cats and ferrets
may obtain a permit to keep more than two (2) dogs, cats or ferrets in a
residential area, provided: (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   A.   Such pets are individually licensed;
   B.   Such pets are rendered sterile;
   C.   Compliance with zoning requirements;
   D.   Approval is granted by the health department and the director;
   E.   Adequate areas for confinement and shelter are provided; and
   F.   Other provisions of this title are complied with, and no pet or
premises is deemed to be a nuisance. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.110: PERMIT FOR FOSTER ANIMALS:
Where permitted by the land use ordinances, owners of dogs and cats may obtain
a permit to keep more than two (2) dogs or cats in a residential area,
provided: (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   A.   Such pets are the property of a local public animal shelter or a
section 501(c)(3), internal revenue code, animal welfare organization;
   B.   Such pets are awaiting adoption;
   C.   Compliance with zoning requirements;
   D.   Approval is granted by the health department and the director;
   E.   Adequate areas for confinement and shelter are provided; and
   F.   Other provisions of this title are complied with, and no pet or
premises is deemed to be a nuisance. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.120: EXOTIC ANIMAL PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to own or keep an exotic animal without a permit.
Unless prohibited by land use or other ordinances or laws, any person, over the
age of eighteen (18) years of age, may obtain an exotic animal permit upon:
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   A.   Demonstrating sufficient knowledge of the species to provide adequate
care;
   B.   Presenting proof of adequate caging appropriate for the species;
   C.   Presenting proof that the animal poses no threat to the health and
safety of the community in the event that the animal should escape. The
director may consult with a review board comprising federal, state and local
public health authorities in considering a request for an exotic animal permit;
and
   D.   Presenting proof of required, if any, state or federal permits.
For the purpose of this section, to demonstrate "sufficient knowledge" of a
species, a person must show that he has adequate knowledge of a species to
provide for its basic needs to maintain the animal's health and welfare. The
director may consider the person's experience, education, apprenticeship or by
examination administered by the director when determining that a person has
sufficient knowledge of a species. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.130: DANGEROUS ANIMAL PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to own or keep a dangerous animal without a
permit. Unless prohibited by land use or other ordinances or laws, any person,
over the age of eighteen (18) years of age, may obtain a dangerous animal
permit upon complying with applicable zoning requirements, and: (Ord. 09-21, 5-
6-2009; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   A.   Demonstrating sufficient knowledge of the species so as to be an expert
in the care and control of the species;
   B.   Presenting proof of adequate primary caging appropriate for the species
and a sufficient secondary system of confinement so as to prevent unauthorized
access to the animal and to prevent the animal's escape;
   C.   Presenting proof that adequate measures have been taken to prevent the
animal from becoming a threat to the health and safety of the community;
   D.   Presenting a plan of action in the event of the animal's escape. The
director may consult with a review board comprising federal, state and local
public health authorities in considering a request for a dangerous animal
permit;
   E.   Presenting proof of required, if any, state or federal permits; and
   F.   Presenting proof of liability insurance in an amount of at least one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), which policy shall name the city as an
additional insured and shall not be subject to cancellation or other material
modifications without at least thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the
city.
For the purpose of this section, to demonstrate "sufficient knowledge" of a
species, a person must show that he has specialized knowledge of a species to
provide for its basic needs to maintain the animal's health, welfare and
confinement. The director may consider the person's experience, education,
apprenticeship or by examination administered by the director when determining
that a person has sufficient knowledge of a species. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.135: FERAL CAT COLONY PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain a feral cat colony without a permit.
Unless prohibited by land use or other ordinances or laws, any person over the
age of eighteen (18) years may obtain a feral cat colony permit and shall
register a feral cat colony with the city or its designee upon: (Ord. 09-21, 5-
6-2009; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   A.   Presenting proof that the feral cats have been sterilized, given their
vaccinations as required, and ear tipped, or are being actively trapped so as
to perform sterilization, vaccination, and ear tipping;
   B.   Demonstrating that the permit holder has a detailed description of each
feral cat in the colony, including vaccination history;
   C.   Presenting proof that the permit holder has the property owner's and/or
landlord's permission at the site that the feral cat colony is being
maintained; and provides the property owner/landlord with feral cat colony
custodian contact information. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.137: MAINTAINING A REGISTERED FERAL CAT COLONY; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Holders of feral cat colony permits shall:
   A.   Take responsibility for feeding the feral cat colony regularly
throughout the year, while ensuring that the feeding area(s) is secure from
insect, rodent, and other vermin attraction and harborage;
   B.   Ensure sterilization, vaccination, and ear tipping of all adult feral
cats that can be captured. Implanting a microchip is recommended; and
   C.   Remove droppings, spoiled food, and other waste from the premises as
often as necessary and at least every seven (7) calendar days, to prevent odor,
insect or rodent attraction or breeding, or any other nuisance. (Ord. 09-21, 5-
6-2009)
8.12.140: BACKYARD CHICKEN PERMIT:
   A.   Where permitted by the land development code, persons may keep backyard
chickens on single-family owner occupied residential and agricultural lots in
accordance with the provisions of this section: (Ord. 10-07, 5-19-2010; amd.
Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
      1.   Application; Obtaining Permit: It is unlawful for any person to keep
backyard chickens without first making application for and obtaining a backyard
chicken permit.
      2.   At Large: It is unlawful for any person who is the owner, keeper, or
temporary custodian of any backyard chicken to allow the animal(s) to be at
large, off the premises or outside the approved enclosure.
      3.   Unsanitary Conditions: It is unlawful for any person to keep and
maintain in an unclean or unsanitary condition any coop, enclosure or other
structure or area in which any backyard chicken is kept. All droppings must be
cleaned at least once a week.
      4.   Nuisance: It is unlawful for the owner or keeper of any backyard
chicken to allow the animal(s) to be a nuisance to any neighbor, including, but
not limited to, creating noxious odors from the animals, their waste, coop, or
related structure or generating noise of a loud and persistent nature.
      5.   Subject To Inspection: All places where any backyard chickens are
kept shall be subject to inspection prior to a permit being issued for
cleanliness, health, and sanitation purposes by a code enforcement official,
animal control officer, or representative of the Salt Lake Valley health
department. A code enforcement official, animal control officer, or
representative of the Salt Lake Valley health department shall also be
authorized to inspect any property where backyard chickens are kept based on
any complaint or observation that the requirements of this section or
conditional use permit requirement are in violation.
      6.   Female Chickens Only: Only female chickens may be kept. No ducks,
geese, turkeys, peafowl, crowing hens, or roosters may be kept. No other bird
species shall be kept except as provided by this code and birds normally and
generally considered household or indoor pets. (Ord. 10-07, 5-19-2010)
      7.   Accessory Buildings: Chicken coops shall be considered accessory
buildings and are subject to the area provisions of the Taylorsville land
development code. Height and setback provisions shall be determined by this
section but shall in no cases violate setback or height limitations of the
zoning ordinance with the exception of proximity to a main structure. (Ord. 10-
07, 5-19-2010; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
      8.   Feed And Water Access: Chickens shall have access to feed and water
at all times in an area that is protected from wild birds, rodents, and other
predators. Any stored feed must be kept in a rodent and predator proof
container.
      9.   Personal Use Only: Backyard chickens shall be for personal use only.
The selling of eggs or fertilizer or the breeding of chickens for commercial
use is prohibited.
      10.   Slaughtering Prohibited: The slaughtering of backyard chickens on
the premises is prohibited.
      11.   Dead Birds; Rotting Eggs: Dead birds and rotting eggs shall be
removed within twenty four (24) hours and properly disposed of.
      12.   Review Of Permits: All backyard chicken permits are subject to
review upon substantiated and unresolved complaint.
      13.   Enclosure Standards:
         a.   Chickens must be contained within an enclosure or fenced area at
all times.
         b.   Backyard chicken enclosures shall be contained entirely in the
rear yard. No enclosures will be permitted in any front or side yard.
         c.   All enclosures shall have a maximum opening of two and one- half
inches (21/2").
      14.   Coop Standards:
         a.   Any backyard chicken shall be provided a covered, predator proof
and well ventilated coop that must be impermeable to rodents, wild birds, and
predators including dogs and cats. The coop shall provide a minimum of three
(3) square feet per animal and be of sufficient size to admit free movement.
         b.   Backyard chicken coops shall be located within or adjacent to the
enclosure and be contained entirely in the rear yard. No coops will be
permitted in any front or side yard.
         c.   All chicken coops shall be placed at least fifteen feet (15')
from an entrance to any habitable structure.
         d.   All chicken coops must be located at least twenty five feet (25')
from any habitable portion of a structure on a neighboring property.
         e.   Chicken coops shall be maintained in good condition.
         f.   Chicken coops shall be constructed such that:
            (1)   It is freestanding.
            (2)   Is easily accessible for cleaning and maintenance.
            (3)   Is enclosed on all sides and has a roof and door(s).
            (4)   Doors must be able to be shut and locked.
            (5)   No chicken coop shall exceed eight feet (8') in height.
            (6)   The coop shall be covered with predator and bird proof wire
with a maximum opening of one-fourth inch (1/4"). The wire shall be buried at
least three inches (3") and bent outward at least another twenty four inches
(24") to prevent rodents from burrowing into the structure unless the coop is
elevated off the ground at least twelve inches (12").
            (7)   All openings and vents shall be covered with predator and
bird proof wire with a maximum opening of one-fourth inch (1/4").
         g.   Coops may be relocated from time to time within the back yard
provided that it remains within or adjacent to the enclosure and adheres to all
setback standards.
      15.   Backyard Chicken Permit Application Requirements:
         a.   Prior to the issuance of any backyard chicken permit, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
            (1)   A completed and signed application.
            (2)   Appropriate fee.
            (3)   A site plan showing the exact location of the enclosure and
coop, including measured distances from all dwellings and property lines,
including buildings on adjacent properties.
            (4)   A photograph or illustration of the proposed enclosure and
coop, including construction materials, height, and other dimensions.
            (5)   Signed consent to an on site inspection of all enclosures,
coops and surroundings.
      16.   Side And Rear Setbacks:
         a.   Minimum rear yard: Three feet (3') minimum from any coop to any
rear property line.
         b.   Side yard setback: Three feet (3') minimum from any coop to any
side property line.
      17.   Maximum Number Of Chickens:
 
Lot Size (Square Feet) Maximum Number Of Chickens
Less than 5,000  0
5,000 to 5,999   2
6,000 to 6,999   3
7,000 to 7,999   4
8,000 to 8,999   5
9,000 to 9,999   6
10,000 to 11,999 8
12,000 or more   10
 
(Ord. 10-07, 5-19-2010)
8.12.150: EXEMPTIONS:
Research facilities where bona fide medical or related research is being
conducted, or other animal establishments operated by state or local
government, or which are licensed by federal law, are excluded from the permit
requirements of sections
8.12.040 through
 8.12.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.160: PERMITS; DISPLAY REQUIREMENTS:
A valid permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in any establishment for
which said permit is required, and such permit shall be considered as
appurtenant to the premises and not transferable to another location. The
permittee shall notify the director within thirty (30) days of any change in
his establishment or operation, which may affect the status of his permit. In
the event of a change in ownership of the establishment, the permittee shall
notify the director immediately. Permits shall not be transferable from one
owner to another. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.170: PERMIT FEES; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL:
A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year after it is
issued by the director and shall be renewable upon acceptance by the director
of a new application. Renewal applications shall not be available until thirty
(30) days prior to the expiration date of the current permit. A permit may only
be issued after the appropriate fee has been paid. Application must be
accompanied by the fee established in the permit and in accordance with the fee
schedule in chapter 8.99 of this title.
   A.   The permit and fee schedule may be modified from time to time as deemed
appropriate by the director and upon resolution by the city council. The then
current permit fee schedule shall apply to all permit applications. A copy of
the then current fee schedule shall be available from the director.
   B.   Permits are not transferable from one owner to another, from one site
to another or from one animal to another. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.180: ESTABLISHMENTS; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   A.   From time to time, the director may, upon resolution by the city
council, adopt rules and regulations governing the operation of kennels,
catteries, animal grooming parlors, pet shops, riding stables, or other animal
related establishments.
   B.   Such rules and regulations may provide for:
      1.   The type of structures, buildings, pens, cages, runways, or yards
required for the animals sought to be kept, harbored, or confined on such
premises;
      2.   The manner in which food, water, and sanitation facilities will be
provided to such animals;
      3.   Measures relating to the health and care of such animals, the
control of odors, noise, and the protection of persons or property on adjacent
premises; and
      4.   Such other matters as the city shall deem necessary.
   C.   Such rules and regulations shall, upon publication and following
adoption by the city, have the effect of law, and violation of such rules and
regulations shall be deemed a violation of this title, and grounds for
revocation of a permit issued by the city. Copies of the rules and regulations,
when adopted, shall be filed for public inspection in the office of the city
recorder and of the director. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.190: ESTABLISHMENTS; INSPECTIONS AND REPORTS:
All establishments required to have permits under this title shall be subject
to periodic inspections, and the inspector shall make a report of such
inspection, which shall be given to the establishment and will be filed with
the director. When the inspector finds a violation, the inspection form shall:
   A.   Set forth the specific violation(s) found;
   B.   Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for correction of
the violation(s) found;
   C.   State that failure to comply in the specified period of time with any
notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this section may result in
immediate suspension of the permit and/or issuance of a citation; and
   D.   State that an opportunity for a director conference upon any grievance
the owner or operator may have concerning the inspection findings and
corrections ordered by the animal control officer may be held according to the
provisions of section
8.40.040 of this title. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.200: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
If an inspection of kennels, catteries, animal grooming parlors, pet shops,
riding stables, similar establishments, or the premises of the holder of a
permit reveals a violation of this title, the inspector shall notify the permit
holder or operator of such violation as provided in section
8.12.190 of this chapter and/or issue a citation. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.210: PERMITS; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; GROUNDS:
A permit may be suspended or revoked or a permit application rejected on any
one or more of the following grounds:
   A.   Falsification of facts in a permit application;
   B.   Material change in the conditions upon which the permit was granted;
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
   C.   Violation of any provisions of this title or any other law or
regulation governing the permittee's establishment, including, but not limited
to, noise and/or building and land use ordinances; or (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009;
amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   D.   Conviction on a charge of cruelty to animals. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.220: PERMITS; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Any permit granted under this title may be suspended or revoked by the
division for violations of any of the requirements of this title. A permittee
aggrieved by the suspension or revocation of his permit may file a written
petition with the director within twenty (20) days of the director's decision
for review of said grievance. Upon consideration of said grievance and upon
good cause showing, the director may, at his sole discretion, uphold or modify
the suspension or revocation, or reinstate the permit. A permittee aggrieved by
a decision of the director may file a written petition with the mayor or a
person appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council
within twenty (20) days of the director's decision for review of said
grievance. Upon consideration of said petition and upon good cause shown, the
mayor or a person appointed by the mayor as provided herein may uphold or
modify the suspension or revocation or reinstate the permit.
   B.   A new permit shall not be issued to any person whose prior permit was
suspended or revoked by the division until the applicant has satisfied the
director that he has the means and the will to comply with the requirements of
this title in the future. An application for another permit must comply with
the requirements for an application for an initial permit, including
application fee. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.230: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF PERMITS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, when the inspecting officer
finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of kennels, catteries,
animal grooming parlors, riding stables, pet shops, or any similar
establishments, or premises of the holder of a permit obtained under this
title, which in his judgment constitute an immediate and substantial hazard to
public health or the health and safety of any animal, he may order the
immediate seizure of any animals whose health and safety are at risk and order
the owner or operator of the establishment to immediately cease operations. It
shall be unlawful for any person to whom such an order is given to fail to obey
the same. Any animals seized under this section shall be impounded or otherwise
cared for as the director deems necessary. Persons whose permit has been
suspended by such action may file a written petition with the director within
twenty (20) days of said decision for review of said suspension. Upon
consideration of said petition and upon good cause shown, the director may, at
his sole discretion, uphold or modify the emergency suspension or reinstate the
permit. Persons who are aggrieved by a decision of the director regarding such
permit may file a written petition with the mayor or a person appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the city council within twenty (20) days
of the director's decision for review of said grievance. Upon consideration of
said petition and upon good cause shown, the mayor or a person appointed by the
mayor as provided herein may uphold or modify the suspension or revocation, or
reinstate the permit. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.12.240: NOTICE OF SUSPENSION OF PERMITS; SERVICE PROCEDURES:
Notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the
inspection report form or other notice has been delivered personally to the
permit holder or person in charge, or such notice has been sent by certified
mail to the last known address of the permit holder. A copy of such notice
shall be filed with the director. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
CHAPTER 8.16
PET LICENSING
SECTION:
8.16.010: License; Required; Age And Residence Requirements For License Holder
8.16.020: License; Required; Age Of Animals
8.16.030: License; Application
8.16.040: Additional Requirements For Licensing And Keeping Ferrets
8.16.050: Veterinary Certificate
8.16.060: License; Fees; Senior Citizens
8.16.070: License; Term And Renewal
8.16.080: License; Revocation
8.16.090: License; Tag Requirements
8.16.100: License; Exemptions
8.16.110: License Vendors
8.16.120: Number Of Dogs, Cats, And Ferrets Per Residence Or Property
8.16.010: LICENSE; REQUIRED; AGE AND RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE HOLDER:
All dogs, cats and ferrets must be licensed each year, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, to a person eighteen (18) years old or older who has
a residence or property within the city. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.16.020: LICENSE; REQUIRED; AGE OF ANIMALS:
Any person owning, possessing or harboring any dog, cat or ferret within the
city shall obtain a license for such animal within thirty (30) days after the
animal reaches the age of four (4) months, or, in the case of a dog, cat or
ferret over four (4) months of age, within thirty (30) days of the acquisition
of ownership or possession of the animal by said person. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.16.030: LICENSE; APPLICATION:
License applications must be submitted to the division, utilizing a standard
form which requests name, address and telephone number of the applicant; breed,
sex, color and age of the animal; previous license information, rabies and
sterilization information; and the number, location or other information
applicable to a tattoo or implanted microchip of the animal. The application
shall be accompanied by the prescribed license fee and by a rabies vaccination
certificate current for a minimum of six (6) months beyond the date of
application. A license shall not be issued for a period that exceeds the
expiration date of the rabies vaccination. A licensed veterinarian shall give
rabies vaccinations with a vaccine approved by the current compendium of animal
rabies control. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.16.040: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSING AND KEEPING FERRETS:
Without limiting any other requirements of this title, those wishing to keep
ferrets must adhere to the following requirements:
   A.   First time applicants for ferret licenses must present, in addition to
the requirements of section
8.16.030 of this chapter, proof of applicant's satisfactory completion of a
ferret ownership class. The class must have the approval/certification of the
director and must, at a minimum, include the following:
      1.   Explanation of the dangers ferrets present to people and other
animals; and
      2.   Explanation of the dangers of owning a ferret in a household with
infants and small children.
   B.   All ferrets must be vaccinated against rabies at least annually.
   C.   An identifying microchip must be implanted in each ferret, and the
microchip number must be included with each license application.
   D.   No more than two (2) adult ferrets may be kept in a household at any
time, and no more than two (2) litters of kits under the age of five (5) months
may be kept in a household at any time.
   E.   All owners shall make their ferret housing facilities and the health of
their ferrets open to inspection by the division once each year, including an
initial inspection upon application for a ferret license.
   F.   Ferrets shall be kept primarily as indoor pets, and shall be housed in
a cage or kennel of sufficient size and construction to allow proper space and
safekeeping of the ferret. When a ferret is outside, it shall be kept on a
harness with a leash not over six feet (6') in length specifically designed for
ferrets.
   G.   The city encourages owners to sterilize and de-scent their ferrets.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.16.050: VETERINARY CERTIFICATE:
No dog, cat or ferret will be licensed as spayed or neutered without veterinary
certificate that such surgery has been performed. If a veterinarian opines in
writing that a dog, cat or ferret has been spayed or neutered, such written
opinion may constitute a veterinary certificate. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.16.060: LICENSE; FEES; SENIOR CITIZENS:
A person sixty (60) years of age or older on the date of license application
may, upon proof of that person's age, obtain a senior citizen dog, cat or
ferret license for an unsterilized animal for an annual fee as set forth in the
fee schedule in chapter 8.99 of this title. A person sixty (60) years of age or
older may obtain a senior citizen dog, cat or ferret license for the life of a
spayed or neutered animal for a onetime fee as set forth in the fee schedule in
chapter 8.99 of this title, but such person shall nevertheless obtain a license
tag, as needed, without fee thereafter. This section shall not be construed to
relieve any person from meeting all licensing requirements not specifically
exempted, including late fees and required vaccinations, nor is any license
issued hereunder transferable to any other animal or owner other than that for
which the license was issued. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.16.070: LICENSE; TERM AND RENEWAL:
The license shall be issued for one year, and be effective from the date of
purchase, through the end of the same month of the expiration year as the month
in which the license is purchased, or at the end of the rabies vaccination
period current for the animal at the time the license is obtained, whichever
date occurs first. Renewals must be obtained prior to the expiration of the
immediately preceding license. Applications for renewals made after the
expiration of the immediately preceding license must be accompanied by a late
fee in accordance with the fee schedule in chapter 8.99 of this title. (Ord.
09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.16.080: LICENSE; REVOCATION:
If the owner of any dog(s), cat(s) or ferret(s) is found to be in violation of
this title on three (3) or more different occasions, within a twelve (12) month
period, the director may seek a court order pursuant to chapter 8.40 of this
title, revoking for a period of one year any and all license(s) such person may
possess, and providing for the division to pick up and impound any animal kept
by the person under such order. Any animal impounded pursuant to such an order
shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this title for
impounded animals, except that the person under the order of revocation shall
not be allowed to redeem such animal, as provided in this title, unless
successfully making reapplication of the license with the director. Persons
seeking reapplication of said license must comply with conditions as set forth
by the director that may include, but not be limited to, sterilization of the
animal(s), enclosure requirements and confinement conditions. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-
2009)
8.16.090: LICENSE; TAG REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Upon payment of the license fee, the director shall issue to the owner
a receipt and a tag for each pet licensed. The tag shall have stamped thereon
the license number, corresponding with the tag number on the receipt. The owner
shall attach the tag to the collar or harness of the animal and see that the
animal constantly wears the collar and tag. Failure to attach the tag as
provided shall be a violation of this title, except that dogs or cats which are
kept for show purposes are exempt from wearing the collar and tag while
participating in an animal exhibition.
   B.   Tags are not transferable from one animal to another or from one owner
to another. No refunds shall be made on any dog, cat, or ferret license fee for
any reason whatsoever. Replacement for lost or destroyed tags shall be allowed
upon payment to the division of the replacement tag fee set forth in the fee
schedule in chapter 8.99 of this title.
   C.   Any person who removes, or causes the removal of, the collar, harness,
or tag from any licensed dog, cat, or ferret without the consent of the owner
or keeper thereof, except a licensed veterinarian or animal control officer who
removes such for medical or other reasons, shall violate this title.
   D.   Owners may have an identifying microchip implanted in their animals. If
owners take such action, they may be exempt from the requirement that such
animals wear identifying tags at all times while on the owner's premises,
provided that the microchip information has been registered with the division.
Owners shall assume the risk of the loss or destruction of an unrestrained
animal whose microchip either cannot be located after a reasonable search
therefor or owner information cannot be found after a reasonable records
search.
   E.   It is the responsibility of any vendor of microchips to provide
information to the division as to the identification of the owner of an animal
that has been microchipped by said vendor. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.16.100: LICENSE; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of sections
8.16.010 through
8.16.090 of this chapter shall not apply in the following circumstances:
      1.   The dog, cat or ferret is properly licensed in another jurisdiction
and the owner thereof is within the city temporarily, for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) consecutive days. If the owner shall be within the city
temporarily, but for a period longer than thirty (30) consecutive days, he may
transfer the dog, cat or ferret license to the local license required by this
chapter by payment of the fee set forth in the fee schedule in chapter 8.99 of
this title, and upon presentment of proof of a current rabies vaccination for
the animal.
      2.   Individual dogs, cats or ferrets housed within a properly permitted
facility or other such establishment when such animals are held for resale for
a period not to exceed twelve (12) months.
   B.   The licensing provisions of sections
8.16.010 through
8.16.080 of this chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Seeing eye dogs trained and certified to assist blind persons, if
such dogs are actually used by blind persons to assist them in moving from
place to place;
      2.   Hearing dogs trained and certified to assist deaf persons to aid
them in responding to sounds and in use for that purpose;
      3.   Assistance dogs trained and certified to assist persons with a
physical disability and in use for that purpose; or
      4.   Dogs trained to assist officials of government agencies in the
performance of their duties and which are owned by such agencies.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to exempt any dog, cat
or ferret located within the city from having a current rabies vaccination.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.16.110: LICENSE VENDORS:
The director may contract with veterinary hospitals, veterinarians, pet shops,
animal grooming parlors, and similar institutions or individuals for the
issuance of license application forms. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.16.120: NUMBER OF DOGS, CATS, AND FERRETS PER RESIDENCE OR PROPERTY:
No person or persons at any one residence or property within the city shall at
any one time own, harbor, or license more than two (2) adult dogs, cats, or
ferrets of any one species and no more than four (4) total dogs, cats, or
ferrets in any combination except as otherwise provided in this chapter and in
chapter 8.12 of this title. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
CHAPTER 8.20
RABIES CONTROL
SECTION:
8.20.010: Dog, Cat And Ferret Rabies Vaccination Requirements
8.20.020: Rabies Vaccination; When Valid
8.20.030: Rabies Vaccination; Veterinarian Duties; Certification And Tags
8.20.040: Impoundment Of Animals Without Valid Vaccination Tags
8.20.050: Rabid Animal Reports
8.20.060: Animals Exposed To Rabies
8.20.070: Management Of Animals That Bite Humans
8.20.080: Management Of Animals That Bite Other Animals
8.20.010: DOG, CAT AND FERRET RABIES VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The owner or person having charge, care, custody, and control of a
ferret, cat, or dog four (4) months of age or older shall have such animal
vaccinated against rabies and shall thereafter ensure that said animal is
revaccinated as often as is required to maintain the animal in a current rabies
vaccination status. Any person permitting any animal to habitually be on or
remain, or be lodged or fed within such person's house, yard or premises shall
be responsible for the vaccinations of the animal. Unvaccinated ferrets, dogs,
or cats over four (4) months of age acquired by the owner or moved into the
jurisdiction must be vaccinated within thirty (30) days of acquisition or
arrival. Every dog, cat, and ferret shall have a current rabies vaccination
with a rabies vaccine approved by the current compendium of animal rabies
control.
   B.   Veterinarians, cattery and kennel operators shall be responsible for
determining that dogs, cats and ferrets are currently vaccinated for rabies
prior to accepting the animal, from their owners or caretakers, for temporary
housing on their premises.
   C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a veterinarian
providing emergency medical care to a sick or injured animal. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-
2009)
8.20.020: RABIES VACCINATION; WHEN VALID:
   A.   Animals that have had a valid vaccination for rabies will not be
considered to have a current vaccine until thirty (30) days following the first
vaccination and will be considered unvaccinated the day following the
expiration of the last documented valid vaccination.
   B.   For the purpose of management of bite cases, an owner may, within the
six (6) months of expiration of the last vaccine, submit proof of protection
against rabies. Such proof shall be in the form of a written statement from a
veterinarian based upon a blood titer paid for by the owner, drawn after the
bite and prior to, or within ten (10) days of, any revaccination. (Ord. 09-21,
5-6-2009)
8.20.030: RABIES VACCINATION; VETERINARIAN DUTIES; CERTIFICATION AND TAGS:
   A.   It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, when vaccinating any animal
for rabies, to complete a certificate of rabies vaccination, in duplicate,
which includes the following information:
      1.   Owner's name and address;
      2.   Description of the animal (breed, sex, markings, age, name);
      3.   Date of vaccination;
      4.   Vaccination expiration date;
      5.   Rabies vaccination tag number;
      6.   Type of rabies vaccine administered; and
      7.   Manufacturer's serial number of vaccine.
   B.   A copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the owner and the
original retained by the issuing veterinarian. The veterinarian and the owner
shall retain their copies of the certificate for the interval between
vaccinations specified in this chapter.
   C.   Additionally, a metal or durable plastic rabies vaccination tag,
serially numbered, may be securely attached to the collar or harness of the
animal. An animal discovered in public view and not wearing a rabies tag, or
current license tag, shall be deemed to be unvaccinated and may be impounded or
seized in accordance with law and dealt with pursuant to this title. (Ord. 09-
21, 5-6-2009)
8.20.040: IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS WITHOUT VALID VACCINATION TAGS:
   A.   Any vaccinated animal impounded because of a lack of a rabies
vaccination tag may be reclaimed by its owner upon the owner furnishing a valid
rabies certificate including the animal's description and payment of all fees
attributable to said animal's apprehension and impoundment accrued up to the
date of release.
   B.   Any unvaccinated animal may be reclaimed by its owner prior to disposal
of said animal under the procedures set forth hereafter in section
8.28.040 of this title by payment of all fees attributable to said animal's
apprehension and impoundment and by the owner posting a rabies deposit as
specified in the fee schedule in chapter 8.99 of this title. Said deposit may
be recovered by owner upon showing proof of rabies vaccination within seventy
two (72) hours of release.
   C.   Any animal not reclaimed prior to the period specified in section
8.28.050 of this title shall be disposed of pursuant to that section. (Ord. 09-
21, 5-6-2009)
8.20.050: RABID ANIMAL REPORTS:
   A.   Any person having knowledge of the presence or whereabouts of an animal
known to have been exposed to or reasonably suspected of having rabies and any
person having knowledge of an animal or person bitten by a wild or domestic
mammal or bat shall report such knowledge and all pertinent information
available to the director and the health department. Any person having custody
of such animal shall confine the animal pending direction from the director or
the health department.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge of the presence or
whereabouts of an animal known to have been exposed to, or reasonably suspected
of having, rabies; or of an animal or person bitten by such an animal; to
harbor, protect, or otherwise interfere with the apprehension or identification
of said animal or persons by wilfully withholding such knowledge from an animal
control officer or any other officer of the city, the division, the health
department or the Utah state department of health.
   C.   It shall be a violation of this title for an owner, or other person
having the care, custody and control of an animal known, suspected, or deemed
to have been exposed to rabies as set forth in this section to fail to
surrender said animal immediately upon demand by any animal control officer or
officer of the city, the division, the health department or the Utah state
department of health. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.20.060: ANIMALS EXPOSED TO RABIES:
Any animal potentially exposed to rabies virus by a wild or domestic mammal or
a bat shall be regarded as having been exposed to rabies pending successful
completion of testing and/or quarantine of the biting animal.
   A.   Unvaccinated dogs, cats, and ferrets exposed to a rabid animal shall be
euthanized immediately. If the owner is unwilling to have this done, the animal
shall be placed in quarantine for up to six (6) months in a location agreeable
to the director and monitored by a veterinarian, at the owner's expense, and
vaccinated one month before being released.
   B.   Dogs, cats, and ferrets that are currently vaccinated shall be
revaccinated immediately, kept under the owner's control and observed for forty
five (45) days.
   C.   Livestock shall be handled as per the current compendium of animal
rabies control. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.20.070: MANAGEMENT OF ANIMALS THAT BITE HUMANS:
   A.   An apparently healthy dog, cat, or ferret that bites a person shall be
quarantined and the following provisions shall apply:
      1.   The animal shall be observed for a period of not less than ten (10)
days by the division and/or the health department, and the owner of the animal
shall be responsible for the cost of such quarantine.
      2.   The normal place for such quarantine shall be the division's animal
shelter; however, other arrangements suitable to the director may be made for
the period of observation specified herein upon the condition that the biting
animal had a current rabies vaccination at the time the bite is inflicted.
      3.   A person having custody of an animal under quarantine at a place
other than the division's animal shelter shall immediately notify the director
and the division if the animal shows any signs of sickness or abnormal
behavior, or if the animal escapes from quarantine.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person who has custody of a quarantined
animal to fail or refuse to allow an officer of the city, the division, the
health department or a veterinarian designated by them, to make an inspection
or examination of the animal during, and/or at the end of the period of
quarantine.
      5.   If the quarantined animal dies within ten (10) days from the date of
the bite for which the animal was quarantined, the person having custody of
said animal shall immediately notify the director and the division of such fact
and immediately deliver the animal to that person's veterinarian or the
division for the removal and delivery of the head of said animal to a
laboratory specified by the Utah state department of health for examination for
rabies.
      6.   At the end of the quarantine period, the director or designee shall
examine the quarantined animal and if no sign of rabies is present in the
animal, the animal may be released to its owner. Stray animals shall be
disposed of as provided in section
8.28.050 of this title.
      7.   If, during the quarantine, the animal exhibits symptoms of rabies,
it shall be immediately destroyed and tested.
      8.   Any stray or unwanted dog, cat or ferret that bites a person may be
euthanized immediately and submitted for rabies examination, if an immediate
examination is determined necessary by the director or the health department.
   B.   Animals other than dogs, cats, or ferrets that might have exposed a
person to rabies shall be reported immediately to the director and the health
department. Case management will be a collaborative effort between the health
department and the division.
   C.   If any animal bites or attacks a person or another animal two (2) or
more times in a twelve (12) month period, or if the director deems the bite or
attack to be vicious by virtue of the severity of the bite, such animal may be
immediately impounded, pending legal action, at the scene by the division
without court order and held at the owner's expense.
   D.   The director may seek a court order for the destruction of an animal as
he deems necessary. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.20.080: MANAGEMENT OF ANIMALS THAT BITE OTHER ANIMALS:
   A.   An apparently healthy dog, cat, or ferret that bites another animal
shall be quarantined as determined by the division, and the following
provisions shall apply:
      1.   The animal shall be observed for a period of not less than ten (10)
days by the division and/or the health department at a location determined by
the division, and the owner of the animal shall be responsible for the cost of
such quarantine.
      2.   The normal place for such quarantine shall be the division's animal
shelter; however, other arrangements suitable to the director may be made for
the period of observation specified herein upon the condition that the biting
animal had a current rabies vaccination at the time the bite is inflicted.
      3.   A person having custody of an animal under quarantine at a place
other than the division's animal shelter shall immediately notify the director
and the division if the animal shows any signs of sickness or abnormal
behavior, or if the animal escapes from quarantine.
      4.   It shall be unlawful for any person who has custody of a quarantined
animal to fail or refuse to allow an officer of the city, the division, the
health department or a veterinarian designated by them, to make an inspection
or examination of the animal during, and/or at the end of the period of
quarantine.
      5.   If the quarantined animal dies within ten (10) days from the date of
the bite for which the animal was quarantined, the person having custody of
said animal shall immediately notify the director and the division of such fact
and immediately deliver the animal to that person's veterinarian or the
division for the removal and delivery of the head of said animal to a
laboratory specified by the Utah state department of health for examination for
rabies.
      6.   At the end of the quarantine period, the director or designee shall
examine the quarantined animal and if no sign of rabies is present in the
animal, the animal may be released to its owner. Stray animals shall be
disposed of as provided in section
8.28.050 of this title.
      7.   If, during the quarantine, the animal exhibits symptoms of rabies,
it shall be immediately destroyed and tested.
      8.   Any stray or unwanted dog, cat or ferret that bites another animal
may be euthanized immediately and submitted for rabies examination, if an
immediate examination is determined necessary by the director or the health
department. (Ord. 14-04, 3-19-2014)
CHAPTER 8.24
PROBLEMS AND NUISANCES
SECTION:
8.24.010: Nuisance; Penalties For Allowing
8.24.015: Animal Causing A Nuisance
8.24.020: Fierce, Dangerous Or Vicious Animals
8.24.025: Animal Bites; Reporting Requirements
8.24.030: Attacks By Animals; Owner Liability; Authorizing Destruction
8.24.040: Control And Fencing Of Livestock
8.24.050: Harboring Stray Animals; Unlawful Confinement Or Concealment Of
Animals
8.24.060: Animals Running At Large
8.24.070: Staking Animals Improperly
8.24.080: Female Pets In Heat
8.24.090: Animals Prohibited In Designated Areas
8.24.100: Animal Trespass
8.24.010: NUISANCE; PENALTIES FOR ALLOWING:
Any owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of an animal or
animals causing a "nuisance", as defined in this title, shall be guilty of
allowing a nuisance in violation of this title and subject to the penalties
provided herein. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.24.015: ANIMAL CAUSING A NUISANCE:
An animal causing a nuisance includes, but is not limited to, any animal that:
   A.   Is repeatedly found at large;
   B.   Damages the property of anyone other than its owner;
   C.   Repeatedly molests or intimidates neighbors, pedestrians, cyclists, or
passersby by lunging at fences, chasing, or acting aggressively toward such
person(s), unless provoked by such person(s) or acts in such a way to cause
unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort;
   D.   Chases vehicles;
   E.   Makes disturbing noises, including, but not limited to, continued and
repeated howling, barking, whining, or other noise which causes unreasonable
annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others;
   F.   Causes fouling of the air by odors and thereby creates unreasonable
annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others;
   G.   Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the
animal is kept or harbored;
   H.   Defecates on any public sidewalk, park or building, or on any private
property without the consent of the owner of such private property, unless the
handler of such animal shall have in his possession the instruments to clean up
after his animal and shall remove the animal's feces to a proper trash
receptacle;
   I.   Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by
virtue of the number and/or types of animals kept or harbored;
   J.   Attacks people or other animals, whether such attack results in actual
physical harm to the person or animal to whom or at which the attack is
directed or not;
   K.   Has been found by a court or by any other commission or board lawfully
established under Utah law, to be a public nuisance under any other provision
(s) of Utah law;
   L.   Cannot be restrained by normal restraints, such as standard leashes,
standard chains, or muzzles;
   M.   Cannot be effectively controlled by its owner or handler.
The fact, or evidence of the fact, that the factors alleged to have caused the
animal to be a nuisance are inherent and/or natural behavior for such animal,
or the action of the owner or animal are otherwise legal, shall not negate or
excuse a charge of nuisance. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.24.020: FIERCE, DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   It is unlawful for the owner of any fierce, dangerous or vicious animal
to permit such animal to go or be off the premises of the owner unless such
animal is under restraint and properly muzzled so as to prevent it from
injuring any person or property. Every animal so vicious and dangerous that it
is not or cannot be effectively controlled by its owner or person having
charge, care, custody, or control of such animal through the use of reasonable
restraints, is a hazard to public safety, and the director may seek a court
order for destruction, muzzling, or appropriate housing and confinement of the
animal.
   B.   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 13-37, 12-18-2013)
8.24.025: ANIMAL BITES; REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Persons who obtain knowledge that an animal has bitten another animal
or a human shall report the fact(s) to the director within twenty four (24)
hours of the bite, regardless of whether the biting animal is of a species
subject to rabies.
   B.   A physician, or other medical personnel, who renders professional
treatment to a person bitten by an animal shall report that fact to the
director and the health department within twenty four (24) hours of his first
professional attendance. Said report shall include the name, sex and address of
the person bitten as well as the type and location of the bite. If known, the
person making the report shall give the name and address of the owner of the
animal that inflicted the bite, and any other facts that may assist the
director in ascertaining the immunization status of the animal.
   C.   A veterinarian, or other person who treats an animal bitten, injured or
mauled by another animal shall report that fact to the director. The report
shall contain the name and address of the owner of the injured animal, the name
and address of the owner, if known, of the animal which caused the injury, and
a description of the animal, if known, which caused the injury, and the
location of the incident.
   D.   Any person not conforming with the requirements of this section shall
be in violation of this title. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.24.030: ATTACKS BY ANIMALS; OWNER LIABILITY; AUTHORIZING DESTRUCTION:
   A.   It is unlawful for the owner or person having charge, care, custody or
control of any animal to allow such animal to attack, chase or worry any human,
domesticated animal, any species of hoofed wildlife protected by any law or
ordinance, or any pet or companion animal.
   B.   Any penalty imposed as a result of prosecution of a person under
subsection A of this section shall be in addition to any penalties or
liabilities imposed upon such person by any other law or ordinance.
   C.   The following shall be considered in mitigating the penalties or
damages, or in dismissing a charge brought under subsection A of this section:
      1.   The animal was properly confined on the premises;
      2.   The animal was deliberately or maliciously provoked; or
      3.   The animal was already injured and was defending itself.
   D.   Any person may kill (or take other protective action against) an animal
while it is committing any of the acts specified in subsection A of this
section, while such animal is being pursued after committing any of such acts,
or to protect themselves, or members of the public, from any threat of death or
personal injury then being posed by the animal.
   E.   Every person owning or keeping an animal shall be liable in damages for
injuries committed by such animal, and it shall not be necessary in any action
brought therefor to allege or prove that such animal was of a vicious or
mischievous disposition or that the owner or keeper thereof knew that it was
vicious or mischievous. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.24.040: CONTROL AND FENCING OF LIVESTOCK:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person owning or harboring an animal of a class
of livestock to allow, either negligently or with specific intent, the
livestock to run at large in an area where such is not permitted by law or to
otherwise permit the livestock to be herded, pastured or to go upon the land of
another.
   B.   Adequate fencing shall be erected and maintained to prevent the
livestock's escape, as specified in subsection C of this section.
   C.   All fencing of property where a class of livestock is kept shall be of
sufficient construction to prevent the escape of or injury to the livestock
being confined within the fencing. The fencing shall be maintained so that no
part of such fence, absent extraordinary circumstances, may be broken, damaged
or in any way create the possibility of injury to the confined livestock or to
allow the escape thereof.
   D.   Construction, maintenance and repair of fencing shall be the
responsibility of the property owner and will be constructed in a manner which
is appropriate to the containment of all types of livestock confined therein.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.24.050: HARBORING STRAY ANIMALS; UNLAWFUL CONFINEMENT OR CONCEALMENT OF
ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, except animal establishments
operated by state or local governments, to harbor or keep any lost or stray
animal. Whenever a lost or stray animal is retained or harbored by an animal
welfare society, it shall be the duty of such animal welfare society to notify
the division within twenty four (24) hours and the division shall impound the
animal as provided herein.
   B.   Whenever any animal shall be found which appears to be lost or strayed,
it shall be the duty of the finder to notify the division within twenty four
(24) hours, and the division shall impound the animal as provided herein. (Ord.
09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.24.060: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any owner, handler or any person harboring any animal
to allow such animal at any time to run at large. The owner, handler or person
harboring an animal found running at large shall be strictly liable for
violations of this section regardless of precautions taken to prevent the
escape of the animal regardless of whether or not he knows the animal is
running at large. The owner, handler or person harboring any animal shall be
liable in damages for injuries committed by such animal. Run at large does not
mean release of seamless banded pigeons for exercise or performance. (Ord. 09-
21, 5-6-2009)
8.24.070: STAKING ANIMALS IMPROPERLY:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to chain, stake or tether any animal on
any unenclosed premises in such a manner that the animal may go beyond the
property line unless such person has permission of the owner of the affected
property.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to chain, stake or tether any animal on
any premises in a manner that prevents the animal from having access to food,
water, or shelter. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.24.080: FEMALE PETS IN HEAT:
Any owner or person having charge, care, custody or control of any female pet
in heat shall, in addition to restraining such pet from running at large, cause
such pet to be constantly confined in a building or other structure so as to
prevent it from attracting by scent or coming into contact with other animals
and creating a nuisance. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.24.090: ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN DESIGNATED AREAS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to take or permit any animal, whether
loose or on a leash or in arms, in or about any establishment or place of
business where food or food products are sold or displayed, or served,
including, but not limited to, restaurants, grocery stores, meat markets and
fruit or vegetable stores.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person keeping, harboring or having charge or
control of any animal to allow such animal to be within protected watershed
areas as designated by either the health department or any public water
district.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to chain, stake or tether any animal in a
public place unless the owner or handler of the animal is continually present
and the animal is properly restrained so that the animal poses no threat of
contact with a person engaged in a normal and expected activity.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person to take or permit any unrestrained animal
in any public park located within the city. Any animal in a public park must be
continually kept on a leash, not over eight feet (8') in length, which is of
sufficient strength to ensure that the animal's owner or handler shall at all
times have absolute control over the animal except for designated off leash
areas. The director may grant exceptions to this subsection for a licensed
animal exhibition.
   E.   This section shall not apply to dogs provided for in subsection
8.16.100B of this title, or when the director of the health department adopts
rules and regulations, which are subsequently ratified by the city council,
which set forth the times and places where the dog or dogs may be allowed
without compromising the health and safety of humans, causing a nuisance, or
damaging property. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.24.100: ANIMAL TRESPASS:
It is unlawful for the owner or handler of an animal to allow such animal to
trespass on the property of another. Any trespassing animal may be confined
provided the person confining the animal notifies the division within twenty
four (24) hours of such confinement. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
CHAPTER 8.28
IMPOUNDMENT
SECTION:
8.28.010: Animal Shelter And Facilities
8.28.020: Impoundment Authorized; When
8.28.030: Impoundment; Recordkeeping Requirements
8.28.040: Redemption Of Animals; Restrictions
8.28.050: Term Of Impoundment; Destruction Or Other Disposition Of Animals
8.28.060: Sterilization Of Adopted And Impounded Animals
8.28.010: ANIMAL SHELTER AND FACILITIES:
   A.   The city shall be responsible, within its legislative discretion, to
provide (by contract with the division or otherwise) suitable premises and
facilities to be used as an animal shelter where impounded animals can be kept.
The city, through the division, shall purchase and supply food and provide care
for impounded animals.
   B.   The city, through the division, shall provide for the destruction of
dogs, cats, ferrets, and other animals for which destruction is authorized by
this title or by Utah law. Destruction shall be accomplished in accordance with
standards established by the American Veterinary Medical Association, or in
accordance with any other nationally recognized standards established for the
proper destruction of animals; or by any method which, in the discretion of the
director or the division, is proper under the then existing circumstances.
   C.   The city or the division may furnish, when deemed necessary at the
discretion of the director or division personnel, medical treatment to animals
impounded pursuant to this title. Prior consent for such treatment from the
owners of such animals shall not be required.
   D.   The owner of any affected animals shall be required to post a bond, as
provided in subsection
8.28.040E of this chapter, and/or pay the cost of the impound and any care and
keeping, medical treatment, euthanasia, and disposal provided or performed
under the authority of this title with respect to such animal. (Ord. 09-21, 5-
6-2009)
8.28.020: IMPOUNDMENT AUTHORIZED; WHEN:
   A.   An animal control officer may impound, or leave an animal in the
custody of its owner or handler, according to said officer's discretion,
whenever such animal is found to be in circumstances which violate the
requirements of this title. If left in the custody of the owner or handler,
said owner or handler shall nevertheless be required to respond to the
administrative code enforcement hearing program established by title 18 of this
code.
   B.   An animal found in the following circumstances may be impounded by an
animal control officer without the filing of a criminal complaint or obtaining
a prior order from a court of competent jurisdiction:
      1.   The animal is running at large outside its owner's or handler's
premises;
      2.   Any animal which is required by this title to be licensed and is not
licensed. An animal not wearing a license tag shall be presumed to be
unlicensed for the purpose of this subsection;
      3.   The animal is sick or injured and its owner cannot be immediately
located;
      4.   The animal's owner or handler requests the division to impound the
animal and posts a bond, as provided in subsection
8.28.040E of this chapter, or pays, in advance, a fee reasonably calculated to
pay for the cost the division will reasonably incur during impoundment and
possible destruction of the animal;
      5.   The animal is abandoned;
      6.   Animals which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with this
title. For the purpose of this subsection, an animal not wearing a rabies tag
shall be presumed to be unvaccinated;
      7.   The animal is known by the animal control officer to have been
exposed to rabies or bitten by a rabid animal;
      8.   The animal is to be otherwise held for quarantine;
      9.   The animal is a vicious animal and not properly confined or
restrained as required by section
8.24.020 of this title;
      10.   The animal is not being kept or maintained as required by any other
provision of this title, and as a result thereof, the animal poses an imminent
threat to the health and safety of persons, other animals, or itself;
      11.   Any animal in physical distress; or
      12.   Any animal considered a nuisance or a public nuisance animal.
   C.   The circumstances set forth above in this section are not intended to
be a complete list of those in which the city, the division, and/or an animal
control officer may impound an animal without a prior order from a court of
competent jurisdiction; and said officers are authorized to act as necessary to
maintain the peace and safety of the city under the requirements of this title
and all other applicable law. (Ord. 13-37, 12-18-2013)
8.28.030: IMPOUNDMENT; RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
The impounding facility shall keep record of each animal impounded, which shall
include the following information:
   A.   Complete description of the animal, including tag numbers;
   B.   The manner and date of impound;
   C.   The location of the pick up and name of the officer picking up the
animal;
   D.   The manner and date of disposal;
   E.   The name and address of the person who redeems, purchases or adopts the
animal;
   F.   The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the
impound facility;
   G.   All fees received on behalf of the animal; and
   H.   All costs of impoundment allocable to the animal which accrues during
its impoundment. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.28.040: REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   The owner of any impounded animal or his authorized representative (a
legally responsible adult of age 18 or more) may redeem such animal before
disposition, provided he posts a bond, as provided in subsection E of this
section, or pays:
      1.   The impound fee;
      2.   The daily board charge;
      3.   Veterinary costs incurred during the impound period, including
rabies vaccination or rabies vaccination deposit;
      4.   License fee, if required;
      5.   A transportation fee if transportation of an impounded animal by
specialized equipment is required. "Specialized equipment" is that equipment,
other than the usual patrol and operation vehicles of animal control, which is
designed for specific purposes such as, but not limited to, livestock trailers
and carcass trailers. The director shall determine this fee at a level that
approximates the cost of utilizing the specialized equipment in the particular
situation;
      6.   Any other expenses incurred to impound an animal in accordance with
state or local laws;
      7.   Any unpaid (past due) fees and fines incurred by the owner; and
      8.   If any dog or cat is fertile, the owner shall also pay a
sterilization deposit and comply with any other requirements of Utah law
including Utah Code Annotated section 11-46-204 et seq. For the purposes of
this subsection, the term "recipient" contained in the referenced Utah statute
shall include an owner or his authorized representative who is redeeming his
animal after impound.
   B.   If an animal is impounded, the owner shall be required to purchase
microchip identification.
   C.   Upon the third impoundment and prior to the release of said animal,
said animal shall be sterilized. Payment of all fees shall be required and
sterilization completed prior to release.
   D.   The city council shall set, and periodically revise when necessary,
impound fees and daily board charges for the impounding of animals. Such fees
shall be as stated on the fee schedule in chapter 8.99 of this title. Such fees
may take into account the type of animal impounded, the owner's compliance with
animal licensure requirements, the number of confinements in the preceding
twenty four (24) months, and the duration of the confinement. No impound fees
will be charged the reporting owners of suspected rabid animals if they comply
with chapter 8.20 of this title.
   E.   The director may require a bond to be posted for the impoundment of
neglected, cruelly treated, quarantined, and/or vicious animals being held for
revocation of license. Any owner whose animals are impounded for a period
exceeding three (3) calendar days that are required to post a bond shall post a
bond with the city. The bond must be posted in full within three (3) calendar
days of notification of impoundment. Failure to consent to the city's
impoundment of such animal and failure to deliver the bond to the city shall
constitute abandonment. Upon occurrence of abandonment pursuant to this
provision, the animal shall automatically without further action become
property of the city, and the decisions regarding the future disposition and/or
adoptability of the animal will be the sole responsibility of the director.
Circumstances wherein the director may require posting of a bond includes
quarantines pending determination of a cruelly treated, vicious animal and/or
revocation of license. The amount of the bond shall include costs incurred by
the city with respect to holding such animal, an amount to secure thirty (30)
days of boarding or until a hearing, and all other fees such as veterinary care
and medication. All bond proceeds in excess of the amount to pay the amount set
forth above shall be refunded upon disposition of the animal. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, if it is determined that the owner of the animal has not
neglected the animal or been cruel to the animal, or the animal is not
determined to be vicious, or the request for revocation of license is denied,
the bond proceeds will be refunded by the city, less veterinary expenses
incurred by the city and one-half (1/2) of the board fee per day for the
animal. (Ord. 13-37, 12-18-2013)
8.28.050: TERM OF IMPOUNDMENT; DESTRUCTION OR OTHER DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS:
   A.   If an animal is not wearing a license tag or other identification, the
animal shall be impounded for a minimum of three (3) working days before
further disposition. If an animal is wearing a license tag or other
identification it shall be held a minimum of five (5) working days.
   B.   During the impound period, reasonable efforts shall be made to notify
the owner of any animal wearing a license or other identification.
      1.   Notice shall be deemed given when sent to the last known address of
the listed owner.
      2.   In the event an owner is notified of the impoundment of his animal,
and fails to either redeem, post a bond as provided in subsection
8.28.040E of this chapter, or formally release said animal to the agency, the
animal shall be deemed voluntarily relinquished to the city and/or the
division.
   C.   Any animal voluntarily relinquished to the division by the owner
thereof for destruction or other disposition need not be kept for the minimum
holding period.
   D.   All animals, except those quarantined or confined by court order, or
stray livestock or farm animals subject to state law requirements, which are
held longer than the minimum impound period, and all animals voluntarily
relinquished to the impound facility, may be destroyed or disposed of as the
director shall direct. The fee for animals other than pets (i.e., livestock,
birds, snakes, etc.) shall be the market value of the animal.
   E.   Any healthy domestic animal excluding livestock may be sold or adopted
by anyone meeting the requirements of the division for a price to be determined
by the director, to include appropriate registration, rabies vaccination,
microchip, and sterilization fees.
   F.   Any healthy animal which is placed into a new home under this chapter
shall be sterilized.
      1.   In the event the animal is not sterilized prior to going into the
new home, the adopter is required to ensure that the surgery is completed
within an agreed upon period of time.
      2.   If the adopter fails to complete the sterilization of the animal
within the approved time period or fails to comply with any part of any
agreement made within the adoption process, the adopter forfeits all rights to
the animal and the division may reclaim said animal.
   G.   The director may recover all costs incurred by the division in the
impoundment and care of any animal sold to a certified research institution
pursuant to the laws of the state of Utah.
   H.   Any licensed animal impounded and having or suspected of having serious
physical injury or contagious disease requiring medical attention, as
determined by the director, may be released to the care of a veterinarian.
   I.   When, in the judgment of the director, it is determined that an animal
should be destroyed for humane reasons or to protect the public from imminent
danger to persons or property, such animal may be destroyed without regard to
any time limitations otherwise established in this title, and without court
order.
   J.   The director may destroy an animal upon the request of an owner without
transporting the animal to an animal shelter. An appropriate fee shall be
charged the owner for the destruction and any subsequent disposal of the
carcass destroyed by the division. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.28.060: STERILIZATION OF ADOPTED AND IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
   A.   A dog, cat, ferret or rabbit adopted from the division's animal
facility shall be sterilized.
   B.   The division may allow the conditional adoption of an unsterilized dog,
cat, ferret or rabbit, because of the age of the animal, or as otherwise deemed
necessary by the division. Said conditional adoption shall become final upon
proof to the division that the animal has been sterilized. Failure to sterilize
results in forfeiture of the animal to the division.
   C.   A dog or cat owner reclaiming an impounded pet shall comply with any
applicable requirements established by Utah Code Annotated section 17-42-101 et
seq., or other applicable Utah law and implemented by the division to conform
with said law. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
CHAPTER 8.32
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
SECTION:
8.32.010: Care And Maintenance Responsibility
8.32.020: Keeping Of Diseased Or Painfully Crippled Animals
8.32.030: Abandonment Of Animals
8.32.040: Hobbling Animals
8.32.050: Animals In Vehicles
8.32.060: Physical Abuse Of Animals
8.32.070: Injury To Animals By Motorists; Duty To Stop And Assist
8.32.080: Poisoning Animals
8.32.090: Steel Jaw Traps
8.32.100: Mistreatment Of Animals
8.32.110: Baby Rabbits And Fowl; Restrictions
8.32.120: Selling Certain Turtles Prohibited
8.32.130: Killing Birds
8.32.140: Giving Animals As Sales Premiums
8.32.150: Prohibit Display Of Animals For Sale Or Gift
8.32.160: Dead Animals
8.32.010: CARE AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
It shall be unlawful for an owner or handler of an animal to withhold adequate
food, drink, care, veterinary care, grooming, adequate space and shelter from
said animal, which is reasonably necessary to maintain said animal in good
health, comfort and safe from potential hazards. To ensure the availability of
adequate space for large animals, notwithstanding anything in this code to the
contrary, it shall be unlawful to keep any horse, mule, burro, ass or cattle on
a lot or other parcel of ground that is not over one-half (1/2) acre in size.
(Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.32.020: KEEPING OF DISEASED OR PAINFULLY CRIPPLED ANIMALS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to abandon or turn out at large any sick,
diseased or disabled animal.
   B.   It is unlawful for the owner or handler of an animal rendered worthless
to said owner or handler by reason of disease or disability, to allow said
animal to continue to live in a diseased or disabled state. Said owner or
handler shall dispose of such animal by killing the same in a humane manner, or
by contacting the division. Upon such contact, the division may assume
responsibility for disposition of the animal, not including livestock, provided
that the owner or handler shall pay a fee, in advance, to the division to pay
for division's cost in disposing of the animal. If the owner or handler fails
to pay such fee, and fails to dispose of the diseased or disabled animal as
required above, such person shall be in violation of this title.
   C.   It is unlawful for an owner or handler of an animal which is infected
with a disease, or is in a painfully crippled condition, to have, keep or
harbor such animal without placing the animal under veterinary care and/or to
dispose of such animal as required in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 09-
21, 5-6-2009)
8.32.030: ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person to abandon any animal within the geographical
boundaries of the city. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.32.040: HOBBLING ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person to hobble livestock or other animals by any means
that may cause injury or damage to any animal. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.32.050: ANIMALS IN VEHICLES:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to carry or confine any animal in or upon
any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner, including, but not limited to,
carrying or confining such animal without adequate ventilation or for an
unusual length of time. Persons transporting an animal in the open bed of a
vehicle must physically restrain the animal in such a manner as to prevent the
animal from jumping or falling out of the vehicle.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to allow a vehicle to be used as a
shelter or housing for pets. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.32.060: PHYSICAL ABUSE OF ANIMALS:
It is unlawful for any person to kill without legal justification, maim,
disfigure, torture, beat, whip, mutilate, burn or scald, overwork, cause to
fight, or in any manner treat any animal in a cruel or malicious manner. Each
instance of such treatment shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 09-21, 5-
6-2009)
8.32.070: INJURY TO ANIMALS BY MOTORISTS; DUTY TO STOP AND ASSIST:
   A.   The operator of a motor vehicle or other self-propelled vehicle being
operated upon the streets of the city shall, in the event said vehicle should
strike and injure or kill any domesticated animal, give reasonable aid and
assistance and/or protection to said animal, without placing himself at
unreasonable risk, and call and report the facts pertaining to the incident to
one of the following authorities:
      1.   The police department having jurisdiction in the city.
      2.   The director.
      3.   The division.
   B.   After making the report required above, the operator shall comply with
the instructions given by the agency contacted and shall, if instructed, remain
at the scene until appropriate police or animal control authority arrives.
After arrival of appropriate authority, the operator shall cooperate with said
authority in the investigation and reporting of the incident.
   C.   As an alternative to complying with the requirements set forth above,
the motor vehicle operator may transport the animal which has been struck to
the division's animal facility, or, in the case of an animal which is injured
and not dead, to a veterinarian for treatment of the animal's injuries. If the
operator chooses the latter course of action, he shall be responsible for the
cost of treatment if required by the veterinarian. The division shall not be
responsible for the cost of treatment unless it has accepted responsibility
after the operator's compliance with any of the requirements of this section.
   D.   This section shall not apply to operators of emergency vehicles if such
vehicles are being operated in response to a bona fide emergency situation at
the time the animal is struck. Emergency vehicle operators who strike an animal
during a response to a bona fide emergency situation shall notify the director
or the division of the incident as soon as is practicable thereafter. (Ord. 09-
21, 5-6-2009)
8.32.080: POISONING ANIMALS:
Except as provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person by any means
to knowingly or recklessly make accessible to any animal, any substance which
has in any manner been treated or prepared with any harmful or poisonous
substance. This provision shall not be interpreted so as to prohibit the use of
poisonous substances for the control of vermin in furtherance of the public
health, when applied in such a manner as to reasonably prohibit access to other
animals. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.32.090: STEEL JAW TRAPS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use steel jaw traps to trap animals,
unless authorized by the director. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.32.100: MISTREATMENT OF ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to provoke any animal. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-
2009)
8.32.110: BABY RABBITS AND FOWL; RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, to offer for sale, offer to give
as a prize, premium or advertising device, or display in any store, shop,
carnival or other public place, any baby rabbits or fowl under eight (8) weeks
of age in any quantity less than six (6).
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter or give
away any baby rabbits or fowl under eight (8) weeks of age during the two (2)
week period preceding Easter in any quantity less than twenty five (25).
   C.   It is unlawful to artificially dye or color any animal less than six
(6) months of age.
   D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the purchase and
raising of such rabbits and fowl by a private individual for his personal use
and consumption provided that he shall maintain proper brooders and other
facilities for the care and containment of such animals while they are in his
possession.
   E.   It is unlawful to offer as an advertising device, or to display, any
animal without at all times keeping adequate food and water available for the
animal's use.
   F.   It is unlawful for any person to offer as a premium, prize, award,
novelty or incentive to purchase merchandise, any live animal. Nothing herein
shall be construed to prohibit the offering or sale of animals in conjunction
with the sale of food or equipment designed for the care or keeping of such
animals.
   G.   Each day an offense of this section occurs or continues shall be a
separate offense. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.32.120: SELLING CERTAIN TURTLES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to own or sell, barter or trade any Chrysemys scripta-elegans,
red eared sliders, that are four inches (4") in length or smaller, or Psendemys
troostii, family Testudinidae, "pet turtles". (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.32.130: KILLING BIRDS:
It is unlawful to kill any bird, or to rob or destroy any nest, egg, or young
of any bird, in violation of Utah law. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.32.140: GIVING ANIMALS AS SALES PREMIUMS:
It is unlawful for any person or business to offer any live animal, fowl, bird,
reptile, or fish as a premium, prize, award, novelty or incentive to purchase
merchandise.
   A.   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the offering or sale of
animals in conjunction with the sale of food or equipment designed for the care
or keeping of such animals in compliance with all necessary permits.
   B.   This section does not apply to groups whose purpose is to enhance a
particular species and/or educate its members on the proper care and handling
of a particular species, and which may offer as a prize animals of the type
specific to the group's purpose, only to members of the group. (Ord. 09-21, 5-
6-2009)
8.32.150: PROHIBIT DISPLAY OF ANIMALS FOR SALE OR GIFT:
It is unlawful for anyone except licensed businesses, humane societies
recognized by the state of Utah, and government animal shelters, to offer or
display any pet for sale or gift in any public place or facility frequented by
the public. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
8.32.160: DEAD ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to permit any dead animal to
remain upon the premises of such person, or for the owner of any dead animal
knowingly to permit the same to remain upon any public property or upon any
premises within the city. If the owner of such dead animal does not remove the
dead animal himself or cause the dead animal to be properly disposed of within
a reasonable time, the city may cause it to be removed and thereupon assess the
actual costs of such removal and disposal against the owner, and may avail
itself of all remedies in law and equity to enforce such removal and recover
the costs thereof. (Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
CHAPTER 8.36
WILD, DANGEROUS AND EXOTIC ANIMALS
SECTION:
8.36.010: Prohibitions Relating To Wild, Dangerous And Exotic Animals;
Exceptions
8.36.010: PROHIBITIONS RELATING TO WILD, DANGEROUS AND EXOTIC ANIMALS;
EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter, give
away, keep, own, harbor, or purchase any wild, dangerous or exotic animal (as
defined in title 50 of the code of federal regulations, in Utah law or
regulation, or by this title) or which is otherwise a "vicious animal" or a
"nuisance" as defined in this title.
   B.   The prohibitions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to a
person, animal shelter, zoological park, veterinary hospital, section 501(c)(3)
of the internal revenue code animal welfare shelter, public laboratory, circus,
sideshow, amusement show, or facility for education or scientific research if
such organizations or individuals are otherwise licensed or permitted pursuant
to a permit as provided in this title, provided that said animals are
restrained or confined in such a manner as to prevent their escape and/or
injury to the public.
   C.   Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 13-37, 12-18-2013)
CHAPTER 8.40
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
8.40.010: Violation Of Title; Penalties
8.40.020: Issuance Of Citations
8.40.030: Pick Up Orders
8.40.040: Director Conference
8.40.010: VIOLATION OF TITLE; PENALTIES:
Except for violation of sections
 8.12.070,
8.12.080,
8.24.020, and
8.36.010 of this title, this title may be enforced through the administrative
code enforcement hearing program established by title 18 of this code or by
filing a civil action in the district court. Violations of sections
8.12.070,
8.12.080,
8.24.020, and
 8.36.010 of this title may be enforced through the administrative code
enforcement hearing program established by title 18 of this code by filing a
civil or criminal action in the district court or criminal action in the
justice court. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the city has sole
discretion to decide whether to pursue or file a civil or criminal case for any
violations. The possibility of an administrative remedy pursuant to title 18 of
this code shall in no way interfere with the city's right to prosecute
violations of this title as criminal action. If the city chooses to file both
civil and criminal charges for the same violation, no civil penalty may be
assessed, but all other remedies are available. The correction period set forth
in section
 18.04.030 of this code may be eliminated by the animal control officer, and an
administrative citation penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed
immediately upon issuance of the administrative citation. (Ord. 14-04, 3-19-
2014)
8.40.020: ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS:
An animal control officer is authorized to issue a criminal citation to any
person upon a charge of violating any of sections
8.12.070,
8.12.080,
8.24.020, and
8.36.010 of this title. The form of the citation, and proceedings to be handled
upon the basis of the citation, shall conform to the provisions of applicable
law. (Ord. 14-04, 3-19-2014)
8.40.030: PICK UP ORDERS:
The director may petition the court for a "pick up order" for an animal within
the premises of and/or under the control of a person who is in violation of
this title. This section may be used for, but is not limited to, picking up of
animals pursued but not captured by an animal control officer, nuisance
animals, or for any other violation of this title. (Ord. 13-37, 12-18-2013)
8.40.040: DIRECTOR CONFERENCE:
In a director conference, the party shall be permitted to testify and present
evidence, and comment on the issues. Discovery shall be limited. Intervention
by a third party is prohibited. No recording will be made of the conference.
The conference will be private and not open to the public. The director may
vacate, modify, or affirm the findings and correction ordered by the animal
control officer in accordance with state statute or this title. (Ord. 13-37,
12-18-2013)
CHAPTER 8.99
FEE SCHEDULE
SECTION:
8.99.010: Fees
8.99.010: FEES:
 
Permit Fees:
 Animal exhibitions for multiple events                              $250.00
 Animal exhibitions for single event                                 25.00
 Cattery or kennel permit (in addition, all pets must be             25.00
  individually licensed as provided below)
 Commercial operations over 30 animals                               150.00
 Commercial operations up to and including 30 animals                75.00
 Dangerous animal permit                                             25.00
 Exotic animal permit                                                5.00
 Fancier's permit                                                    25.00
 Feral cat colony registration fee                                   5.00
 Foster animal permit                                                0.00
 Guard dog permit (per site)                                         25.00
 Hobby permit                                                        25.00
 Late fee (in addition to regular fee)                               25.00
 Pet shops selling only tropical or freshwater fish                  50.00
 Stables                                                             40.00
Pet License Fees:                                                      
 Late fee (in addition to regular fee)                               25.00
 Replacement tag                                                     3.00
 Senior citizen (age 60 and older) (sterilized pet, onetime fee)     15.00
 Senior citizen (age 60 and older) (unsterilized pet)                15.00
 Sterilized                                                          5.00
 Transfer fee                                                        3.00
 Unsterilized                                                        25.00
Service Fees For Livestock:                                            
  Board fees per day:                                                   
 Large livestock                                                     10.00
  Small livestock                                                      8.00
  Impound fees:                                                         
 Large livestock                                                     60.00
  Small livestock                                                      30.00
 Transportation fees                                                 20.00
Service Fees For Pets:                                                 
 Adoption fee (includes microchip and adoption packet)               25.00
 Board fee per day per animal                                        8.00
  Impound fees:                                                         
  First impound                                                        25.00
 Second impound within 24 month period                               50.00
  Third impound within 24 month period                                 100.00
  Subsequent impound after third impound (within 24 month period)      200.00
 Rabies deposit                                                      25.00
  Sterilization deposit:                                                
 Cat impoundment                                                     25.00
  Dog impoundment                                                      50.00
 Stray animal from another jurisdiction                              10.00
 Transportation fee                                                  25.00
 Turn over:                                                           
  Turn over or disposal fee                                            25.00
Off Leash Area Permit/Tag:                                             
 Taylorsville resident                                               10.00
 Taylorsville nonresident                                            25.00
 Taylorsville resident senior citizen (age 60 and older, onetime     5.00
  fee)
 Taylorsville nonresident senior citizen (age 60 and older, onetime  10.00
  fee)
 Replacement permit                                                  3.00
 
(Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006; amd. Ord. 06-45, 9-6-2006; Ord. 09-21, 5-6-2009)
TITLE 9
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Nuisances And Abatement   9.08
Abatement Of Weeds, Garbage And Refuse, Public Nuisances, And Illegal Objects
And Structures   9.10
Helicopter Flights   9.12
Parachute Jumping   9.16
Sewers   9.20
Collection And Transportation Of Solid Waste   9.24
Weeds And Refuse   9.28
Fumigation   9.32
Air Pollution Control   9.36
Fire Code   9.40
Fire Inspection   9.44
Pyrotechnics And Explosives   9.48
Cost Recovery; Fire Department   9.52
Adoption Of Salt Lake Valley Health Department Regulations By Reference   9.56
Penalty For Violation   9.60
Parks   9.61
Smoking Prohibited In City Parks, Trails, And Recreation Facilities   9.65
CHAPTER 9.08
NUISANCES AND ABATEMENT
SECTION:
9.08.010: Purpose
9.08.020: Definitions
9.08.030: Nuisance; Definition
9.08.040: Exceptions
9.08.050: Responsibility For Nuisances
9.08.060: Nuisance Abatement; Administration
9.08.070: Finding Of Nuisance
9.08.080: Voluntary Correction
9.08.090: Administrative Notice
9.08.100: Other Remedies
9.08.110: Appeals
9.08.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means for the city and individuals
to identify nuisances within the city and to provide a means for correcting or
abating the nuisances. The city needs the ability to abate nuisances in order
to protect the health and safety of the public, to foster neighborhood
stability, to preserve the appearance, character and beauty of neighborhoods,
to encourage community pride, to preserve the value of property, and to protect
the general welfare of the city and its citizens, businesses and visitors. This
chapter provides for progressive enforcement measures to abate nuisances; the
most aggressive forms of enforcement are generally reserved for the most
recalcitrant violators of this chapter. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.08.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
herein prescribed:
ABATE: To repair, replace, remove, destroy, correct or otherwise remedy a
condition which constitutes a nuisance by such means, in such a manner and to
such an extent as the city designated representative determines is necessary in
the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.
COMPLETION DATE: The date by which the responsible person must abate a
nuisance. The completion date is originally set by the city designated
representative in the voluntary correction agreement or in a notice from the
city. The completion date may be modified by the hearing officer.
EMERGENCY: A situation which, in the opinion of the city designated
representative, requires immediate action to prevent or eliminate an immediate
threat to the health or safety of a person or property.
HEARING OFFICER: The person(s) designated to hear appeals pursuant to this
chapter. The hearing officer shall be the mayor or a person appointed by the
mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. The designee need not be
a city employee.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE: A vehicle not currently registered or licensed in this
state or another state, or a vehicle that is or has any of the following
conditions: dismantled, broken windows, flat tires, no tires, missing doors,
missing windows, missing fenders, missing hood, missing trunk, will not start,
or is in a condition that would result in the vehicle's failure to pass state
safety inspection pursuant to the motor vehicle act, Utah Code Annotated
section 41-1a-101 et seq.
OWNER: Any person who, alone or with others, has title or interest in any
building, premises, or vehicle, with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof. For the purpose of giving notice, the term "owner" also includes any
person in physical possession.
PREMISES: A plot of ground, whether occupied or not.
PROPERTY: A building or structure, or the premises on which the building or
structure is located, or undeveloped land.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area generally visible to public view and includes alleys,
bridges, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks, streets, and
buildings open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink
or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or
dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The person(s) responsible for correcting or abating a
nuisance pursuant to this chapter. The responsible person includes the property
owner and any person who causes or permits a nuisance to occur or remain upon
property in the city, and includes, but is not limited to, the owner(s), lessor
(s), lessee(s), or other person(s) entitled to control, use and/or occupy
property where a nuisance occurs. In cases where there are more than one
responsible persons, the city may proceed against one, some or all of them.
VEHICLE: Includes, but is not limited to, passenger vehicles, trailers, travel
trailers, semitrailers, road tractor, recreational vehicle, pickup truck,
motorboat, manufactured home, motor vehicle, motorcycle, off highway vehicle,
farm truck, farm tractor, commercial vehicle, camper, all-terrain type I and
type II vehicles, reconstructed vehicle, sailboat, special interest vehicle,
specially constructed vehicle, all as defined in the motor vehicle act, Utah
Code Annotated section 41-1a-101 et seq. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.08.030: NUISANCE; DEFINITION:
   A.   Purpose: This section defines "nuisance" by providing five (5) general
definitions of what constitutes a nuisance (subsection B of this section), and
then providing specific examples of situations, conduct or activities that
constitute nuisances (subsection C of this section). The purpose of the general
definitions is to allow the city to classify an offending situation, conduct or
activity as a nuisance, even though the situation, conduct or activity may not
be listed as a nuisance in the specific examples. The first three (3) general
definitions are taken directly from Utah state law. The purpose of listing the
specific examples is to identify some of the specific situations, conduct and
activities that the city intends to abate as nuisances.
   B.   General Definitions Of Nuisance: Any activity that meets any one or
more of the five (5) definitions set forth below shall constitute a "nuisance"
if it occurs within the city of Taylorsville:
      1.   Nuisance As Defined In Utah Code Annotated Section 78-38-1(1):
Anything which is injurious to health, indecent, offensive to the senses, or an
obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
      2.   Nuisance As Defined In Utah Code Annotated Section 76-10-801: Any
item, thing, manner, or condition whatsoever that it is dangerous to human life
or health or renders soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome.
      3.   Nuisance As Defined In Utah Code Annotated Section 76-10-803:
Unlawfully doing any act or omitting to perform any duty, which act or
omission:
         a.   Annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or
safety of three (3) or more persons, at separate and distinct addresses in the
affected neighborhood of the city;
         b.   Offends public decency;
         c.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake, stream, canal, or basin, or any public
park, square, street, or highway; or
         d.   In any way renders three (3) or more persons, at separate and
distinct addresses in the affected neighborhood of the city, insecure in life
or the use of property.
An act which affects three (3) or more persons, at three (3) separate and
distinct addresses in the affected neighborhood of the city, in any of the ways
specified in this subsection is still a nuisance regardless of the extent to
which the annoyance or damage inflicted on individuals is unequal.
      4.   Nuisance: A condition which:
         a.   Wrongfully annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health or safety of others; or
         b.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or
render dangerous for passage, any public park, square, street or highway, or
any other public place; or
         c.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life, or in the use
of property, and which affects the rights of an entire community or
neighborhood, although the extent of the damage may be unequal.
      5.   Specific Nuisances Listed In Subsection C Of This Section: Anything
specifically listed as a nuisance in subsection C of this section.
   C.   Nuisances Enumerated: Every situation, conduct or activity listed below
constitutes a nuisance and may be abated pursuant to this chapter. The listed
examples are not exhaustive; a situation, conduct or activity not listed below,
but coming within one of the general definitions of nuisance listed above,
shall also constitute a nuisance. The first six (6) listed nuisances are also
listed as nuisances pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 78-38-9:
      1.   Drug Houses: Every building or premises where the unlawful sale,
manufacture, service, storage, distribution, dispensing, or acquisition of any
controlled substance, precursor, or analog specified in title 58, chapter 37 of
the Utah code controlled substances act occurs.
      2.   Gambling: Every building or premises where gambling is permitted to
be played, conducted, or dealt upon as prohibited in title 76, chapter 10, part
11 of the Utah code (gambling) which creates the conditions of a nuisance as
defined in Utah Code Annotated section 78-38-1(2)(b).
      3.   Gangs: Every building or premises wherein criminal activity is
committed in concert with two (2) or more persons as provided in Utah Code
Annotated section 76-3-203.1.
      4.   Party Houses: Every building or premises where parties occur
frequently which create the conditions of a nuisance as defined in Utah Code
Annotated section 78-38-1(1).
      5.   Prostitution: Every building or premises where prostitution or the
promotion of prostitution is regularly carried on by one or more persons as
provided in title 76, chapter 10, part 13 (prostitution) of the Utah code.
      6.   Weapons: Every building or premises where a violation of title 76,
chapter 10, part 5 (weapons) of the Utah code occurs on the premises.
      7.   Unsafe Condition: A condition that unreasonably or unlawfully
affects the health or safety of one or more persons.
      8.   Fire Hazard: A fire hazard.
      9.   Noxious Emanations: Emanation of noxious or unreasonable odors,
fumes, gas, smoke, soot or cinders.
      10.   Noxious Weeds: Noxious weeds located on vacant lots or other
property, along public sidewalks or the outer edge of any public street, or
weeds in any other location which constitute a fire hazard.
      11.   Refuse: Keeping or storing of any refuse or waste matter which
interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of nearby property.
      12.   Stagnant Water: Polluted or stagnant water which constitutes an
unhealthy or unsafe condition.
      13.   Improper Accumulations: Accumulation of soil, litter, debris, plant
trimmings, or trash, that constitutes a health or safety hazard.
      14.   Accumulation Of Junk: Accumulation of used or damaged lumber;
inoperable vehicles; junk; scrap metal; machinery or machinery parts; salvage
materials; abandoned, discarded or unused furniture; stoves, sinks, toilets,
boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, containers, cold storage appliances, cabinets,
or other fixtures or equipment stored. However, nothing herein shall preclude
the placement of stacked firewood for personal noncommercial use on the
premises.
      15.   Attractive Nuisances: Any attractive nuisance dangerous to children
and other persons including, but not limited to, abandoned, broken, or
neglected household appliances, equipment and machinery, abandoned foundations
or excavations, or improperly maintained or secured pools.
      16.   Vegetation: Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds,
hedges, and overgrown or uncultivated vegetation which is in a hazardous
condition, is an obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or which is
likely to harbor rats, vermin or other pests.
      17.   Dust: Any premises which causes excessive dust due to construction,
lack of landscaping, nonmaintenance or other cause.
      18.   Improper Storage: The keeping, storing, depositing or accumulating
on the premises or in the public right of way for an unreasonable period of
time dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, or other similar materials, or maintenance
of such material on public rights of way. Material stored as part of an active
construction project shall not be considered a nuisance.
      19.   Garbage Can Or Containers: The leaving of any garbage can or refuse
container in the street, other than on collection day, or for more than twelve
(12) hours before or after the collection day, or the use of worn out, rusted
or filthy garbage containers.
      20.   Construction Equipment: Construction equipment or machinery of any
type or description parked or stored on property when it is readily visible
from a public street, alley or adjoining property, except while excavation,
construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit are
in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property, or where the
property is zoned for the storage of construction equipment and/or machinery.
      21.   Improper Sign: Improper maintenance of a sign; or signs which
advertise a business that is no longer extant on the property.
      22.   Hazardous Conditions: Any wall, sign, fence, gate, hedge, or
structure maintained in such condition of deterioration or disrepair as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property.
      23.   Graffiti: Graffiti which remains on the exterior of any building,
fence, sign, or other structure and is visible from a public street.
      24.   Improper Maintenance: Maintenance of buildings and/or structures in
such condition as to be deemed defective or in a condition of deterioration or
disrepair including, but not limited to:
         a.   Any building or structure which is unfit for human habitation, or
which is an unreasonable hazard to the health of people residing in the
vicinity thereof, or which presents an unreasonable fire hazard in the vicinity
where it is located; or
         b.   Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered,
enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of city
ordinances, or any use of land, buildings or premises in violation of city
ordinances; or
         c.   Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed, or left in an
unreasonable state of partial construction for a period of six (6) months or
longer. An "unreasonable state of partial construction" is defined as any
unfinished building or structure where the appearance or condition of the
building or structure does not meet the requirements for finished buildings or
structures as required by applicable city ordinances or building codes. The
building or structure shall not be considered to be a nuisance if it is under
active construction; or
         d.   Buildings having dry rot, warping, termite infestation, decay,
excessive cracking, peeling, or chalking, as to render the building unsightly
and/or in a state of disrepair; or
         e.   Buildings with missing doors and/or windows containing broken
glass and/or no glass at all where the window is of a type which normally
contains glass; or
         f.   Building exteriors, walls, fences, gates, driveways, sidewalks,
walkways, signs or ornamentation, or alleys maintained in such condition as to
render them unsightly and/or in a state of disrepair; or
         g.   Buildings or conditions that violate any building, electrical,
plumbing, fire, housing, or other code adopted by the city.
      25.   City Code Nuisances: Any violation of this code that expressly
declares a specific situation, conduct or activity to be a nuisance.
      26.   Alcohol: Every property or premises not licensed under applicable
state law or city ordinance where any intoxicating liquors or alcohol are kept
for unlawful use, sale or distribution.
      27.   Inappropriate Conduct: Every property or premises where there
exists an environment which causes, encourages or allows individuals or groups
of individuals to commit one or more of the following acts on the property,
premises or adjacent public place, including, but not limited to:
         a.   Illegally consuming intoxicating liquor or alcohol, and/or drugs;
         b.   Publicly urinating or defecating;
         c.   By physical action, intentionally causing or attempting to cause
another person to reasonably fear imminent bodily injury or the commission of a
criminal act upon their person or upon property in their immediate possession;
         d.   Engaging in acts of violence, including fighting amongst
themselves;
         e.   Discharging a firearm or explosive in violation of city ordinance
or state law;
         f.   Creating unreasonable noise which disturbs others;
         g.   Intentionally obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or
         h.   Soliciting acts of prostitution.
      28.   Dangerous Conditions: Any fence, wall, shed, deck, house, garage,
building, structure or any part of any of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole,
smokestack; or any excavation, hole, open well, pit, basement, cellar,
sidewalk, subspace, dock, or loading dock; or any lot, land, yard, premises or
location which in its entirety, or in any part thereof, by reason of the
condition in which the same is found or permitted to be or remain, shall or may
endanger the health, safety, life, limb or property, or cause any hurt, harm,
inconvenience, discomfort, damage or injury to any one or more individuals in
the city, in any one or more of the following particulars:
         a.   By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the general
health and safety of the community.
         b.   By reason of being a fire hazard.
         c.   By reason of being unsafe for occupancy, or use on, in, upon,
about or around the aforesaid property.
         d.   By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of the
property, and/or being vacant, any of which depreciates the enjoyment and use
of the property in the immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful
to the community in which such property is situated or such condition exists.
      29.   Family: Keeping or allowing people at a premises in violation of
the city's single-family residence and zoning requirements.
      30.   Parking On Landscaping: Parking in an area required to be
landscaped by city ordinance.
      31.   Banner And Snipe Signs: Keeping or allowing banner and/or snipe
signs in violation of city ordinance.
      32.   Required Landscaping: Failure to install or maintain landscaping
required by city ordinance.
      33.   Fly Control: Any premises that contains any one of the following
unsanitary conditions:
         a.   A privy, cesspool, sink, pit or like place that is not securely
protected from flies;
         b.   Garbage that is not securely protected from flies; or
         c.   Vegetable waste, trash, litter, rags or refuse of any kind which
flies may breed.
      34.   Habitat For Insects: Any condition that creates a habitat for
mosquitoes or other harmful insects.
      35.   Weeds And Refuse: Any violation of chapter 9.28 of this title.
      36.   Rats: Accumulation of garbage or refuse that constitutes a health
or safety hazard, consisting of waste, animals or vegetable matter upon which
rats may feed.
      37.   Dead Animals: Any premises that contains any dead animals, animal
parts, or animal matter of any kind, (excluding fertilizer) or any violation of
section
8.32.160 of this code.
      38.   Public Nuisance Animal: Any animal that is considered to be a
nuisance or a public nuisance animal as defined in title 8 of this code. (Ord.
04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.08.040: EXCEPTIONS:
No act which is done or maintained under the express authority of an
authoritative statute, ordinance, conditional use permit or court ruling shall
be declared a nuisance. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.08.050: RESPONSIBILITY FOR NUISANCES:
The responsible person(s) is responsible for abating nuisances pursuant to this
chapter. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or occupant, who creates, aids in
creating, or contributes to a nuisance, or who supports, continues, or retains
a nuisance, is responsible for the nuisance and is a responsible person
pursuant to this chapter. Every successive owner or tenant of a property or
premises who fails to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such
property or premises caused by a former owner or tenant is responsible therefor
in the same manner as the one who first created it. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.08.060: NUISANCE ABATEMENT; ADMINISTRATION:
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the police department or
other designee. In case of nuisances involving dangerous buildings or
violations of codes typically administered and enforced by the board of health,
this chapter may also be administered and enforced by the community development
department. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004; amd. Ord. 05-11, 3-16-2005, eff. 4-1-2005)
9.08.070: FINDING OF NUISANCE:
If a city designated representative finds that a nuisance exists, the city
designated representative will usually attempt to have the responsible person
abate the nuisance. Although the city designated representative's first usual
step in correcting or abating the nuisance will be to attempt to obtain
voluntary compliance, the city designated representative may pursue any remedy
or combination of remedies available pursuant to this chapter, state law or
common law in order to abate the nuisance. Nothing in this chapter shall be
interpreted to prohibit the city from engaging in its standard prosecution or
abatement practices. Therefore, the city may prosecute violators of city
ordinances or state laws without first attempting to give notice as stated in
this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prevent the city
from enforcing applicable city ordinances, or building codes without first
treating the offending conduct, situation or activity as a nuisance pursuant to
this chapter. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.08.080: VOLUNTARY CORRECTION:
This section applies whenever the city designated representative determines
that a nuisance exists.
   A.   Contact: Before taking other steps to abate the nuisance, the city
designated representative will usually make a reasonable attempt to secure
voluntary correction or abatement of the nuisance by:
      1.   Contacting the responsible person, where possible;
      2.   Explaining the nuisance;
      3.   Requesting the responsible person to abate the nuisance; and
      4.   Agreeing to terms with the responsible person to abate the nuisance.
   B.   No Agreement: If the city designated representative and the responsible
person cannot agree to terms for correcting or abating the nuisance, the city
designated representative may still abate the nuisance using one or more of the
procedures set forth in this chapter, state law, or common law.
   C.   Voluntary Correction Agreement: If the city designated representative
and the responsible person agree to terms for abating the nuisance, they shall
enter into and sign a voluntary correction agreement. The voluntary correction
agreement is a contract between the city and the responsible person in which
the responsible person agrees to abate the nuisance within a specified time and
according to specified conditions. The voluntary correction agreement shall
include the following terms:
      1.   The name and address of the responsible person;
      2.   The street address of the nuisance, or a description sufficient to
identify the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the
nuisance is occurring;
      3.   A description of the nuisance, along with a citation to the specific
enumerated nuisance that has been violated;
      4.   The necessary corrective action to be taken, and a date or time by
which correction must be completed;
      5.   An agreement by the responsible person that the city may enter the
premises and inspect the premises as may be necessary to determine compliance
with the voluntary correction agreement;
      6.   An agreement by the responsible person that the city may abate the
nuisance and recover its costs and expenses to abate the nuisance, as well as a
monetary fine pursuant to this chapter from the responsible person, if terms of
the voluntary correction agreement are not met;
      7.   An agreement by the responsible person acknowledging that they waive
the right to appeal the city designated representative's finding that a
nuisance exists and waives the right to appeal the specific corrective action
required in the voluntary correction agreement; and
      8.   An agreement by the responsible person that failure to comply with
the voluntary correction agreement may be grounds for criminal prosecution.
The city designated representative may grant an extension of the time limit for
correcting or abating the nuisance if the responsible person has shown due
diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting or abating the nuisance but
unforeseen circumstances render abatement under the original conditions
unattainable. If the responsible person complies with the terms of the
voluntary correction agreement, the city shall take no further action against
the responsible person related to the nuisance described in the voluntary
correction agreement unless the nuisance recurs. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.08.090: ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE:
   A.   Administrative Notice: When the city designated representative
determines that a nuisance exists, and is unable to secure voluntary correction
pursuant to section
9.08.080 of this chapter, the city designated representative may issue an
administrative notice to the responsible person. The city designated
representative may issue an administrative notice without having attempted to
secure voluntary correction as provided in section
9.08.080 of this chapter under the following circumstances:
      1.   When an emergency exists; or
      2.   When the city designated representative is unable to locate or
determine the identity of the responsible person.
   B.   Content Of Administrative Notice: The administrative notice shall
include the following:
      1.   The name and address of the responsible person; and
      2.   The street address of the nuisance or a description sufficient for
identifying the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the
nuisance is occurring; and
      3.   A description of the nuisance; and
      4.   The required corrective action; and
      5.   The nuisance abatement completion date, whether agreed upon or not,
and a notice that the city may abate the nuisance and charge the responsible
person for all abatement costs if the responsible person does not correct the
nuisance before the completion date; and
      6.   The time for appealing the administrative notice to the hearing
officer and the procedure for filing an appeal;
      7.   A statement indicating that no monetary fine will be assessed if the
city designated representative approves the completed, required corrective
action prior to the completion date; and
      8.   A statement that the city may abate the nuisance and assess costs
and expenses of abatement and a monetary fine against the responsible person if
the correction is not completed by the responsible person and approved by the
city designated representative before the completion date.
   C.   Service Of Administrative Notice: The city designated representative
shall serve the administrative notice upon the responsible person, either
personally or by mailing, certified, return receipt requested, a copy of the
administrative notice to the responsible person at their last known address. If
the responsible person cannot after due diligence be personally served within
Salt Lake County and if an address for mailed service cannot after due
diligence be ascertained, notice shall be served by posting a copy of the
administrative notice conspicuously on the affected property or structure.
Proof of service shall be made by a written declaration under penalty of
perjury executed by the person effecting the service, declaring the time and
date of service, the manner by which the service was made, and if by posting,
the facts showing that due diligence was used in attempting to serve the person
personally or by mail.
   D.   No Extension: No extension of the time specified in the administrative
notice for correction of the nuisance may be granted, except by order of the
hearing officer. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.08.100: OTHER REMEDIES:
The city may take one or more of the following actions against any responsible
person who fails to comply with the terms of a voluntary consent agreement, an
administrative notice, or an order of the hearing officer:
   A.   Abatement By The City:
      1.   The city may abate a nuisance when:
         a.   The terms of a voluntary correction agreement have not been met;
or
         b.   The requirements of an administrative notice have not been
complied with, or, if the administrative notice is appealed to a hearing
officer and the terms of the administrative notice are amended by the hearing
officer, the terms of the hearing officer's order have not been complied with;
or
         c.   The condition is subject to summary abatement as provided for in
subsection A2 of this section.
      2.   Whenever a nuisance is occurring which constitutes an immediate and
emergent threat to the public health, safety or welfare or to the environment,
the city may summarily and without prior notice abate the condition. Notice of
such abatement, including the reason for it, shall be given to the responsible
person as soon as reasonably possible after the abatement.
      3.   Using any lawful means, the city may enter upon the subject property
and may remove or correct the condition which is subject to abatement. Remove
or correct may include, but not be limited to, closing a building. The city may
seek, but is not required to seek, such judicial process as it deems necessary
to effect the removal or correction of such condition. Such judicial process
may include, but not be limited to, condemnation and destruction proceedings.
      4.   The costs, including incidental expenses, of correcting or abating
the violation shall be billed to the responsible person and/or the owner,
lessor, tenant or other person entitled to control, use and/or occupy the
property and shall become due and payable to the city within ten (10) days of
actual receipt of the bill (within 15 days of the mailing date if the bill is
mailed). The term "incidental expenses" includes, but is not limited to:
         a.   Personnel costs, both direct and indirect, including attorney
fees and costs;
         b.   Costs incurred in documenting the violation;
         c.   Hauling, storage and disposal expenses; and
         d.   Actual expenses and costs for the city in preparing notices,
specifications and contracts, and in accomplishing and/or contracting and
inspecting the work; and
         e.   The costs of any required printing and mailing.
   B.   Monetary Fine: The responsible person shall pay the city a monetary
fine for each day the nuisance continues after the completion date. The
nuisance shall be considered to continue until the city designated
representative approves the responsible person's actions to correct or abate
the nuisance. The amount of the monetary fine shall be as follows:
      1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day during the first
week that the nuisance remains uncorrected or unabated after the completion
date;
      2.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day thereafter until
the nuisance is corrected or abated according to the terms set forth in the
administrative notice.
The monetary fine shall be cumulative and may not be waived by the city
designated representative. Payment of a monetary fine pursuant to this section
does not relieve the responsible person from the duty to abate the nuisance as
required by the voluntary consent agreement or the administrative notice. The
monetary fine constitutes a personal obligation of the responsible person. Any
monetary fine assessed must be paid to the city within ten (10) calendar days
from the date of mailing of the hearing officer's decision and order or a
notice from the city that the fine is due. The city attorney or their designee
is authorized to take appropriate action to collect the monetary fine, plus
reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred in collecting said monetary fine.
   C.   Civil Actions: Either the city or any private person directly affected
by a nuisance may bring a civil action to abate or enjoin the nuisance, or for
damages for causing or maintaining the nuisance (including the cost, if any, of
cleaning the subject property). The civil action may be brought pursuant to
this chapter or pursuant to state law.
   D.   Criminal Actions: Criminal actions may be initiated by criminal
citation or by information.
      1.   Any person who maintains or assists in maintaining a nuisance is
guilty of a class C misdemeanor. No person shall be prosecuted under this
subsection unless the city designated representative attempted to obtain
voluntary correction as provided in section
9.08.080 of this chapter.
      2.   If the alleged nuisance is also a violation of a provision of this
code (other than this nuisance ordinance) or state law, the responsible person
may be charged under the specific provision of this code or state law, even if
the city designated representative did not first attempt to obtain voluntary
correction as provided herein.
      3.   Any person who knowingly obstructs, impedes, or interferes with the
city or its agents, or with the responsible person, in the performance of
duties imposed by this chapter, or a decision and order issued by the hearing
officer, or a voluntary correction agreement, is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor.
   E.   Abatement By Eviction: Whenever there is reason to believe that a
nuisance under this chapter is kept, maintained, or exists in the city, the
city attorney or any citizen(s) residing in the city, or any person or entity
doing business in the city, in his or their own names, or the city attorney in
the name of the city, may maintain an action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to abate the nuisance and obtain an order for the automatic
eviction of the tenant of the property harboring the nuisance. The eviction
shall take place as specified in Utah law.
   F.   Lien For Costs: If a person fails to pay any fines or costs related to
nuisance abatement when due, the city may record a lien on the property or
premises for the full amount of the unpaid fines and costs.
   G.   Nonexclusive Remedies: Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the
contrary, the city may proceed pursuant to Utah Code Annotated sections 10-11-
1 through 10-11-4 without complying with any of the provisions of this chapter.
In addition, the city may take any or all of the remedies identified in this
chapter (administrative, civil or criminal) to abate a nuisance and/or to
punish any person or entity who creates, causes or allows a nuisance to exist.
The abatement of a nuisance does not prejudice the right of the city or any
person to recover damages or penalties for its past existence.
   H.   Buildings' Closure: Whenever conditions inside or under occupied
business buildings provide extensive harborage for rats, in the opinion of the
city, the city is empowered, after due notification in accordance with this
chapter, to close the business buildings until such time as the conditions are
abated by ratproofing and harborage removal including, if necessary, the
installation of suitable concrete floors in basements or replacement of wooden
ground floors with concrete or other major repairs necessary to facilitate rat
eradication.
   I.   Buildings' Destruction: Whenever conditions inside or under unoccupied
business buildings provide extensive harborage for rats, in the opinion of the
city, the city is empowered, after due notification in accordance with this
chapter, to institute condemnation and destruction proceedings. (Ord. 04-11, 3-
3-2004)
9.08.110: APPEALS:
   A.   Grounds: Any person receiving an administrative notice may appeal the
administrative notice to the hearing officer. Only the following issues may be
appealed to the hearing officer:
      1.   The person charged is not the responsible person.
      2.   The condition described as a nuisance in the administrative notice
is not a nuisance as defined by this chapter.
      3.   The method required by the administrative notice to abate the
nuisance is inappropriate or is not the most cost effective method of
effectively correcting or abating the nuisance.
      4.   The time period given to abate the nuisance in the administrative
notice is unreasonable.
      5.   The monetary fine set forth in the administrative notice is
unreasonable.
      6.   The city designated representative refused to approve a corrective
action that met the requirements of the administrative notice.
      7.   The responsible person claims that the requirement(s) of the
administrative notice violates their constitutional rights.
   B.   Filing: The person desiring to appeal must file a notice of appeal with
the city within ten (10) days of receipt of the administrative notice (within
15 days of the mailing date if the administrative notice is mailed).
   C.   Hearing: The hearing before the hearing officer shall be informal
according to rules and procedures established by the hearing officer. The
appellant may, but is not required to, bring an attorney or other
representative to assist him or her. The appellant and the city designated
representative may each call witnesses at the hearing. The hearing officer may,
with or without the parties present, visit the site of the alleged nuisance. If
the hearing officer allows the parties at the site visit, both parties must be
given the opportunity to be present. The hearing shall be scheduled by the
hearing officer within thirty (30) days of when the notice of appeal is filed
with the city.
   D.   Burden Of Proof: The appellant shall have the burden of proof to
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that they had legitimate grounds
for an appeal. The determination of the city designated representative as to
the need for the required corrective action shall be accorded substantial
weight by the hearing officer in determining the reasonableness of the
corrective action.
   E.   Authority Of Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall have authority
to affirm or vacate the administrative notice, or to modify or waive specific
provisions of the administrative notice. If the appellant fails to attend the
hearing, the hearing officer shall affirm the administrative notice. The
hearing officer shall not vacate the administrative notice unless they find
that no nuisance exists. The hearing officer shall modify the administrative
notice if they find that a nuisance exists, but that one or more of the
requirements of the administrative notice is improper or inappropriate. A
requirement is improper if it is contrary to this chapter. A requirement is
inappropriate if the hearing officer finds that there is a better means of
resolving the problem or that the proposed solution is inappropriate given the
nature or severity of the problem. When determining whether to waive or modify
a requirement of the administrative notice, the hearing officer may also
consider:
      1.   Whether the appellant responded to the city designated
representative's attempts to contact the appellant and cooperated with efforts
to correct the nuisance;
      2.   Whether the appellant has shown due diligence and/or substantial
progress in correcting the nuisance;
      3.   The financial ability of the appellant and the amount, if any, that
the appellant has benefited financially by maintaining the nuisance;
      4.   Any other relevant factors.
If the appellant appeals the city designated representative's refusal to
approve appellant's corrective action, the hearing officer shall visit the site
and determine if the appellant complied with the requirements of the
administrative notice.
   F.   Order: The hearing officer shall issue a written order to the appellant
and the city notifying them of their decision. The order shall include the
hearing officer's findings of fact conclusion of law, and an ultimate decision.
If the hearing officer modifies or waives provisions of the administrative
notice, the order shall specify which portions are modified and how they are
modified. The hearing officer shall mail a copy of the order to the appellant
and the city within five (5) working days of the close of the hearing.
   G.   Appeal To District Court: Either the city or the appellant may appeal
the hearing officer's order by filing a petition for review of the order. The
petition must be filed in the district court within thirty (30) calendar days
from the date the hearing officer's order was mailed to the appellant. In the
petition, the plaintiff may only allege that the hearing officer's order was
arbitrary, capricious, or illegal. The hearing officer shall transmit to the
reviewing court the record of its proceedings, including any minutes, findings,
orders and, if available, a true and correct transcript of its proceedings. If,
in the opinion of the district court, there is a sufficient record to review
the hearing officer's order, the court's review is limited to the record
provided by the hearing officer. The district court may not accept or consider
any evidence outside of the hearing officer's record unless the evidence was
offered to the hearing officer and the court determines that it was improperly
excluded by the hearing officer. If, in the opinion of the district court,
there is not a sufficient record to review the hearing officer's order, the
court may call witnesses and take evidence. No petition or appeal may be filed
in district court unless the responsible person first appeals to the hearing
officer pursuant to the terms set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
CHAPTER 9.10
ABATEMENT OF WEEDS, GARBAGE AND REFUSE, PUBLIC NUISANCES, AND ILLEGAL OBJECTS
AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
9.10.010: Purpose
9.10.020: Municipal Inspector
9.10.030: Inspection
9.10.040: Written Notice
9.10.050: Removal By City And Cost Of Removal
9.10.060: Duty To Maintain Property
9.10.010: PURPOSE:
The Taylorsville city council hereby declares that it is beneficial to the
community to enact this chapter to regulate abatement of the growth and spread
of injurious and noxious weeds, garbage and refuse, public nuisances, and
illegal objects and structures. The provisions of this chapter shall be
liberally construed in order to carry out the abatement of the growth and
spread of injurious and noxious weeds, garbage and refuse, public nuisances,
and illegal objects and structures. (Ord. 11-13, 9-21-2011)
9.10.020: MUNICIPAL INSPECTOR:
The city council may appoint a municipal inspector to examine and investigate
real property located within the city for the growth and spread of injurious
and noxious weeds, garbage and refuse, public nuisances, and illegal objects
and structures. The municipal inspector shall examine and investigate real
property located within the city for the growth and spread of injurious and
noxious weeds, garbage and refuse, public nuisances, and illegal objects and
structures. (Ord. 11-13, 9-21-2011)
9.10.030: INSPECTION:
If the inspector conducts an examination and investigation of real property
located within the city, the inspector shall deliver written notice of the
results of the examination and investigation in accordance with section
9.10.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 11-13, 9-21-2011)
9.10.040: WRITTEN NOTICE:
   A.   The municipal inspector shall serve the written notice on the property
owner of record according to the Salt Lake County recorder's office, as
provided in subsection C of this section.
   B.   The municipal inspector may serve the written notice on a nonowner
occupant of the property or another person responsible for the property, who is
not the owner of record, including a manager or agent of the owner, if the
property owner is not an occupant of the property, as provided in subsection C
of this section.
   C.   The written notice may be served on the property owner of record in
person or by mail to the last known address of the owner according to the
records of the Salt Lake County recorder's office or on the nonowner occupant
or another person responsible for the property who is not the owner of record
in person or by mail to the property address.
   D.   The written notice shall identify the property owner of record
according to the records of the Salt Lake County recorder's office, describe
the property and the nature and the results of the examination and
investigation conducted, and require the property owner, occupant, or, if
applicable, another person responsible for the property to eradicate or destroy
or remove identified items examined and investigated and comply in a time
period designated in the notice, but no less than ten (10) days after the day
on which the notice is delivered or postmarked. With respect to a written
notice of injurious and noxious weeds, the municipal inspector is not required
to give more than one notice for each annual season of weed growth for weeds
growing on the property. (Ord. 11-13, 9-21-2011)
9.10.050: REMOVAL BY CITY AND COST OF REMOVAL:
   A.   If the owner of, occupant of, or other person responsible for, the real
property described in the written notice fails to timely comply with the
written notice, the municipal inspector may, at the expense of the city, employ
necessary assistance to enter the property and destroy or remove any item
identified in the written notice and prepare an itemized statement, as set
forth in subsection B of this section, and mail to the owner of record
according to the Salt Lake County recorder's office a copy of the itemized
statement demanding payment within thirty (30) days after the day on which the
statement is postmarked.
   B.   The itemized statement shall include the address of the property, an
itemized list of and demand for payment of all expenses, including
administrative expenses incurred by the city to employ necessary assistance to
enter the property and destroy or remove the items identified in the written
notice, the address of the city treasurer where payment may be made for the
expenses and notify the property owner that failure to pay the expenses may
result in a lien on the property in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section
10-11-4, and that the owner may file a written objection to all or part of the
statement within twenty (20) days after the day of the statement postmark with
the city recorder.
   C.   If the owner fails to file a timely written objection or timely pay the
amount set forth in the demand for payment, the city may file an action in
district court or certify the past due costs and expenses to the Salt Lake
County treasurer.
   D.   If the city files an action in the district court, the city may sue for
all removal and destruction costs, including administrative costs and
reasonable attorney fees, interest, and court costs.
   E.   If the property owner files a written objection, as provided above, the
city shall hold a hearing pursuant to the provisions of section
9.08.110 of this title as if it were an appeal of an administrative notice,
except that the time periods and notice set forth in this chapter shall be
applicable. The city shall mail or deliver notice of the hearing date and time
to the property owner. At the hearing, the hearing officer shall review and
determine the actual cost of abatement, if any. The property owner shall pay
the actual cost due after the decision by the hearing officer to the city
treasurer within thirty (30) days after the date on which the hearing is held.
   F.   If the property owner fails to pay the amount due as determined by the
hearing officer, the city may file an action in the district court for the
amount due as determined by the hearing officer or certify the past due cost
and expenses to the Salt Lake County treasurer in accordance with Utah Code
Annotated section 10-11-4. (Ord. 11-13, 9-21-2011)
9.10.060: DUTY TO MAINTAIN PROPERTY:
   A.   The owner and the occupant of a property who is not the property owner
of record shall have a joint and several obligation and the duty to maintain
property located within the city, including, but not limited to, abatement of
the growth and spread of injurious and noxious weeds, garbage and refuse,
public nuisance, or illegal objects or structures.
   B.   Definition of noxious weeds shall have the same meaning as that term is
defined in Utah Code Annotated section 4-17-1 or its successor. (Ord. 11-13, 9-
21-2011)
CHAPTER 9.12
HELICOPTER FLIGHTS
SECTION:
9.12.010: Permit Required For Helicopter Flights
9.12.020: Permit; Application; Contents
9.12.030: Altitude Restrictions
9.12.010: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR HELICOPTER FLIGHTS:
It is unlawful for any person, except in an emergency, to take off or land a
helicopter within the limits of the city, without first making application for
and obtaining the required permit from the city. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.12.020: PERMIT; APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
Application for a permit to take off or land a helicopter within the limits of
the city shall be made in writing to the city. Each application shall state the
name of the business; the name of the applicant; the location to be used for
such take off and landing; the name and address of the business agent who is
authorized to receive service of process and any communication regarding such
application; evidence of participation in a federal aviation administration
approved drug testing program; evidence of compliance with all applicable
federal aviation administration rules and regulations; evidence of proposed
compliance with noise control ordinances adopted pursuant to section
9.56.020 of this title; and such additional information as may be needed for
the purpose of guidance of the city officials in issuing such permit. (Ord. 04-
11, 3-3-2004)
9.12.030: ALTITUDE RESTRICTIONS:
Except when necessary for take off or landing, no person may operate a
helicopter below the following altitudes:
   A.   An altitude allowing, if power unit fails, emergency landing without
undue hazard to person or property on the surface.
   B.   An altitude of one thousand feet (1,000') above the highest obstacle
within a horizontal radius of two thousand feet (2,000') of the helicopter.
(Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
CHAPTER 9.16
PARACHUTE JUMPING
SECTION:
9.16.010: Written Permission Required For Parachute Jumping
9.16.020: Jumps To Be In Compliance With Law
9.16.010: WRITTEN PERMISSION REQUIRED FOR PARACHUTE JUMPING:
It is unlawful for any person, except in an emergency, to make a parachute
jump, or for any pilot in command of an aircraft to allow a parachute jump to
be made from that aircraft, within the limits of the city, unless prior
permission in writing is first had and obtained from the city. (Ord. 04-11, 3-
3-2004)
9.16.020: JUMPS TO BE IN COMPLIANCE WITH LAW:
Any such approved parachute jump shall be made strictly in compliance with all
pertinent federal, state and local rules and regulations. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-
2004)
CHAPTER 9.20
SEWERS
SECTION:
9.20.010: Connection To Public Sewer Required
9.20.020: Opening Manhole Covers; Restrictions
9.20.030: Discharging Surface Water Into Sewers
9.20.040: Obstruction Of Sewers; Prohibited Discharges
9.20.010: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED:
Connection with the public sewer is required unless proper vents and traps are
installed that are approved by an authorized representative of the city or the
applicable sewer district. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.20.020: OPENING MANHOLE COVERS; RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to open any manhole without permission from an
authorized representative of the city or the entity having ownership of such
manhole. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.20.030: DISCHARGING SURFACE WATER INTO SEWERS:
It is unlawful for any person to connect any drain that discharges rainwater or
surface water, or the contents of any spring, creek, ditch or other
watercourse, with the public sewer, without permission to do the same from the
entity having ownership of such sewer. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.20.040: OBSTRUCTION OF SEWERS; PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
It is unlawful for any person to empty or discharge into the public sewers any
solids, garbage, or other similar matter, or any matter or thing likely to
obstruct the sewer. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
CHAPTER 9.24
COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF SOLID WASTE
SECTION:
9.24.010: Garbage Hauling; Covering Of Vehicles
9.24.020: Damaging Containers
9.24.030: Waste Disposal; Rules And Regulations
9.24.040: Waste Disposal; Dumping Restrictions
9.24.050: Loaded Vehicles On Streets
9.24.060: Spilling Refuse From Vehicles
9.24.070: Solid Waste Storage And Disposal Facilities; New Building
9.24.080: Household Solid Waste
9.24.090: Litter; Deposit In Containers
9.24.010: GARBAGE HAULING; COVERING OF VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to haul, convey or transport through or upon any
of the public streets, any garbage, ashes, market wastes, trade wastes, manure,
night soil, loose paper, scrap lumber, excelsior, tree limbs, bush clippings,
lawn clippings, house refuse, yard refuse, liquid wastes, or any other refuse
materials, in open trucks, open trailers or other open conveyances, unless
covered completely with a heavy duty canvas or other heavy acceptable material
at all times when the vehicle is being used for the collection of, or carrying,
transporting or hauling of such refuse. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.020: DAMAGING CONTAINERS:
It is unlawful for any person to, wilfully or negligently break, deface or
injure any receptacle used to contain garbage or other refuse. (Ord. 04-11, 3-
3-2004)
9.24.030: WASTE DISPOSAL; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to make collections of or to haul or transport
garbage, market waste or trade waste in or from any part of the city, except as
provided by the rules and regulations of the board of health and/or Salt Lake
County special service district no. 1. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.040: WASTE DISPOSAL; DUMPING RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful to dump or dispose of any refuse or garbage of any description
anywhere in the city. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.050: LOADED VEHICLES ON STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to suffer, permit or allow any vehicle, and/or
container, loaded with garbage, manure, slop, swill, market waste or other
refuse to be or remain standing upon any public street within the city for
longer than seventy two (72) hours for the purpose of loading and transporting
the same. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.060: SPILLING REFUSE FROM VEHICLES:
It is unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle, any garbage,
refuse or ashes on any public street or alley in the city; provided, that this
section shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage, refuse or ashes for
collection in a manner complying with the prescribed rules and regulations of
the Salt Lake County special service district no. 1. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.070: SOLID WASTE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL FACILITIES; NEW BUILDING:
   A.   Before building permits shall be issued for construction of commercial
buildings and multiple-dwelling units, plans for the adequacy, location and
accessibility of solid waste containers and storage facilities must be approved
by the city.
   B.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for such premises until the
city approves such facilities. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.080: HOUSEHOLD SOLID WASTE:
All residents located in the city shall comply with the rules and regulations
of the Salt Lake County special service district no. 1 in all matters
pertaining to containers and removal of solid wastes. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.090: LITTER; DEPOSIT IN CONTAINERS:
It is unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place or deposit litter in any
manner or amount on any public or private property within the city except in
containers or areas lawfully provided therefor. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
CHAPTER 9.28
WEEDS AND REFUSE
SECTION:
9.28.010: Responsibility To Keep Property Clean
9.28.020: Weed Control Standards
9.28.030: Examination Of Property For Compliance
9.28.010: RESPONSIBILITY TO KEEP PROPERTY CLEAN:
It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of real property in the city to let
the height of weeds on such property to grow beyond the maximum permitted, or
to fail to remove from such property any injurious and noxious weeds, garbage
or refuse, unsightly or deleterious objects or structures, after having been
given notice pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-11-2. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-
2004)
9.28.020: WEED CONTROL STANDARDS:
Weeds shall be maintained at a height of not more than six inches (6") at any
time, and shall be cleared from all real property in the city. (Ord. 04-11, 3-
3-2004)
9.28.030: EXAMINATION OF PROPERTY FOR COMPLIANCE:
The city may abate weeds, garbage, refuse and unsightly objects pursuant to
Utah Code Annotated sections 10-11-1 through 10-11-4. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
CHAPTER 9.24
COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF SOLID WASTE
SECTION:
9.24.010: Garbage Hauling; Covering Of Vehicles
9.24.020: Damaging Containers
9.24.030: Waste Disposal; Rules And Regulations
9.24.040: Waste Disposal; Dumping Restrictions
9.24.050: Loaded Vehicles On Streets
9.24.060: Spilling Refuse From Vehicles
9.24.070: Solid Waste Storage And Disposal Facilities; New Building
9.24.080: Household Solid Waste
9.24.090: Litter; Deposit In Containers
9.24.010: GARBAGE HAULING; COVERING OF VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to haul, convey or transport through or upon any
of the public streets, any garbage, ashes, market wastes, trade wastes, manure,
night soil, loose paper, scrap lumber, excelsior, tree limbs, bush clippings,
lawn clippings, house refuse, yard refuse, liquid wastes, or any other refuse
materials, in open trucks, open trailers or other open conveyances, unless
covered completely with a heavy duty canvas or other heavy acceptable material
at all times when the vehicle is being used for the collection of, or carrying,
transporting or hauling of such refuse. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.020: DAMAGING CONTAINERS:
It is unlawful for any person to, wilfully or negligently break, deface or
injure any receptacle used to contain garbage or other refuse. (Ord. 04-11, 3-
3-2004)
9.24.030: WASTE DISPOSAL; RULES AND REGULATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to make collections of or to haul or transport
garbage, market waste or trade waste in or from any part of the city, except as
provided by the rules and regulations of the board of health and/or Salt Lake
County special service district no. 1. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.040: WASTE DISPOSAL; DUMPING RESTRICTIONS:
It is unlawful to dump or dispose of any refuse or garbage of any description
anywhere in the city. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.050: LOADED VEHICLES ON STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to suffer, permit or allow any vehicle, and/or
container, loaded with garbage, manure, slop, swill, market waste or other
refuse to be or remain standing upon any public street within the city for
longer than seventy two (72) hours for the purpose of loading and transporting
the same. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.060: SPILLING REFUSE FROM VEHICLES:
It is unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle, any garbage,
refuse or ashes on any public street or alley in the city; provided, that this
section shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage, refuse or ashes for
collection in a manner complying with the prescribed rules and regulations of
the Salt Lake County special service district no. 1. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.070: SOLID WASTE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL FACILITIES; NEW BUILDING:
   A.   Before building permits shall be issued for construction of commercial
buildings and multiple-dwelling units, plans for the adequacy, location and
accessibility of solid waste containers and storage facilities must be approved
by the city.
   B.   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for such premises until the
city approves such facilities. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.080: HOUSEHOLD SOLID WASTE:
All residents located in the city shall comply with the rules and regulations
of the Salt Lake County special service district no. 1 in all matters
pertaining to containers and removal of solid wastes. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.24.090: LITTER; DEPOSIT IN CONTAINERS:
It is unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place or deposit litter in any
manner or amount on any public or private property within the city except in
containers or areas lawfully provided therefor. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
CHAPTER 9.52
COST RECOVERY; FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
9.52.010: Purpose
9.52.020: Definitions
9.52.030: Recovery Authorization And Procedure
9.52.040: No Admission Of Liability
9.52.050: Action To Recover Expenses
9.52.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall provide procedures for recovering costs incurred by the city
or the fire department for assistance rendered by the city or the fire
department in responding to hazardous materials emergencies, aggravated fire
emergencies and aggravated emergency medical responses. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.52.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
AGGRAVATED FIRE EMERGENCY:
   A.   A fire proximately caused by the owner or occupier of property or a
structure, which presents a direct and immediate threat to public safety and
requires immediate action to mitigate the threat, and the fire:
      1.   Is caused or contributed to by the failure to comply with an order
from any city agency, department or official, or
      2.   Occurs as a direct result of a deliberate act in violation of the
ordinances or regulations of the city, or
      3.   Is caused by arson;
   B.   An alarm that results in a fire unit being dispatched, and the person
transmitting, or causing the transmission of, the alarm, knows at the time of
said transmission that no fire or fire related emergency exists.
AGGRAVATED MEDICAL EMERGENCY: An alarm that results in a fire unit or an
emergency medical unit being dispatched, and the person transmitting, or
causing the transmission of, the alarm, knows at the time of said transmission
that there are no reasonable grounds for believing that a medical emergency
exists.
EXPENSES: The actual costs of government and volunteer personnel including
workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs
of equipment operation, costs of materials, costs of disposal and the cost of
any contract labor and materials.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The Salt Lake County fire department or other entity providing
fire protection services to the city.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY: A sudden or unexpected release of any substance
that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics, presents a direct and immediate threat to public
safety or the environment and requires immediate action to mitigate the threat.
(Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.52.030: RECOVERY AUTHORIZATION AND PROCEDURE:
   A.   The city is hereby empowered to recover expenses incurred by virtue of
the city's or the fire department's response to a hazardous materials
emergency, aggravated fire emergency or an aggravated medical emergency from
any person, corporation, partnership or other individual or entity who caused
such an emergency, pursuant to the following procedure:
      1.   The fire department shall determine responsibility for the emergency
or response as defined above, and the city shall notify the responsible party
by written notice of the fire department's determination of responsibility and
the expenses to be recovered.
      2.   The notice shall specify that the determined responsible party may
appeal the fire department's decision.
   B.   In the event the determined responsible party appeals the
determination, a hearing officer shall hold a hearing to consider any issues
raised by the appeal, at which hearing the appealing party and the city shall
be entitled to present evidence in support of their respective positions. The
hearing officer shall be the mayor or a person appointed by the mayor with the
advice and consent of the city council.
   C.   After the hearing, the hearing officer, if appointed, shall make a
recommendation to the mayor, and the mayor shall issue a decision determining
responsibility and assessing expenses. The mayor may adopt, modify or remand
the recommendation of the hearing examiner, if appointed, for further
proceedings. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.52.040: NO ADMISSION OF LIABILITY:
The payment of expenses determined owing under this chapter does not
constitute:
   A.   An admission of liability or negligence in any legal action for
damages; or
   B.   A criminal fine. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.52.050: ACTION TO RECOVER EXPENSES:
In the event the parties determined to be responsible for the repayment of
expenses incurred due to the city's or the fire department's response to such
an emergency fail to make payment to the city within thirty (30) days after
issuance of the order or thirty (30) days from the deadline for appeal in the
event no appeal is filed, the city may initiate legal action to recover from
the determined responsible parties the expenses determined to be owing,
including the city's reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
CHAPTER 9.56
ADOPTION OF SALT LAKE VALLEY HEALTH DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE
SECTION:
9.56.010: Purpose
9.56.020: Regulations Adopted
9.56.030: Interpretation
9.56.040: Copies On File
9.56.010: PURPOSE:
The city council finds that it is in the best interest of the citizens of the
city to adopt the Salt Lake valley health department regulations to clarify the
authority of the city to enforce provisions of such regulations for violations
occurring within the city. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.56.020: REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The Salt Lake valley health department regulations, and amendments thereto, are
hereby adopted in their entirety. The regulations shall be construed to apply
only to the incorporated areas of the city and references in the regulations
including reference to personnel and officers of the Salt Lake valley health
department shall be interpreted and construed, where necessary to carry out the
intent of this chapter and title, to personnel and officers of the city. (Ord.
04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.56.030: INTERPRETATION:
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the Salt Lake valley
health department regulations and the provisions of any other applicable
ordinance, statute, rule or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall
apply. (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
9.56.040: COPIES ON FILE:
Copies of the Salt Lake valley health department regulations shall be filed for
use and examination by the public in the offices of the city recorder. (Ord.
04-11, 3-3-2004)
CHAPTER 9.60
PENALTY FOR VIOLATION
SECTION:
9.60.010: Violation Penalty
9.60.010: VIOLATION PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision or provisions of this title shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and punished by imprisonment in the county jail
not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine in any sum less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), or both, except that in all cases where a corporation is
convicted of an offense for the commission of which a natural person would be
punishable as for a misdemeanor, such corporation is punishable by a fine not
exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). (Ord. 04-11, 3-3-2004)
CHAPTER 9.61
PARKS
SECTION:
9.61.010: Definitions
9.61.020: Hours Of Use Of Off-Leash Park Areas
9.61.030: Off Leash Area Permit/Tag; Required For Use
9.61.040: Off Leash Area Permit/Tag; Term
9.61.050: Off Leash Area Permit/Tag; Revocation
9.61.060: Off Leash Area Permit/Tag; Requirements
9.61.070: Off Leash Area Permit/Tag; License Vendors
9.61.080: Hours Of Use Of Parks
9.61.090: Motor Vehicle Restriction
9.61.100: Skateboard And Scooter Restriction
9.61.110: Rules For Skateboard Park
9.61.120: Limit On Number Of Dogs
9.61.130: Business Restriction
9.61.140: Fire Making
9.61.150: Firearms And Explosives
9.61.160: Camping Restricted
9.61.170: Noise Restriction
9.61.180: Injuring Trees Or Other Improvements
9.61.190: Nuisance In Park
9.61.200: Rules For Off Leash Area
9.61.210: Enforcement Authority
9.61.220: Penalties
9.61.010: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall have the following meanings for purposes of this
chapter:
AUTHORIZED PERSON: A police officer, sheriff, deputy sheriff, emergency
services personnel, animal control officer, maintenance personnel, or
government employee or contractor on official business.
DIVISION AND DIRECTOR: Shall have the same meaning as those terms are defined
in title 8 of this code.
MOTOR VEHICLE: An automobile, truck, tote goat, motorcycle, motorbike,
snowmobile, low profile vehicle, motor assisted scooter, pocket bike,
minimotorcycle, go-cart, and any and all other self-propelled motor vehicles.
Motor vehicle does not include a vehicle designed for use by a person with a
disability.
OFF LEASH AREA: An enclosed, fenced parcel of real property located within a
park that has been set apart where dogs do not need to be under the immediate
physical control of their owners or persons charged with the care, custody, or
control of the dogs by means of a leash, tether, or other physical control
device.
PARKS OR PARK: A parcel of real property that is owned, leased, or controlled
by the city that has been set apart for the use of general public as a park,
whether developed or undeveloped.
SCOOTER: Any nonmotorized device consisting of two (2) or more wheels affixed
to a platform or footboard upon which the rider stands and which has a handle
or other mechanism at the front for holding or guiding the device. It also
includes every device generally recognized as a scooter but does not include a
bicycle.
SKATEBOARD: Any nonmotorized device consisting of two (2) or more wheels
affixed to a platform or footboard upon which a rider stands and which does not
have steering capabilities similar to that of a bicycle and does not have
brakes which operate on or upon the wheels of the skateboard and includes every
device generally recognized as a skateboard.
SKATEBOARD PARK: An enclosed, fenced parcel of real property that is located
within a park that has been set apart for skateboards.
UNAUTHORIZED PERSON: Any person who is not an authorized person. (Ord. 06-06,
2-15-2006)
9.61.020: HOURS OF USE OF OFF-LEASH PARK AREAS:
   A.   The hours of use of off-leash park areas shall be determined by the
city administration at its sole discretion. Hours of operation shall be posted
at each respective off-leash park area as soon as possible following the
administration’s determination of such hours.
   B.   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to be in an off- leash park 
area, either on foot or in any type of motor vehicle or other conveyance,
during the hours that the off-leash park area is closed. (Ord. 09-29, 8-19-
2009; amd. Ord. 20-05, 2-5-2020)
9.61.030: OFF LEASH AREA PERMIT/TAG; REQUIRED FOR USE:
Any person harboring, exercising control, or having in his possession a dog in
the off leash area shall have an off leash area permit/tag for such dog. An off
leash area permit/tag may be obtained by submitting an application for an off
leash area permit/tag to the division, utilizing a standard form acceptable to
the division. The application shall be accompanied by evidence that is
acceptable to the director or his designee of a valid dog license issued by the
jurisdiction of the dog owner's residence and the prescribed off leash area
permit/tag fee as set forth in the fee schedule in title 8, chapter 8.99 of
this code. (Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.040: OFF LEASH AREA PERMIT/TAG; TERM:
The off leash area permit/tag shall be issued for one year and be effective
from the date of purchase, through the end of the same month of the expiration
year as the month in which the off leash area permit/tag is purchased. (Ord.
06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.050: OFF LEASH AREA PERMIT/TAG; REVOCATION:
If the owner of any dog(s) is found to be in violation of this chapter or of
title 8 of this code on three (3) or more different occasions, within a twenty
four (24) month period, the director may seek a court order pursuant to title
8, chapter 8.40 of this code, revoking for a period of one year any off leash
area permit(s)/tag(s) such person may possess. Persons seeking reapplication of
said off leash area permit/tag must comply with conditions as set forth by the
director that may include, but not be limited to, sterilization of the dog.
(Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.060: OFF LEASH AREA PERMIT/TAG; REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Upon satisfying the requirements of section
9.61.030 of this chapter, the director or designee shall issue to the owner a
receipt and an off leash area permit/tag in the form of a tag for each dog
permitted. The off leash area permit/tag shall have stamped thereon the off
leash area permit/tag number, corresponding with off leash area permit/tag
number on the receipt. The owner shall attach the off leash area permit/tag to
the collar or harness of the dog and see that the dog constantly wears the
collar and off leash area permit/tag while in the off leash area. Failure to
attach the off leash area permit/tag as provided shall be a violation of this
chapter.
   B.   Off leash area permit/tags are not transferable from one dog to another
or from one owner to another. No refunds shall be made on any off leash area
permit/tag for any reason whatsoever. Replacement for lost or destroyed off
leash area permit/tags shall be allowed upon payment to the division of the
replacement off leash area permit/tag fee set forth in the fee schedule of
title 8, chapter 8.99 of this code. (Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.070: OFF LEASH AREA PERMIT/TAG; LICENSE VENDORS:
The director may contract with veterinary hospitals, veterinarians, pet shops,
animal grooming parlors, and similar institutions or individuals for the
issuance of off leash area permit/tag application forms. (Ord. 06-06, 2-15-
2006)
9.61.080: HOURS OF USE OF PARKS:
The hours and days that a park is open and closed are as follows:
   A.   Parks shall be closed beginning November 1 through March 31 from eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M. until seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the next day and shall
be open from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
   B.   Parks shall be closed beginning April 1 through October 31 from ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. until seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the next day and shall
be open from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. until ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to be in a park, either on foot or
in any type of motor vehicle or other conveyance, during the hours that a park
is closed. (Ord. 09-29, 8-19-2009)
9.61.090: MOTOR VEHICLE RESTRICTION:
   A.   It is unlawful to operate or drive any motor vehicle within any park at
a speed in excess of that speed posted on a particular road, trail, or pathway
within the park.
   B.   It is unlawful to operate or drive a motor vehicle within a park other
than in those areas specifically designated and posted for that particular use.
This prohibition shall not apply, however, to motorized or self-propelled
equipment used within the park by authorized personnel for transportation or
that is used for maintenance and service of park facilities. Emergency vehicles
are also exempt from this provision. (Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.100: SKATEBOARD AND SCOOTER RESTRICTION:
   A.   Every person riding a skateboard or scooter shall exercise due care and
reasonable caution to prevent injuries to others, to himself, or to property.
   B.   Every person riding a skateboard or scooter shall yield the right of
way to pedestrians at all times.
   C.   Skateboards and scooters shall not be ridden upon any stairway, wall,
bench, parking lot, roadway, or on or over any landscaped area, including, but
not limited to, grass areas, shrubbery, or flowerbeds located in a park. (Ord.
06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.110: RULES FOR SKATEBOARD PARK:
   A.   The rules for the skateboard park are set forth below:
      1.   The skateboard park is open thirty (30) minutes before sunrise and
is closed thirty (30) minutes after sunset.
      2.   Users of the skateboard park must utilize appropriate safety
equipment, including helmets and pads.
      3.   No food or drink or glass containers are allowed in the skateboard
park.
      4.   No alcohol, drug, and tobacco products are allowed in the skateboard
park.
      5.   Use of the skateboard park is at your own risk.
   B.   The rules shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the skateboard park
and shall include the following disclaimer:
Skating/skateboarding/rollerblading is an inherently- dangerous sport. The
dangers of skating/skateboarding/rollerblading include, but are not limited to,
injury or death resulting from changing track conditions arising from changing
weather conditions; variations in or steepness of skating area, rain, snow, or
ice conditions; surface conditions, such as the introduction of debris onto the
course; collision with other skaters, and the skater's failure to skate or
behave in a safe and reasonable manner. Utilizing this facility constitutes
your acceptance of the above cited rules, the above cited risks, and your
willingness to assume personal responsibility for any and all injuries arising
from the use of this facility. If you are unwilling to obey these rules or
assume these risks, for yourself, or for those under your supervision, you
should not use this facility.
   C.   It is unlawful to violate the rules for the Skateboard Park. (Ord. 06-
06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.120: LIMIT ON NUMBER OF DOGS:
It is unlawful for any person at any one time to harbor, exercise control, or
have in his possession more dogs in the off leash area than permitted in
section
9.61.200 of this chapter. (Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.130: BUSINESS RESTRICTION:
Except as specifically authorized by the City, it is unlawful for any person to
sell or display for sale any merchandise or goods, products, or operate a
business, including temporary food vendor cart, in a park. (Ord. 06-06, 2-15-
2006)
9.61.140: FIRE MAKING:
It is unlawful for any person to make or kindle a fire within a park for any
reason unless such person uses a designated area which has a fireplace,
barbecue grill, or other facility designated by the City to contain a fire.
(Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.150: FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES:
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to discharge any firearm,
firecracker, rocket, torpedo, powder, or any other fireworks or explosives
within a park. (Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.160: CAMPING RESTRICTED:
It is unlawful for any person to camp or lodge in a park, unless otherwise
permitted by the City. (Ord. 17-21, 10-18-2017)
9.61.170: NOISE RESTRICTION:
It is unlawful for any person to play or cause to be played amplified sound or
music in a park without a permit from the City. Such permit may be denied where
it is the reasonable belief of the City that such sound or music would have a
propensity to disturb the peaceful enjoyment of the park by other members of
the public or annoy residents neighboring the park. It shall be the
responsibility of any person obtaining such permit to ensure that the permit is
available for inspection by authorized personnel. The issuance of any permit
does not exempt the holder thereof from applicable rules and regulations
regarding noise emissions. (Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.180: INJURING TREES OR OTHER IMPROVEMENTS:
It is unlawful for any person to move any building or other object so as to
injure or interfere with any tree, shrub, statue, monument, or other
improvements standing in any street or park or scratch, cut, mark, or deface
any tree, shrub, statue, monument, or other improvements in any street or park.
(Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.190: NUISANCE IN PARK:
It is unlawful for any person or persons to scratch, cut, injure, or deface any
building, fence, structure, or other property or foul any fountains or any
other improvements, or to cut or injure flowers or flowerbeds within the park.
(Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.200: RULES FOR OFF LEASH AREA:
   A.   The rules for the off leash area are set forth below:
      1.   All dogs must be on a leash except in the off leash area.
      2.   All dogs using the off leash area must be wearing a current license
tag and off leash area permit/tag and be current on all required immunizations
unless exempt by title 8 of this Code.
      3.   Dog defecation must be immediately cleaned up by the person
handling, harboring, exercising control or possession of such dog, and the
defecation must be placed in a proper trash receptacle.
      4.   Aggressive dogs and dog owners are prohibited from the off leash
area.
      5.   Dogs in the off leash area must be under the supervision of a person
over the age of twelve (12).
      6.   Female dogs in heat and dogs under the age of four (4) months are
not allowed in the off leash area. No animals except canines are allowed in the
off leash area.
      7.   Persons handling, harboring, exercising control or possession of
dogs are required to quiet their barking dogs or remove them from the park area
and are also required to stop dogs from digging and must repair all damage that
occurs.
      8.   No food (human or animal) is allowed in the off leash area.
      9.   Dogs are not allowed in the tot lot area.
      10.   The off leash area hours shall be as stated in section
9.61.020 of this chapter.
      11.   Violators of these rules shall be punished as set forth in section
9.61.220 of this chapter.
      12.   It is unlawful for any person at any one time to harbor, exercise
control, or have in his possession more than two (2) dogs in the off leash
area.
   B.   The rules shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the off leash area
and shall include the following disclaimer:
Any person who brings a dog into the off-leash area assumes the legal
responsibility for any damage, disease, or injury to persons, other dogs, or
property caused by the dog. Utilizing this off-leash area constitutes your
acceptance of the above cited rules, and your willingness to assume personal
responsibility for any and all injuries arising from the use of the off-leash
area. If you are unwilling to obey these rules or assume these risks, for
yourself, or for those under your supervision, you should not use the off-
leash area.
(Ord. 09-36, 11-4-2009)
9.61.210: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
The city's designated animal control service contract provider, other agent
designated by the city, or any law enforcement officer is hereby authorized and
empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to apprehend, to
transport, and impound any animals found in violation of this chapter, or any
licensed or unlicensed animal for any other violation of title 8 of this code,
and to issue criminal citations. (Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006)
9.61.220: PENALTIES:
Violation of this chapter shall be an infraction. The schedule of penalties for
violation of this chapter is:
   A.   Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense, one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the second and subsequent offenses.
   B.   When determining under this section if an offense is a second or
subsequent offense, only prior convictions committed within the twenty four
(24) months prior to the commission of the current offense may be considered.
(Ord. 06-06, 2-15-2006)
CHAPTER 9.65
SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CITY PARKS, TRAILS, AND RECREATION FACILITIES
SECTION:
9.65.010: Purpose
9.65.020: Definitions
9.65.030: Smoking Prohibited
9.65.040: Smoking In Designated Areas (Rep. by Ord. 18-19, 5-16-2018)
9.65.045: Posting Of Signs
9.65.050: Penalties
9.65.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the public by prohibiting smoking in City parks, recreation areas and
facilities, and trails. (Ord. 12-01, 1-4-2012)
9.65.020: DEFINITIONS:
CITY OWNED PARKS, TRAILS, AND RECREATION FACILITIES: All City owned parks,
trails, trailheads, and recreation facilities, including parking lots for such
facilities.
SMOKING: Smoking means:
   A.   The possession of any lighted or heated tobacco product in any form;
   B.   Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar,
cigarette, pipe, or hookah that contains:
      1.   Tobacco or any plant product intended for inhalation;
      2.   Shisha or non-tobacco shisha;
      3.   Nicotine;
      4.   A natural or synthetic tobacco substitute; or
      5.   A natural or synthetic flavored tobacco product;
   C.   Using an oral smoking device intended to circumvent the prohibition of
smoking in this chapter. (Ord. 18-19, 5-16-2018)
9.65.030: SMOKING PROHIBITED:
Smoking is prohibited in City owned parks, trails, and recreation facilities,
including parking lots for such facilities. (Ord. 18-19, 5-16-2018)
9.65.040: SMOKING IN DESIGNATED AREAS:
(Rep. by Ord. 18-19, 5-16-2018)
9.65.045: POSTING OF SIGNS:
"No Smoking" signs shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in City owned
parks, trails, and recreational facilities and parking lots of City owned
parks, trails, and recreational facilities. (Ord. 18-19, 5-16-2018)
9.65.050: PENALTIES:
A violation of this chapter is an infraction for the first offense and a Class
C misdemeanor for each subsequent offense. (Ord. 12-01, 1-4-2012)
TITLE 10
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
General Provisions   10.10
Offenses By Or Against Minors   10.20
Disorderly Conduct   10.30
Trespass   10.40
Curfew   10.50
Firearms And Weapons   10.60
CHAPTER 10.10
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10.10.010: Criminal Code Adopted
10.10.020: Controlled Substances Act Adopted
10.10.030: Alcoholic Beverage Control Act Adopted
10.10.040: Severability
10.10.010: CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   Chapters 1 through 4 of title 76 of the Utah Code Annotated are adopted
by reference in their entirety;
   B.   Chapters 5 through 10 of title 76 of the Utah Code Annotated are
adopted by reference to the extent that those chapters describe criminal
violations which are classified therein as either an infraction, class C
misdemeanor, or class B misdemeanor, and the classifications of offenses and
the penalties prescribed for those violations as provided by state law are
adopted by reference;
   C.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect or amend in any
way the provisions of ordinances 93-42 and 93-44 relating to the sale to and
possession of certain firearms by minors and the five (5) day review
requirement for the purchase of a firearm in the city. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
10.10.020: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ACT ADOPTED:
Chapters 37, 37a, 37b, and 37c of title 58 of the Utah Code Annotated,
pertaining generally to controlled substances, are adopted by reference to the
extent that those chapters describe criminal violations which are classified as
either an infraction, class C misdemeanor, class B misdemeanor, and the
classifications of offenses and the penalties prescribed for those violations
as provided by state law are adopted by reference. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
10.10.030: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT ADOPTED:
Chapter 12 of title 32A of the Utah Code Annotated is adopted by reference to
the extent that the chapter describes criminal violations which are classified
as either an infraction, class C misdemeanor, class B misdemeanor, and the
classifications of offenses and the penalties prescribed for those violations
as provided by state law are adopted by reference. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
10.10.040: SEVERABILITY:
In the event that any provision of this title is deemed invalid for any reason,
the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 05-25, 5-
18-2005)
CHAPTER 10.20
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
SECTION:
10.20.010: Definitions
10.20.020: Unlawful To Distribute Or Furnish Sex Paraphernalia To Minors
10.20.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings as
defined in this section:
DISPLAY PUBLICLY: The exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion
displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item in a manner that
it may be readily seen, and its content or character distinguished by normal
unaided vision viewing it from a public thoroughfare, place or vehicle.
DISTRIBUTE: To transfer possession of, with or without consideration.
KNOWINGLY: To have actual or constructive knowledge of the contents of the
subject matter. A person has "constructive knowledge" if a reasonable
inspection under the circumstances would have disclosed the nature of the
subject matter or if the failure to inspect is for the purpose of avoiding such
disclosure.
MINOR: Any unmarried person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
PERSON: Shall not be limited to individuals only but shall include public and
private corporations, firms, joint associations, partnerships and the like. The
word "person" as used in this chapter, shall apply to a natural person and
shall apply equally to the male and female genders.
PROMOTE: To manufacture, issue, transmit, publish, circulate, disseminate,
present, exhibit, or advertise, or to offer or agree to do the same.
SEX PARAPHERNALIA: Any item, device or product, other than a "sexual device",
as defined in this section, which is manufactured, promoted or designed to be
used primarily for sexual stimulation, sexual arousal, or the enhancing or
prolonging of sexual activity. "Sex paraphernalia" shall not mean any device,
appliance or pill designed to be used primarily for contraception purposes and
shall not mean movies, books, magazines, or other communicative materials
protected by the first amendment of the United States constitution.
SEXUAL DEVICE: Any item, device or product, including, but not limited to, a
dildo, vibrator, artificial vagina, Spanish fly, benwa balls, pillows or other
products shaped or made to resemble male or female genitals, buttocks, or
developed female breasts, edible underwear, flavored or unflavored edible body
lotion or other substance designed for internal consumption, or any other item,
device or product manufactured, promoted or designed to be used primarily for
sexual stimulation, sexual arousal, or the enhancing or prolonging of sexual
activity.
WILFULLY: A purpose or willingness to commit the act or to omit an act required
herein. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
10.20.020: UNLAWFUL TO DISTRIBUTE OR FURNISH SEX PARAPHERNALIA TO MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and wilfully distribute or furnish
any sex paraphernalia to any minor. Each distribution to a minor shall
constitute a separate offense. A violation of this section is a class B
misdemeanor. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
CHAPTER 10.30
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
SECTION:
10.30.010: Loitering
10.30.020: Camping And Sleeping On Public Grounds
10.30.030: Placing Printed Material On Vehicles
10.30.010: LOITERING:
   A.   A person is guilty of loitering if such person:
      1.   Appears at a place or at a time under circumstances that warrant
alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity, and upon inquiry
by a law enforcement official, such person fails to give a reasonably credible
account of his identity, conduct, or purposes; or
      2.   Loiters, remains, wanders, or lingers idly in or about a school,
either by walking, sitting, standing, or by sitting in or upon a vehicle or
conveyance, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of or
responsibility for a pupil or student or any other specific, legitimate reason
for being there, and not having written permission from anyone authorized to
grant the same, and upon inquiry of a law enforcement official, such person
fails to give a reasonably credible account of his identity, conduct or
purposes; or
      3.   Loiters, remains, wanders or lingers idly in or about a building,
lot, street, sidewalk or any other public or private place, either by walking,
sitting, standing, or by sitting in or upon a vehicle or conveyance, without
apparent reason and under circumstances which justify suspicion that he may be
engaged in or about to engage in a crime, and upon inquiry of a law enforcement
official, such person fails to give a reasonably credible account of his
identity, conduct or purposes; or
      4.   Is on or in any public area as hereafter defined, and which person:
         a.   Remains, wanders idly or prowls:
            (1)   In a manner or at a time not usual for law abiding citizens;
or
            (2)   Under circumstances that warrant a reasonable alarm or
immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity; or
            (3)   Accosts other persons in any public place or in any place
open to the public for the purpose of begging; and
         b.   Refuses to obey the lawful command of a law enforcement officer
to move on, or provide to said police officer a lawful reason for remaining on
or in said public area as hereafter defined;
         c.   The law enforcement officer's command shall be lawfully given
when the alleged loitering by such person creates or causes to be created:
            (1)   A breach of the peace; or
            (2)   The actual or attempted obstruction, molestation or
interference of any other person lawfully on or in any "public area", as
hereafter defined, in such a manner as to cause such other person to reasonably
fear for his safety; or
            (3)   The obstruction or attempted obstruction of the free normal
flow of vehicular traffic, or the normal passage of pedestrian traffic in said
public areas; or
            (4)   The unreasonable disturbance of any person acting lawfully on
or in any said public place;
         d.   For the purposes of this subsection, "public area" means any
place open to the public, including, but not limited to, any common public area
of any shopping mall, public way, street, highway, alley or park.
   B.   No person shall be convicted under this section if the explanation such
person gave of his conduct and purposes was true and, if believed by the law
enforcement official at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
   C.   Loitering is a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
10.30.020: CAMPING AND SLEEPING ON PUBLIC GROUNDS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person, and such person shall be guilty of a
class C misdemeanor for each day of violation hereof, to camp, lodge, cook,
make a fire or pitch a tent, fly, lean-to, tarpaulin, umbrella or any other
type of ground cover or shelter, or place sleeping bags, bedding or any other
type of camping or sleeping equipment on any "public grounds", as defined in
subsection B of this section, and it is unlawful for any person, and such
person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day of violation hereof, to
use or benefit from the use of any of the foregoing items of shelter or camping
or sleeping equipment to fail to remove the same from such public grounds
within a reasonable amount of time after being requested to do so by any law
enforcement officer or citizen.
   B.   For the purpose of this section, the term "public grounds" means any
real property owned in whole or in part by the United States of America and its
agencies, or the state of Utah or any of its political subdivisions, upon which
camping or sleeping has not been authorized by the owner. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-
2005)
10.30.030: PLACING PRINTED MATERIAL ON VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person, and such person shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor for each day of violation hereof, to distribute, deposit, place,
throw, scatter or cast, or cause to be distributed, deposited, placed, thrown,
scattered or cast, any handbill, circular, card, booklet, placard or other
printed or written commercial advertisement, except notice of parking
violations in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
CHAPTER 10.40
TRESPASS
SECTION:
10.40.010: Trespass On City Property
10.40.020: Trespass From A Public Recreational Trail
10.40.010: TRESPASS ON CITY PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person, and such person shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor for each day of violation hereof, to drive or operate any self-
propelled motor vehicle in, on or about any property belonging to the city, or
under the control of the city, except on public highways, streets and roads,
unless such property is specifically designated and posted for such use. (Ord.
05-25, 5-18-2005)
10.40.020: TRESPASS FROM A PUBLIC RECREATIONAL TRAIL:
It is unlawful for any person, and such person shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor for each day of violation hereof, for the purpose of biking,
hiking, or any other activity to wilfully leave the boundaries of any public
recreational trail across privately owned lands without the express consent of
the landowner whenever notice against leaving the trail has been given by
posting of a sign or signs reasonably likely to notify trail users. (Ord. 05-
25, 5-18-2005)
CHAPTER 10.50
CURFEW
SECTION:
10.50.010: Definitions
10.50.020: Curfew If Under Age Sixteen
10.50.030: Curfew If Age Sixteen Or Seventeen
10.50.040: Parental Liability
10.50.050: Business Liability
10.50.060: Exceptions
10.50.070: Enforcement
10.50.010: DEFINITIONS:
CARE AND CUSTODY: The legal authority of a parent or guardian to supervise or
otherwise be responsible for a minor, or the express authority given from such
parent or legal guardian of a minor to a responsible adult to supervise or
otherwise be responsible for the activities and care of the minor.
EMERGENCY ERRAND: Any errand or travel undertaken to directly and immediately
seek to prevent or reduce the consequences of an illness or injury, criminal or
potentially criminal activity, or fire or other accident and shall include the
seeking of aid and assistance from medical or emergency response personnel or
the purchase of medications.
MINOR: Any unmarried, unemancipated person who is not a member of the armed
forces of the United States and who is under the age of sixteen (16) years for
the purposes of section
10.50.020 of this chapter or who is age sixteen (16) years or seventeen (17)
years for the purposes of section
10.50.030 of this chapter.
PUBLIC PLACES: Any place open to the public, whether publicly or privately
owned, including, but not limited to, parking lots and the interiors and
exteriors of commercial establishments such as restaurants, stores or places of
entertainment. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
10.50.020: CURFEW IF UNDER AGE SIXTEEN:
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to remain or
loiter upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in the city,
between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
the following morning. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
10.50.030: CURFEW IF AGE SIXTEEN OR SEVENTEEN:
It is unlawful for any minor who is age sixteen (16) years or seventeen (17) to
remain or loiter upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in
the city, between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00)
A.M. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
10.50.040: PARENTAL LIABILITY:
It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having care and custody
of any minor to allow or permit the minor to violate the provisions of this
chapter. Violation is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
10.50.050: BUSINESS LIABILITY:
No person owning or operating a business as defined by this code shall
knowingly permit any minor to remain on the premises of such business in
violation of the provisions of this section. Any such violation shall be a
misdemeanor. This section, however, shall not apply to any minor who is
lawfully employed on the premises. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
10.50.060: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any circumstances in which
the minor is:
   A.   Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other responsible adult having
care and custody of such minor;
   B.   Engaged in legitimate trade, employment or occupation which requires
the minor's presence in or on the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places
while working at or traveling to or from such employment;
   C.   Engaged in an emergency errand directed by the minor's parent, guardian
or other responsible person having care and custody;
   D.   In a motor vehicle engaged in a normal interstate travel beginning in,
traveling through, or ending in the city;
   E.   Attending or engaged in traveling between the minor's home or place of
residence and a place where any religious, municipal, social, entertainment,
sporting, political, library or school function is occurring; or
   F.   Within the immediate vicinity of the minor's place of residence. (Ord.
05-25, 5-18-2005)
10.50.070: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any minor who is in violation of the provisions of this chapter is
subject to arrest and citation.
   B.   Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the parent,
guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of the minor.
   C.   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person charged with
the care and custody of a minor who is in violation of this chapter to refuse
to appear and take custody of the minor within a reasonable time after being
ordered to do so by a peace officer.
   D.   Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 05-25, 5-18-2005)
CHAPTER 10.60
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
SECTION:
10.60.010: Discharge Prohibited Within City Limits; Exceptions
10.60.010: DISCHARGE PROHIBITED WITHIN CITY LIMITS; EXCEPTIONS:
It is unlawful to discharge any firearm within the city limits except in self-
defense, or defense of property, or in the case of any peace officer, in the
performance of his duty, or at a duly licensed shooting gallery or range. (Ord.
05-25, 5-18-2005)
TITLE 11
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
General Provisions   11.04
Traffic Control Regulations   11.08
Vehicle Control Restrictions   11.12
Speed Limits   11.16
Stopping, Standing, And Parking   11.20
Parking Permit Program   11.22
Traffic And Parking On School Grounds   11.24
Driving Under The Influence Of Intoxicants (Rep. by Ord. 06-30, 9-6-
2006)   11.28
Bicycles   11.32
Pedestrians   11.36
Wrecker Service   11.40
CHAPTER 11.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11.04.010: Definitions
11.04.020: Applicability
11.04.030: Traffic Control Devices
11.04.010: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
OWNER: A person who holds the legal title to a vehicle or, in the event a
vehicle is subject to an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof
with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the
agreement and with immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to
possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed
the owner for the purpose of this title.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The police department of the city or any other entity
providing law enforcement services to the city. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.04.020: APPLICABILITY:
All vehicles using the roads and highways of the city shall be subject to the
provisions of this title. Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an
animal upon a roadway, and every person driving an animal drawn vehicle, shall
be subject to such provisions as are applicable to the drivers of vehicles,
except those that by their nature have no application. (Ord. 96-10, 5-15-1996)
Title 41, motor vehicles act, of the Utah code, as amended, and title 53,
chapter 3, uniform driver's license act, as amended, of the Utah code, are
adopted by this reference to the extent that those laws describe criminal
offenses which are classified therein as either an infraction, class C
misdemeanor, or class B misdemeanor and the classification of offenses and the
penalties prescribed for those violations as provided by state law are also
adopted by this reference as violations of city ordinances. Peace officers and
any public official charged with enforcement of the law are hereby authorized
to cite violations of state law. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.04.030: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The city may place and maintain such traffic control devices and pavement
markings on streets, highways, trails, bike paths, alleys, public parking
areas, private roads, and maintenance roads, as are necessary to indicate and
to carry out the provisions of this title or to regulate, warn or guide
traffic. All signs, markings and other devices shall conform with all
applicable rules and standards, including, but not limited to, the "Manual On
Uniform Traffic Control Devices", as amended, and any supplements. (Ord. 06-30,
9-6-2006)
CHAPTER 11.08
TRAFFIC CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
11.08.010: Recreational Activities On Streets Or Highways
11.08.020: Avoiding Intersections Prohibited
11.08.030: Damaging Traffic Signs Prohibited
11.08.040: Obstruction Of View Prohibited
11.08.050: Gravel And Foreign Matter On Street Or Highway
11.08.060: Truck Routes
11.08.010: RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS:
There shall be no nontraffic or recreational activities conducted upon any
streets or highways unless the city allows such activity in restricted areas by
designating same with appropriate signs and other controls. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-
2006)
11.08.020: AVOIDING INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle through a private
driveway, lot or similar area, whether vacant or not, where any residence,
business establishment, or any kind of a business or trade is maintained or
carried on, for the purpose and with the intent of avoiding obedience to any
traffic regulation or to avoid traffic congestion. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.08.030: DAMAGING TRAFFIC SIGNS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to drive into, alter, deface, injure, move, knock
down, demolish, remove, or interfere with any traffic sign, standard, post,
chain, rope, pavement markings, or other traffic control device installed for
the purpose of directing or regulating traffic in the city. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-
2006)
11.08.040: OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for persons owning or occupying property adjacent to any
street or highway in the city to permit any tree, plant, shrub, sign, vehicle,
fence or other obstacle of any kind located on said property to block the view
of traffic signs to the vision of oncoming motorists or to obscure the vision
of oncoming traffic so as to constitute a traffic hazard.
   B.   When the city determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that a traffic hazard exists, it shall notify the owner or
occupant and order that the hazard be removed within ten (10) days.
   C.   The failure of the owner or occupant to remove the traffic hazard
within ten (10) days is unlawful.
   D.   If an obstruction is an imminent hazard to public safety, then the city
may require the owner or occupant to immediately remove the obstruction or
hazard, or the city may remove the obstruction or hazard at the expense of the
owner. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.08.050: GRAVEL AND FOREIGN MATTER ON STREET OR HIGHWAY:
All construction sites within the city are required to install and maintain
approved cleaning plans to prevent vehicles leaving a construction site from
carrying mud, dirt, rocks, or any other debris that could be tracked, dropped,
or deposited onto streets or highways. If mud, dirt, rocks, or any other debris
is tracked, dropped, or deposited onto streets or highways from any
construction site, the owner and/or contractor is required to remove or have
such material removed. On construction sites larger than five (5) acres, a
water truck is required to be at such sites at all times and shall be used to
prevent dust from leaving the construction sites. It is unlawful to wash mud,
dirt, rocks, or other debris from construction sites into the storm drain
system. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.08.060: TRUCK ROUTES:
   A.   The following streets or highways are designated as truck routes:
      1.   6200 South from Norman H. Bangerter Highway to the western city
boundary;
      2.   5400 South from the eastern city boundary to the western city
boundary;
      3.   4700 South from the eastern city boundary to the western city
boundary;
      4.   4100 South from the eastern city boundary to the western city
boundary;
      5.   1700 West from the northern city boundary to the southern city
boundary;
      6.   Norman H. Bangerter Highway from the northern city boundary to the
southern city boundary; and
      7.   I-215 from the northern city boundary to the eastern city boundary.
   B.   All trucks, tractors, semitrailers and trailers and all vehicles
carrying flammable liquids in excess of three thousand (3,000) gallons,
explosives and corrosives, shall, except as provided herein, follow such
designated truck routes and not depart therefrom. The mayor may designate in
writing temporary alternative truck routes and authorize said trucks to depart
from the truck routes herein designated, for a temporary period not to exceed
thirty (30) days when street or highway repairs or other obstacles block said
truck routes. The mayor shall report such temporary authorization to the city
council at the next regular scheduled council meeting.
   C.   The above truck routes shall not apply to said trucks delivering to or
returning from construction sites where it is not possible to use a designated
truck route, or to said trucks delivering merchandise to or from local business
or local residents.
   D.   An unladen truck or tractor may, for the sole purpose of going to or
returning from a retail fuel outlet, depart from the truck routes designated
herein, provided however, said route of travel to a retail fuel outlet must be
as reasonably direct as possible.
   E.   The mayor or his designee shall install signs on said truck routes
which indicate in words or pictures that trucks exceeding eighteen thousand
(18,000) pounds of gross weight are prohibited. Where signs are installed
indicating that trucks are prohibited, the mayor or his designee may install
additional signs to the effect that "local deliveries are permitted" in
accordance with these provisions. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
CHAPTER 11.12
VEHICLE CONTROL RESTRICTIONS
SECTION:
11.12.010: Interference With Control Of Vehicle Prohibited
11.12.020: Passengers On Improper Portion Of Vehicle Prohibited; Exception
11.12.030: Low Profile Vehicles And Motor Assisted Scooters
11.12.040: Driving When Ill Or Fatigued
11.12.050: Negligent Collision
11.12.010: INTERFERENCE WITH CONTROL OF VEHICLE PROHIBITED:
No driver shall engage in any activity that interferes with the safe control
and operation of his vehicle while the same is in motion. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-
2006)
11.12.020: PASSENGERS ON IMPROPER PORTION OF VEHICLE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
Except for a vehicle with a valid parade permit and special event permit, no
person shall ride, and no person driving a motor vehicle shall knowingly permit
any person to ride upon any portion of a vehicle not designated or intended for
the use of passengers. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.12.030: LOW PROFILE VEHICLES AND MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTERS:
   A.   "Low profile vehicle" shall mean any motorized vehicle or cycle capable
of being operated at speeds of more than five (5) miles per hour that either
has a seat or saddle that is less than twenty four inches (24") from the ground
as measured on a level surface with properly inflated tires or is less than
thirty six inches (36") in height when in its normal operating position,
notwithstanding any flag, antenna, or other attachment or modification made
thereto. This definition includes, but is not limited to, pocket bikes, mini-
motorcycles and go-carts. Low profile vehicle does not include a vehicle
designed for use by a person with a disability.
   B.   "Motor assisted scooter" shall mean any self-propelled device with a
gas or electric motor and either a deck designed for a person to stand while
operating the device or a deck and seat designed for a person to sit, straddle,
or stand while operating the device. Motor assisted scooter does not include a
vehicle designed for use by a person with a disability.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a low profile vehicle on
public property within the city including, but not limited to, city streets or
highways, sidewalks, parks, alleys and parking lots.
   D.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor assisted scooter on
any public sidewalk or walkway within the city.
   E.   It is unlawful for an owner to knowingly permit the operation of a low
profile vehicle or motor assisted scooter in violation of subsections C and D
of this section.
   F.   A violation of this section is a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-
2006)
11.12.040: DRIVING WHEN ILL OR FATIGUED:
No driver shall operate a vehicle while his ability or alertness is so impaired
through fatigue, illness, or any other cause as to make it unsafe for him to
drive such vehicle. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.12.050: NEGLIGENT COLLISION:
It is unlawful to operate a vehicle with such lack of due care as to cause the
same to collide with any vehicle, person or object. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
CHAPTER 11.16
SPEED LIMITS
SECTION:
11.16.010: Speed Limits On Public Property
11.16.010: SPEED LIMITS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
The city shall have authority to regulate the speed of vehicles on all public
owned property in the city upon posting appropriate signs and markings. (Ord.
06-30, 9-6-2006)
CHAPTER 11.20
STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
SECTION:
11.20.010: Erection Of Traffic Control Devices
11.20.020: Curb Markings
11.20.030: Regulation Of Parking
11.20.040: Parking Prohibited In Specified Areas
11.20.050: Parking Of Trucks And Commercial Vehicles
11.20.055: Parking Of Recreational Vehicles Or Travel Trailers
11.20.060: Angle Parking; Restrictions
11.20.070: Obstructing Traffic Prohibited
11.20.080: Parking Prohibited When
11.20.085: Parking Prohibited On Emergency Access Streets
11.20.090: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
11.20.100: Reserved
11.20.110: Liability
11.20.120: Removal Of Illegally Parked Vehicle
11.20.010: ERECTION OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The city shall cause traffic signs and other traffic control devices to be
erected and to regulate, warn, inform, and guide traffic of the city. (Ord. 06-
30, 9-6-2006)
11.20.020: CURB MARKINGS:
The city may place and maintain appropriate signs or traffic markings to
indicate standing or parking regulations. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.20.030: REGULATION OF PARKING:
   A.   The city may place signs on any street or highway prohibiting or
restricting the parking of vehicles and/or trailers.
   B.   The city may prohibit, restrict or regulate the parking, stopping or
standing of vehicles on any off street parking facility or property.
   C.   No such regulations shall apply until signs giving notice thereof have
been erected. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.20.040: PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED AREAS:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any one of the following
places:
   A.   In front of or within five feet (5') of a private driveway or alley;
   B.   In front of or within ten feet (10') of a mailbox between the hours of
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on days that mail is
delivered;
   C.   Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection. (Ord. 06-
30, 9-6-2006)
11.20.050: PARKING OF TRUCKS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section:
COMMERCIAL TRANSPORT: A "trailer" and/or "truck" as defined in this section.
GROSS UNLADEN WEIGHT: The actual weight of a vehicle or combination of
vehicles, equipped for operation, to which is not added the load to be carried.
PARK: Causing a vehicle to stand unattended for any amount of time or to stand
attended for five (5) minutes within thirty feet (30') of the same point or to
permit a vehicle to stand when it is within one's power to prevent it from so
standing. In determining whether a vehicle is parked, it is immaterial whether
or not the motor is running. A vehicle is deemed to be attended when its driver
is inside the vehicle or within twenty feet (20') of the vehicle.
PUBLIC STREET: Any public street, road, alley, lane, court, place, or public
way, owned, dedicated, or abandoned to the public, and which is used by
vehicular traffic.
TRAILER: A vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or
property or for being drawn by a motor vehicle and constructed so that no part
of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle or constructed so that some part of
its weight and its load rests or is carried by another vehicle that is sixteen
feet (16') in length or more.
TRUCK: A motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and
constructed so as it does not carry any load either independently or any part
of the weight of a vehicle or load that is drawn with a gross unladen weight of
twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or more or a motor vehicle designed and used
primarily for drawing other vehicles and not constructed to carry a load other
than a part of the weight of a vehicle or load that is drawn with a gross
unladen weight of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds or more.
   B.   General Prohibition: No commercial transport shall be parked or stored
on any residential zone within the city, except as permitted by this section.
   C.   Loading: The prohibition in this section shall not apply to a vehicle's
being actually used in the servicing of adjoining property, streets, or
highways, or while actually loading cargo on or in said vehicle or actually
servicing a property.
   D.   Parking In Commercial Areas: A commercial transport may park on private
property in a commercial zone within the corporate limits of the city as
designated on the city general plan or zoning map, with the permission of the
property owner or representative, or on a public street, in a commercial zone,
as long as it does not violate any other ordinance or law.
   E.   Emergency: A commercial transport may be parked so as not to create a
safety hazard or obstruct the flow of traffic if such commercial transport is
unable to travel or travel safely because of unforeseen circumstances beyond
the driver's control, such as inclement weather or unanticipated equipment
failure for a period of time not to exceed twenty four (24) hours. (Ord. 09-12,
3-18-2009)
11.20.055: PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES OR TRAVEL TRAILERS:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this section:
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit other than a mobile home, primarily
designated as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, or vacation use,
which is either self- propelled or pulled by another vehicle. Recreational
vehicle includes a travel trailer, a camping trailer, a fifth wheel trailer,
and a motor home. "Travel trailer", "camping trailer", or "fifth wheel trailer"
means a portable vehicle without motive power, designed as a temporary dwelling
for travel, recreational, or vacation use that does not require a special
highway movement permit when drawn by a self- propelled motor vehicle.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A portable vehicle without motive power, designed as temporary
dwelling for travel, recreation, or vacation use that does not require special
highway permit from the state of Utah when drawn by a self-propelled motor
vehicle.
   B.   General Prohibition: No recreational vehicle or travel trailer shall be
parked or stored anywhere within the city except as permitted by this section.
   C.   Street/Highway Parking: A recreational vehicle or travel trailer may be
parked on a public street for up to twenty four (24) consecutive hours.
   D.   Private Property Parking: A recreational vehicle or travel trailer may
park on private property with the permission of the property owner/
representative for an indefinite time as long as it does not violate any other
ordinance or law. (Ord. 09-12, 3-18-2009)
11.20.060: ANGLE PARKING; RESTRICTIONS:
The city may, after placement of appropriate signs and markings, designate
certain areas as suitable for angle parking. No vehicle may park in an area
designated for angle parking if any portion of the vehicle extends into the
travel lane. It is prohibited to angle park, front end first, in areas
designated for reverse angle parking. Angle parking is only permitted in
designated areas. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.20.070: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC PROHIBITED:
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street or highway in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the
width of the street or highway for free movement of vehicular traffic. (Ord.
06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.20.080: PARKING PROHIBITED WHEN:
It is unlawful for any person who owns or has possession, custody or control of
any vehicle or trailer to park or knowingly allow to be parked any vehicle or
trailer on any street or highway:
   A.   After any snow and/or ice accumulation, until after the street or
highway is cleared of snow and/or ice; or
   B.   For a period longer than twenty four (24) consecutive hours; or
   C.   For any period longer than that allowed by appropriate signs, markings,
or parking meters giving notice of such parking time limitation. (Ord. 14-03,
2-19-2014)
11.20.085: PARKING PROHIBITED ON EMERGENCY ACCESS STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person who owns or has possession, custody, or control
of any vehicle or trailer to park, or knowingly allow to be parked, any vehicle
or trailer on any private road or driveway that serves as emergency access,
turnaround, or within a twenty foot (20') clear zone. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.20.090: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park or operate a vehicle upon any street or highway for the
principal purposes of maintaining or repairing such vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.20.100: RESERVED:
(Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.20.110: LIABILITY:
The fact that an automobile is illegally parked shall be sufficient to
constitute a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner was in control of
the automobile at the time it was parked. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.20.120: REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE:
Whenever any officer of the police department or city finds a vehicle parked or
standing upon a street or highway in violation of this title, the officer is
authorized to move the vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge
of the vehicle to move it to a position not in violation of this title. (Ord.
06-30, 9-6-2006)
CHAPTER 11.22
PARKING PERMIT PROGRAM
SECTION:
11.22.010: Purpose
11.22.020: Definitions
11.22.030: Area Designation; Authority
11.22.040: Area Designation; Criteria
11.22.050: Area Designation; Process
11.22.060: Area Designation
11.22.070: Signs And Markings In Designated Areas
11.22.080: Parking Permit; Application; Term
11.22.090: Fees
11.22.100: Parking Permit; Issuance Conditions
11.22.110: Parking Permit; Display Required
11.22.120: Parking Permit; Activities Permitted
11.22.130: Guest Permits
11.22.140: Parking Permit; Revocation Conditions
11.22.150: Enlargement Of Area
11.22.160: Removal Of Area Designation Or Deletion Of Streets
11.22.170: Modification Of Regulations
11.22.180: Unlawful Activities; Penalty
11.22.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   There exist certain facilities within the city, such as schools,
college complexes and other large buildings, which attract commuters seeking
parking in nearby areas which are predominantly residential in nature. The
increased demand often exacerbates the severe shortage of on street or highway
parking for residents in such areas.
   B.   This chapter authorizes a program and implements a procedural system by
which residents and businesses within qualifying areas may receive preferential
treatment when competing with commuter vehicles for available on street or
highway parking in predominantly residential neighborhoods of the city. The
enactment of a preferential parking permit program, administered and
coordinated by community development, can address the adverse effect of motor
vehicle congestion caused by the long term parking of commuter vehicles within
these areas by:
      1.   Increasing access to residents;
      2.   Increasing traffic/pedestrian safety by reducing traffic congestion;
      3.   Reducing the adverse environmental impacts on an area created by
excessive air and noise pollution and the accumulation of trash and refuse on
public streets or highways;
      4.   Encouraging the use of mass transit, car pooling and other
alternative modes of transaction by reducing commuter vehicle traffic that
originates from outside the permit area and has no apparent relation to area
residents; and
      5.   Promoting the tranquility, safety, health and welfare of area
inhabitants, which are desirable attributes that are associated with a positive
urban environment. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ADDRESS: The street number and applicable apartment/condominium number for each
dwelling unit, business, or other use. Each apartment or commercial unit is
regarded as a separate address.
AREA: Refers, without reference to zoning, to a geographical region, not
necessarily contiguous, where residents dwell and businesses may operate.
AREA BUSINESS: Any professional establishment or nonresident property owner
whose business property is located within a city parking permit area.
AREA PERMITTEE: An area resident or an area business which has received from
the city an area regular permit.
AREA REGULAR PERMIT OR REGULAR PERMIT DECAL: A valid decal or cardstock placard
hung from the vehicle's rearview mirror issued by the city for assignment to
vehicles under the legal control of area residents and/or area businesses.
AREA RESIDENT: Any person who is a bona fide resident of a parking permit area.
AREA VEHICLE: A vehicle that originates from inside a parking permit area and
is under the control of area residents or area business owners and includes
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, or other motor driven forms of
transportation. The term area vehicle does not include boats and trailers.
CITY PERMIT AREA OR PARKING PERMIT AREA: Any area designated by the city
council as a permit parking area within the corporate limits of Taylorsville
wherein motor vehicles displaying a permit as described herein shall be exempt
from parking regulations or restrictions solely applicable to commuter
vehicles.
CITY PERMIT PROGRAM: Taylorsville's permit parking program, as a whole,
administered by community development.
COMMUTER VEHICLE: A motor vehicle parked in a city permit parking area that: a)
is not under the control of an area resident or area business; and b) does not
bear a permit as described herein for the parking permit area.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, which is designated for residential
purposes. Such dwelling must bear an address. The number of independent
dwelling units recognized therein shall not exceed the number authorized by the
applicable land use ordinances.
GUEST PERMIT: The portable cardstock placard issued by the city to area
residents and area businesses for use on vehicles under the legal control of
guests, customers and/or clients during periods when persons operating said
vehicles are actually visiting or engaged in business at the permittee's
address not to exceed forty five (45) days.
LEASE: A person pays rent or other remuneration for use of a parcel of real
property as such person's residence or place of business.
OWNS: A person has at least one-fourth (1/4) of the fee or equitable interest
in a parcel of real property within a city permit parking area.
PERMIT VEHICLE: Refers to any vehicle properly displaying a regular permit or a
guest permit issued by the city for authorized use on such vehicles.
PERMIT YEAR: Refers to the twelve (12) month period set for the administration
of a city permit area, including the expiration and renewal of permit area
regular and guest permits.
PROGRAM: Means and shall refer to the process of designation, administration
and enforcement of all city parking permit areas and regulations established by
the city council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
REGULAR PERMIT: An adhesive decal or cardstock placard hung from the vehicle's
rearview mirror that was issued by the city for assignment to vehicles under
the legal control of area residents and area businesses.
RESIDENT: A person who resides or dwells in the city parking permit area on a
regular basis. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
11.22.030: AREA DESIGNATION; AUTHORITY:
The city council may designate as a parking permit area any area within the
corporate limits of the city which the city council finds to satisfy the area
designation criteria detailed below. Such area shall then be a city permit area
in which motor vehicles displaying an area regular permit or guest permit may
stand or be parked without limitations imposed on commuter vehicles by the
parking regulations in the area. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.040: AREA DESIGNATION; CRITERIA:
   A.   An area may be eligible for consideration as a city permit area if the
community development director determines, after proper evaluation, that the
qualified area is adversely affected by commuter vehicles for any extended
period(s) during the day or night, on weekends or holidays.
   B.   In determining adverse effects upon an area, the community development
director shall analyze and evaluate factors which include, but are not limited
to, the following:
      1.   The extent of the desire and perception of need by the residents for
permit parking as evidenced by receipt of petitions as required herein;
      2.   The extent to which legal on street or highway parking spaces are
occupied by motor vehicles during any given time period; and
      3.   The extent to which vehicles parking in the area during the period
proposed for parking regulations are commuter vehicles rather than resident
vehicles.
   C.   The community development director may consider for proposed
designation as a city permit area, an area whose streets or highways (or
portions thereof) qualify by satisfying the following eligibility criteria:
      1.   A major portion of the parking capacity is generally occupied;
      2.   Such occupancy continues for any consecutive four (4) hour period
and such occupancy rate occurs on an average of at least four (4) days per
week;
      3.   Twenty five percent (25%) of the vehicles occupying the on street or
highway spaces are other than area vehicles; and
      4.   The requesting area consists of curb space fronting a minimum of two
(2) contiguous residences in length. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.050: AREA DESIGNATION; PROCESS:
   A.   Persons desiring to have an area designated a parking permit area shall
consult with the community development director, to tentatively establish the
boundaries of the area proposed for designation.
   B.   As soon as practical after consulting with the community development
director the proponents of the parking permit area shall submit a petition in a
form acceptable to the city containing the signatures of a minimum of fifty one
percent (51%) of the residents living within the boundaries of the area
proposed for the parking permit area.
   C.   As soon as practical after submitting the petition containing the
required signatures, the proponents of the parking permit area shall submit a
list from the Salt Lake County assessor's office that lists each separate tax
parcel/property owner of record within the proposed parking permit area
together with the complete address of such owner.
   D.   Upon receipt of the petition containing the required signatures and the
list from the Salt Lake County assessor's office and on the community
development director's favorable recommendation to establish a parking permit
area for the area, the city council, as soon as practicable consistent with
scheduling constraints, may fix a time, date and location for a public hearing
to consider the petition and the community development director's
recommendation to designate the proposed area a parking permit area where on
street or highway parking is restricted or allowed by area regular permit or
temporary visitor permit only. Said hearing shall also be conducted for comment
and analysis to determine the boundaries as well as the appropriate area rules
and regulations, parking restrictions, issuance of permits, fees and other
facets of appropriate implementation.
   E.   At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date, written notice of the
public hearing(s) provided for herein shall be: 1) published in a newspaper of
general circulation, 2) posted not more than four hundred feet (400') apart
along the streets or highways proposed in the permit area, and 3) mailed to the
property owners within the proposed area. The notice shall state the purpose of
the hearing, the location of the hearing, the proposed boundaries of the
parking permit area, the proposed permit fee schedules and formulas for
issuance, if any, and the location where the petition and other information is
on file and available for public review.
   F.   Any interested party shall be entitled to appear and be heard on the
public hearing subject to city council rules of procedure. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-
2006)
11.22.060: AREA DESIGNATION:
   A.   Within thirty (30) days following the hearing, the city council shall
deny or approve the designation of a parking permit area.
   B.   If the city council approves creation of a parking permit area, a
declaration of designation shall be prepared establishing the program,
including the boundaries, parking regulations, fees, etc., for its
administration and implementation. The declaration of designation shall be
mailed to each property owner supplied pursuant to subsection
11.22.050C of this chapter.
   C.   As part of a declaration of designation, the city council may establish
a conditional citation program. The conditional citation program may include
such terms and conditions as the city council shall determine appropriate and
shall be included as part of the declaration of designation. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-
2006)
11.22.070: SIGNS AND MARKINGS IN DESIGNATED AREAS:
Upon the declaration of designation, the city shall cause appropriate signs,
markings and/or meters to be erected in the area, indicating prominently
thereon the parking regulations, the effective date, and conditions under which
permit parking shall be exempt therefrom. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.080: PARKING PERMIT; APPLICATION; TERM:
Each area regular permit shall be valid for five (5) years or portion thereof
as set forth in the declaration of designation. Permits shall not be
transferable, but may be renewed every five (5) years upon reapplication in the
manner required by community development. Each application or reapplication for
an area regular permit or visitor permit shall contain information sufficient
to identify the applicant's identity, claim for permit eligibility, authorized
residence or business address within the city permit area, the license number
of the motor vehicle for which application is made, and such other information
that may be deemed relevant by community development. Applications shall be
accompanied by the fee established in the declaration of designation. (Ord. 06-
30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.090: FEES:
To defray program administration costs, the regular permit fee for two (2)
permits shall be five dollars ($5.00) and the guest permit fee shall be five
dollars ($5.00) per permit. The cost to replace a regular permit or a guest
permit shall be five dollars ($5.00). (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.100: PARKING PERMIT; ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
Area regular permits or visitor permits shall be issued by community
development. Each such permit shall be designed to state or reflect thereon the
particular city permit parking area. No more than one such permit shall be
issued for each motor vehicle indicated on the application. The number of
permits available and the manner for allocating permits between various
competing resident (as opposed to commuter) vehicles, and the manner in which
the process will be administered for each designated area in the program shall
be established in the declaration of designation. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.110: PARKING PERMIT; DISPLAY REQUIRED:
Area regular permits or guest permits shall be displayed on or in the
authorized vehicle by means of an adhesive decal attached to the rear window of
the authorized vehicle or a card stock placard hung from the rearview mirror of
the authorized vehicle. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.120: PARKING PERMIT; ACTIVITIES PERMITTED:
A motor vehicle bearing an area regular permit or guest permit properly
displayed as provided for herein, shall be permitted to stand or be parked in
the parking permit area for which the permit has been issued without being
limited by parking regulations or prohibitions solely applicable to commuter
vehicles. The permit does not exempt drivers or owners from complying with
general parking regulations and penalties imposed by an applicable traffic code
or ordinance. All other motor vehicles not bearing an area permit or guest
permit properly displayed as provided for herein that are parked within a
parking permit area shall be subject to the commuter parking regulations
established in the declaration of designation, and the penalties provided for
herein. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.130: GUEST PERMITS:
The community development director is authorized to issue guest permits to
residents and businesses located within designated permit areas for use of
their bona fide transient visitors, service persons, and construction personnel
for a limited duration not to exceed forty five (45) days. Prior to expiration,
a vehicle bearing a guest permit shall have all the parking rights, obligations
and privileges given to area permittees. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.140: PARKING PERMIT; REVOCATION CONDITIONS:
   A.   Faithful compliance with the terms of the permit program is a condition
subsequent to the privilege of obtaining an area regular permit or guest
permit. Violation of the terms of the city permit program shall be deemed a
forfeiture of those privileges.
      1.   Any person holding an area regular permit or guest permit that is
convicted of a violation of this chapter may be required to surrender such
permit as a part of sentencing.
      2.   The community development director is authorized to revoke an area
regular permit or guest permit of any person found to be in violation of this
chapter, and upon written notification thereof, the person shall surrender such
permit to the community development director. Failure, when so requested, to
surrender such a permit so revoked shall constitute an infraction.
      3.   In the event the community development director has good cause to
believe that any person or entity is abusing the visitor permit system, he
shall so notify such person abusing the visitor permit system. Any further
application for a visitor permit by such person found abusing the visitor
permit system may be denied for a period of not more than one year.
   B.   Any person aggrieved by such a determination made by the community
development director under subsections A2 and A3 of this section shall have the
right to appeal to the mayor within seven (7) days of such determination. (Ord.
06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.150: ENLARGEMENT OF AREA:
Any existing parking permit area may be enlarged by following substantially the
same procedure set forth in sections
11.22.040,
11.22.050 and
11.22.060 of this chapter for such enlarged area. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.160: REMOVAL OF AREA DESIGNATION OR DELETION OF STREETS:
The city council may delete an area or selected street or highway from the
parking permit area by giving:
   A.   Notice to all addresses within the boundary of the permit parking area
proposed to be wholly removed from permit parking designation or within the
boundary of an existing permit parking area where certain streets or highways
(or portions thereof) are proposed to be deleted from permit parking area, that
a public hearing is to be held to consider this action. Such notice shall be
given as provided for in subsection
11.22.050E of this chapter.
   B.   Such notice shall contain:
      1.   The date, time and place of the public hearing to consider the
proposed removal or deletion.
      2.   A description of the city council's intention to remove from
designation a permit parking area or to delete certain streets or highways (or
portions thereof) from an existing permit parking area.
      3.   A listing of the streets or highways (or portions thereof) proposed
for removal from designation or deletion from a permit parking area.
   C.   The hearing shall be conducted as provided herein.
   D.   Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing the city council shall
approve or deny the proposed removal from permit designation of an entire
permit parking area or the proposed deletion of certain streets or highways (or
portions thereof) from an existing permit parking area.
   E.   If permit parking area designation is removed from an entire area or if
the deletion of certain streets or highways (or portions thereof) from an
existing permit parking area is approved, a declaration of removal shall be
prepared and distributed to the areas so affected using the criteria outlined
herein. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.170: MODIFICATION OF REGULATIONS:
The city council may modify the rules, regulations or restrictions governing an
existing permit parking area by giving:
   A.   Notice to all addresses within the boundary of the existing permit area
subject to the proposed modifications of a public hearing to be held.
   B.   Such notice shall contain:
      1.   The date, time and place of the public hearing to consider the
proposed modifications.
      2.   A description of the city council's proposed modifications to the
existing permit parking area.
      3.   A listing of the streets or highways (or portions thereof) that will
be affected by the proposed modifications.
   C.   The hearing shall be conducted as provided herein.
   D.   Within thirty (30) days of the public hearing the city council shall
approve or deny the proposed modification(s).
   E.   If the modification(s) is approved, a notice shall be prepared and
distributed to the areas so affected using the criteria outlined herein. (Ord.
06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.22.180: UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES; PENALTY:
   A.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to stand
or park a motor vehicle, or to cause the same to be done contrary to the
parking regulations established pursuant hereto. Such violation shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   B.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to falsely
represent himself as eligible for an area regular permit or a guest permit, or
to furnish false information in an application therefor to the community
development director. Such violation shall constitute a class B misdemeanor.
   C.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person holding an
area regular permit to permit the use or display of such permit on a motor
vehicle other than that for which the permit is issued. Such conduct shall
constitute an unlawful act and violation of this chapter, both by the person
holding the valid parking permit and the person who so uses or displays the
permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which it is issued. Such
violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   D.   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a person to copy,
produce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit area
regular permit or a guest permit in order to evade parking regulations
applicable in a city permit parking area. Such violation shall constitute a
class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
CHAPTER 11.24
TRAFFIC AND PARKING ON SCHOOL GROUNDS
SECTION:
11.24.010: Applicable Regulations Enforced
11.24.020: Maximum Speed Limit
11.24.030: Parking Prohibited Where
11.24.040: School Parking Permits
11.24.050: Signposting
11.24.010: APPLICABLE REGULATIONS ENFORCED:
The applicable state, county, or city traffic and parking regulations shall be
enforced upon school and school district property. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.24.020: MAXIMUM SPEED LIMIT:
Maximum speed on school and district premises is as posted. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-
2006)
11.24.030: PARKING PROHIBITED WHERE:
   A.   Students shall park in designated student parking areas only.
   B.   Students may not park in designated faculty parking areas.
   C.   Unauthorized vehicles shall not park in restricted areas.
   D.   All vehicles shall be parked inside marked parking stalls.
   E.   Motorcycles must be parked in areas designated for motorcycle parking.
(Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.24.040: SCHOOL PARKING PERMITS:
School authorities may determine parking permit requirements and how parking
permits shall be displayed. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.24.050: SIGNPOSTING:
All regulatory signs utilized on district or school property shall be placed in
conspicuous and appropriate areas of the grounds. All regulatory signs must be
approved by the city prior to posting. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
CHAPTER 11.28
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICANTS
(Rep. by Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
CHAPTER 11.32
BICYCLES
SECTION:
11.32.010: License; Removal Or Alteration Prohibited
11.32.010: LICENSE; REMOVAL OR ALTERATION PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for a person to wilfully or maliciously destroy, mutilate or
alter any bicycle frame number or any bicycle license issued pursuant to this
title, or to remove, destroy or mutilate any license decal while the same is
valid. It is unlawful for a person to possess a bicycle without a bicycle frame
number. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
CHAPTER 11.36
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
11.36.010: Pedestrian Signal Indicators
11.36.020: Pedestrians Yielding Right-Of-Way - Limits On Pedestrians
11.36.010: PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL INDICATORS:
Whenever a pedestrian signal is in place and operating, the illuminated word or
symbol shall indicate and govern pedestrians as follows:
   A.   A steady white "walk" or walking person (symbolizing "walk") signal
indicator means that exercise in due caution, a pedestrian facing the signal
indicator may start to cross a street or highway in the direction of the signal
indicator.
   B.   A flashing orange "don't walk" or an upraised hand (symbolizing "don't
walk") signal indicator means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the
street or highway in a direction of the signal indicator, but that any person
who has already started to cross on steady white "walk" or walking person
(symbolizing "walk") signal indicator may complete crossing the street or
highway.
   C.   A steady orange "don't walk" or upraised hand (symbolizing "don't
walk") signal indicator means that a pedestrian shall not enter the street or
highway in the direction of the signal indicator.
   D.   A countdown clock (displaying times and seconds remaining in a
pedestrian crossing phase) in connection with the flashing orange upraised hand
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication may start to cross the
street or highway in the direction of the signal indicator, but only if such
pedestrian is able to safely walk completely across the street or highway or to
a safety island before the countdown clock shows no remaining time. (Ord. 06-
30, 9-6-2006)
11.36.020: PEDESTRIANS YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY - LIMITS ON PEDESTRIANS:
   A.   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall do so
only if no crosswalk exists within nine hundred feet (900') of the desired
point of crossing; when so crossing, the pedestrian shall exercise due care and
caution and shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway and
shall only cross by the shortest straight route to the opposite curb.
   B.   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, no pedestrian shall cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk.
   C.   At roadways which utilize flex lanes, as designated by the Utah
Department of Transportation, no pedestrian shall cross at any place except in
a marked crosswalk.
   D.   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway within one hundred feet (100') of a
raised positive median.
   E.   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where there is a
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing shall only use such
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing to cross the roadway.
   F.   A violation of this section shall be an infraction. (Ord. 19-05, 5-15-
2019)
CHAPTER 11.40
WRECKER SERVICE
SECTION:
11.40.010: Definitions
11.40.020: Registration Required
11.40.030: Exempt Towing Operations
11.40.040: Illegal Towing Activities Designated
11.40.050: Violation; Penalty
11.40.010: DEFINITIONS:
BOOT: To attach a mechanical device to a vehicle that prevents the vehicle from
being moved.
NONCONSENSUAL TOWING: Any towing of a vehicle without the prior consent of the
owner of such vehicle.
NONEMERGENCY TOWING ASSIGNMENT: Means and includes towing of vehicles that have
been involved in a collision, but have been removed from the scene; that have
experienced mechanical failure, but have been removed from the streets or
highways and no longer constitute a hazard; or that being mechanically
operative, are towed for convenience.
TOW TRUCK: A motor vehicle which has been altered or designed, equipped and
primarily used for the purpose of towing vehicles by means of a crane, hoist,
towbar, towline, or dolly.
TOWING OPERATION: The business of nonconsensual towing, for compensation, of
motor vehicles in the city, whether or not the towing extends beyond the city
limits. Such business shall also include the storage of the towed vehicles,
pending their return to the owners.
WRECKER SERVICE: Any entity which has tow trucks providing towing services to
the public, or a private business, or which registers with the city or its
designated representative to be on call for the police department on a rotating
basis to provide towing services to move vehicles or remove motor vehicles to a
place of storage. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.40.020: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Any wrecker service providing towing service in the city and any such service
wishing to be available for call through the police department must be
registered and be permitted by the city or its designated agent. (Ord. 06-30,
9-6-2006)
11.40.030: EXEMPT TOWING OPERATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any towing operation that:
   A.   Provides tow services exclusively to members of an association,
automobile club or similar organization, and receives remuneration only from
the sponsoring association, automobile club or similar organization; or
   B.   Provides tow service without charge for vehicles owned or operated by
an individual or organization; or
   C.   Provides tow service for vehicles owned or operated under terms of a
rent or lease agreement or contract; or
   D.   Being located in another city, enters the city on a nonemergency towing
assignment for the purpose of towing a disabled vehicle for repairs to, from,
or through the city; or
   E.   Provides legal repossession of a vehicle. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
11.40.040: ILLEGAL TOWING ACTIVITIES DESIGNATED:
Except as defined in section
11.40.030 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful:
   A.   For any wrecker owner or operator to tow or otherwise move a vehicle
from any area or portion of a public street or highway without the consent of
the owner or custodian thereof, unless such wrecker owner or operator shall
first notify the police department.
   B.   For any wrecker owner or operator, or any other person, to tow, or
otherwise move a vehicle or authorize the removal thereof from any private road
or driveway, or from any privately owned land or property in the city except:
      1.   When such wrecker owner or operator is requested to perform towing
services by the owner or custodian of the vehicle, or
      2.   When the wrecker owner or operator is requested to perform such
towing services by an owner or custodian of private property on which the
vehicle is parked; provided the property is posted with signs at all entrances
or at other conspicuous locations in such a manner that the subject vehicle's
operator could have read the same, notifying him the unauthorized parking would
result in removal of the vehicle at the owner's expense. Such signs shall be of
sufficient size, legibility and location, with reference to the vehicle subject
to tow, as to reasonably provide notice that defined unauthorized parking will
result in removal of said vehicle at the owner's expense.
   C.   For a wrecker owner or operator to fail to notify the Taylorsville
police department with respect to all nonconsent, nonpolice generated tows
immediately upon arrival at an impound or storage yard. (Ord. 12-08, 5-2-2012)
11.40.050: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any wrecker owner or operator guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 06-30, 9-6-2006)
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISIONS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 13, chapters 13.21 and 13.30 of this code.
TITLE 13
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
Organization   13.01
General Provisions   13.02
Officers, Boards, And Commissions   13.03
Zone Districts   13.04
Enactment Of Or Amendment To Development Code And Zoning Map   13.05
General Plan   13.06
Land Uses In Residential Districts   13.07
Land Uses In The Commercial, Office, Industrial, Mixed Use, Transit Corridor,
And Research And Development Districts   13.08
Institutional Care (IC) District   13.09
Open Space District   13.10
Special Use Standards   13.11
Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay Zone   13.12
Hospital (H) District   13.13
Reserved   13.14
Sensitive Area Overlay Zone   13.15
Floodplain Overlay Zone   13.16
Drinking Water Source Protection Overlay Zone   13.17
Design District And Historic Resources Overlay Zones   13.18
Site Specific Development (SSD) Districts   13.19
Residential Development Standards   13.20
Subdivision Design Standards   13.21
Manufactured Home Parks   13.22
Commercial, Office, Hospital, Industrial, Transit Corridor, And Multi-Family
Development Standards   13.23
Parking, Access And Circulation Requirements   13.24
Landscaping Standards   13.25
Signage And Outdoor Advertising   13.26
Grading And Excavating   13.27
Fencing/Retaining Walls   13.28
Addressing, Street Naming, And Design Standards   13.29
Subdivision Review   13.30
Condominium Development   13.31
Site Plan Review   13.32
Administrative And Nonadministrative Conditional Use Permit   13.33
Appeals And Variances   13.34
Notice Requirements   13.35
Definitions   13.36
Design Standards   13.37
SSD-X-Bennion Point Zoning District   13.38
SSD-R-Muirhouse Zoning District   13.39
SSD-R-Thornhill Park Zoning District   13.40
CHAPTER 13.01
ORGANIZATION
SECTION:
13.01.010: Short Title
13.01.020: Authority
13.01.030: Purpose And Scope
13.01.040: Relationship To The General Plan
13.01.050: Effect On Previous Ordinances And Maps
13.01.060: Interpretation
13.01.070: Conflict
13.01.080: How To Use The Land Development Code
13.01.010: SHORT TITLE:
This title shall be known as the DEVELOPMENT CODE OF THE CITY OF TAYLORSVILLE
2011 (and is sometimes referred to hereinafter as the "development code") and
may be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.01.020: AUTHORITY:
This title is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Utah Code Annotated
section 10-9a-101 et seq. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.01.030: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: This development code is adopted to implement the general plan
and to promote: public health, safety, convenience, aesthetics, welfare;
efficient use of land; sustainable land use and building practices;
transportation options and accessibility; crime prevention; timely citizen
involvement in land use decision making; and efficiency in development review
and land use administration.
Specifically, this development code is established to promote the following
purposes:
      1.   General:
         a.   To facilitate the orderly growth, development, and redevelopment
of the city.
         b.   To facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water,
sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements.
         c.   To stabilize property values.
         d.   To enhance the economic well being of the city and its
inhabitants.
      2.   Implementation Of The General Plan: To coordinate and ensure the
implementation of the general plan through effective execution of development
review requirements, adequate facility and services review, and other goals,
policies, or programs contained in the general plan.
      3.   Comprehensive, Consistent, And Equitable Regulations: To establish a
system of fair, comprehensive, consistent, and equitable regulations, standards
and procedures for review and approval of all proposed land development within
the city.
      4.   Efficiently And Effectively Managed Procedures:
         a.   To promote fair procedures which are efficient and effective in
terms of time and expense.
         b.   To be effective and responsive in terms of the allocation of
authority and delegation of powers and duties among ministerial, appointed, and
elected officials.
         c.   To foster a positive customer service attitude and to respect the
rights of all applicants and affected citizens.
   B.   Scope: Consistent with the above purpose and intent, this development
code establishes land use classifications; creates zoning districts;
establishes regulations, prohibitions, and restrictions on land use and
development; governs the use of land for residential and nonresidential
purposes; regulates the height and bulk of buildings and other structures;
regulates lot occupancy and the size of yards and other open spaces;
establishes standards of performance and design; adopts a map of the zoning
districts; creates a board and commissions for land use and development
decisions and defines the powers and duties of the administration, land use
authority, and appeal authority; prescribes procedures for changes of
districts, conditional use permits, subdivision approvals, variances, special
exceptions, appeals, annexations; and prescribes penalties for violations of
this title. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.01.040: RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL PLAN:
The adoption of this title is consistent with, compatible with, and furthers
the goals, policies, objectives, and programs of the general plan. It is the
intent of the city council that regulatory decisions made pursuant to this
title be consistent with the general plan.
For purposes of this title, "consistency with the general plan" means not only
consistency with the plan's land use and density designations but also
consistency with all aspects of the general plan, including those that promote
compatibility of uses and densities, and orderly development consistent with
available resources. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.01.050: EFFECT ON PREVIOUS ORDINANCES AND MAPS:
Titles 12 and 13 of the revised ordinances of the city of Taylorsville code of
ordinances 1998, as amended, are hereby superseded and amended to read as set
forth herein. Any maps previously adopted shall remain in effect pursuant to
this development code. This development code shall be deemed a continuation of
previous development codes and not a new enactment, insofar as the substance of
revisions of previous development codes is included in this development code,
whether in the same or in different language. This development code shall be so
interpreted upon all questions of construction relating to tenure of officers
and boards established by previous development codes, to questions of
conforming or nonconforming uses and buildings and structures, and to questions
as to the dates upon which such uses, buildings, or structures became
conforming or nonconforming. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.01.060: INTERPRETATION:
Interpretation and application of the provisions and requirements contained
herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the purposes set forth,
unless otherwise specifically stated. If in the course of administration
hereof, a question arises as to the meaning of any phrase, section, chapter, or
zone district, the interpretation thereof shall be given by the director and
shall be construed to be the official interpretation thereof. In the event that
there is a need for further interpretation by any person, firm or corporation,
or official of the city, they shall submit the question to the planning
commission which, unless otherwise provided, is authorized to interpret this
title. Appeals of planning commission interpretations shall be submitted to the
city council. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.01.070: CONFLICT:
This development code shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of
agreements, other ordinances, or laws (which are not superseded by this
development code) but shall prevail when such provisions are less restrictive.
In the event of a question between this development code and the general plan,
this development code shall prevail. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.01.080: HOW TO USE THE LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE:
This development code governs land use and development within the incorporated
limits of the city. The sections of this development code are used together in
the review of land use and development applications, enforcement of zoning and
land use regulations, and implementation of the general plan. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
13.02.010: Violations And Penalties
13.02.020: Severability
13.02.030: Compliance And Scope
13.02.040: Fees
13.02.050: Administrative Reviews And Permits
13.02.060: Expiration Of Licenses, Permits, And Approvals
13.02.070: Lot Standards
13.02.080: Substandard Lots
13.02.090: Every Dwelling On A Lot
13.02.100: Yard Space For One Building Only
13.02.110: Yard To Be Unobstructed; Exceptions
13.02.120: Clear View Of Intersecting Streets
13.02.130: Sale Or Lease Of Required Space
13.02.140: Division Of Lots Below Minimum Space Requirements
13.02.150: Conservation Of Values
13.02.160: Guarantee For Improvements
13.02.170: Nonconforming Uses And Noncomplying Structures Provisions; Purpose
13.02.180: Continuing Existing Uses
13.02.190: Construction Approved Prior To New Development Code
13.02.200: Nonconforming Uses And Noncomplying Structures; Substitution,
Extension, Discontinuance, Etc.
13.02.210: Amortization Of Nonconforming Uses
13.02.010: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Violations: It is unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter, change,
maintain, use, or permit the construction, erection, installation, alteration,
change, maintenance, use of any house, building, structure, sign, landscape
area, parking lot, fenced lot or other land contrary to any of the provisions
of this development code. Any land use that is specifically prohibited by this
development code or is unspecified and not classified by the director is
prohibited in any district.
   B.   Property Owner Is Responsible Party: The owner and/or the person in
possession of any property used in violation of this development code shall be
responsible for any violation thereof, whether or not he or his agent has
committed the prohibited act(s) or has neglected to prevent the performance of
the prohibited act(s) by another person.
   C.   Penalty: Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this development code (and any amendments hereto, or of any
adopted subdivisions, official maps, major street plan ordinance, or
regulations) shall, upon conviction, be punishable as a class C misdemeanor.
   D.   Other Remedies: The city may pursue a violation of the provisions of
this development code pursuant to this development code, other provisions of
the Taylorsville code, or other provisions of law.
   E.   Number Of Offenses: Every person, firm, or corporation may be deemed
responsible or guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which
any violation is committed or continued.
   F.   Remedy:
      1.   The city or any adversely affected owner of real estate within the
city in which violations of this development code occur or are about to occur,
may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute:
         a.   Injunctions, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate
action.
         b.   Proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove the unlawful
building, use, or act.
      2.   The city need only establish the violation to obtain the injunction.
      3.   The city may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, enforce
this title by:
         a.   Withholding building permits; or
         b.   Taking action to cancel any permit or approval for failure to
comply fully with the terms of any permit or approval including, but not
limited to, a conditional use permit, site plan review, building permit,
variance, or special exception. The authority that issued the permit or
approval shall consider the matter at a public hearing preceded by at least ten
(10) days' notice to the licensee/permittee. Cancellation or revocation of a
permit or approval may be appealed in the same manner as the original action.
   G.   Nuisance And Abatement: Any required fencing, landscaping, parking lot,
lighting, or other required site plan elements, building or structure erected,
constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, removed, or maintained
contrary to the provisions of this development code, and any use of any
conditional use permit, approved site plan, other approved development plans
and permits, land, building, or premises established, conducted, or maintained
contrary to the provisions of this development code shall be, and the same
hereby is declared, to be unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to other
remedies provided by the law, the city attorney, upon request of the director,
may immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal
and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and may take other steps
and apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will
abate and remove such building, use or structure, and restrain and enjoin any
person, firm, or corporation from erecting, building, maintaining, or using any
such building, structure, or property contrary to the provisions of this
development code. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.020: SEVERABILITY:
Should any article, section, clause, or provision of this development code be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the development code as a whole or any part thereof
other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 12-15,
7-11-2012)
13.02.030: COMPLIANCE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Use Of Land, Buildings, And Structures: No land shall be used or
occupied, and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, used, or
occupied for any use contrary to the provisions of this development code.
   B.   Development To Be In Accordance With Terms Of Licenses, Permits, Or
Approvals:
      1.   All construction, operations, and occupancy shall be in accordance
to approved building permits, conditional use permits, approved site plans,
business licenses, and other permits which may be required. No deviance from
said permits or approvals shall be made unless the proper variances, special
exceptions, or appeals have been granted as per this development code.
      2.   No building permit shall be issued until all permits, reviews,
guarantee of improvements, or approvals required by this development code have
been secured. Grading permits may be issued by the city prior to the issuance
of a building permit with the approval of the director, accompanied by a
guarantee of improvement ("guarantee(s)"). Except as specifically provided
herein, the securing of one required review or approval shall not exempt the
recipient from the necessity of securing any other review or approval required
by this development code.
   C.   Conformance To Title Provisions: All city officials who are vested with
the duty or authority to issue permits shall conform to the provisions of this
development code and shall issue no permit, certificate, license for uses,
buildings, or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this development
code. Any such permit, certificate or license issued in conflict with the
provisions of this development code, intentionally or otherwise, shall be null
and void.
   D.   Inspection Of Property:
      1.   Inspection Of Site Improvements: The director is hereby authorized
to inspect or cause to be inspected all site improvements in the course of
development, construction, modification, or repair to determine compliance with
the provisions of this development code.
      2.   Inspection Of Buildings, Structures, And Land Uses: The director is
hereby authorized to inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings and
structures in the course of construction, modification, or repair, and to
inspect land uses to determine compliance with the provisions of this
development code.
      3.   Right Of Entry: The director or any authorized employee shall have
the right to enter any building, premises, or property for the purpose of
determining the use thereof or to enter the premises or real property for the
purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this development code
provided such right of entry shall be exercised only at a reasonable hour and
in no case shall entry be made to any building in the absence of the owner or
tenant thereof without their consent or a written order of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   E.   Storage: Storage of any kind on a vacant lot is prohibited. (Ord. 12-
15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.040: FEES:
A fee shall be paid for certain reviews and permits as established by the city
council. No such fee approved and listed in the city fee schedule shall be
returnable in the event that the permit or approval applied for is denied.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.050: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEWS AND PERMITS:
   A.   Review For Building Permits: All applications for building permits
shall be submitted to the director for review. Such review shall determine
compliance with the regulations of this development code. The requirements for
a building permit shall be established by the director. The city shall issue no
building permit until the application is approved for zoning compliance by the
director.
   B.   Review For Business Licenses And Home Occupations: All applications for
business licenses, home occupations, or renewal of such licenses shall be
submitted to the director for review and approval to determine compliance with
this development code.
   C.   Design Guideline Review: All applications for design guideline review,
as provided in this development code, shall be submitted to the director. The
director shall receive all such submittals to assure compliance and/or assure
completeness and prepare submittals for review.
   D.   Site Plan Review: All applications for site plan review as provided for
in this development code shall be submitted to the director. The director shall
receive all such submittals to assure compliance and/or assure completeness and
prepare submittals for review.
   E.   Administrative Conditional Use Permit: All applications for an
administrative conditional use permit shall be submitted to the director for
review and approval to determine compliance with this development code.
   F.   Nonadministrative Conditional Use Permit: All applications for a
nonadministrative conditional use permit shall be submitted to the director as
provided for in this development code. The director shall receive all
submittals, assure completeness of submittals, and prepare submittals for
review by the planning commission.
   G.   Nonadministrative Temporary Use Permit: All applications for a
temporary use permit shall be received by the director and follow the procedure
as described in this development code.
   H.   Amendments: All requests for amendments or changes to the Development
Code or zone district map shall be submitted to the Director or initiated with
the Director. The amendment process shall proceed as provided for in this
Development Code.
   I.   Sign Permit: As provided in this Development Code, the Director shall
be responsible for issuance of permits for signs and for enforcement of sign
regulations.
   J.   Grading Permit: As provided in this Development Code, the Director,
upon recommendation of the City Engineer, shall be responsible for issuance of
permits for grading and for enforcement of grading regulations. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012)
13.02.060: EXPIRATION OF LICENSES, PERMITS, AND APPROVALS:
Each license, permit or approval issued, as set forth herein, shall expire
after one hundred eighty (180) days if no construction is undertaken or no work
is done unless a different time period is specifically set forth at the time of
issuance of the license or permit or in this Development Code, or unless an
extension is granted by the issuing agency prior to expiration. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012)
13.02.070: LOT STANDARDS:
Except for more flexible requirements, as those pertaining to planned unit
developments or as may be otherwise provided in this Development Code, every
lot within the City shall have such area as is required by this Development
Code and shall have the required frontage upon a dedicated or publicly approved
street before a building permit may be issued. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.080: SUBSTANDARD LOTS:
The requirements of this Development Code as to minimum lot area or lot width
shall not be construed to prevent the use for a single-unit dwelling of any lot
or parcel of land in the event that such lot has been held in separate
ownership prior to and continuing since the adoption of this Development Code
and zoning regulations in effect prior to the adoption of this Development
Code. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.090: EVERY DWELLING ON A LOT:
Unless otherwise permitted by this Development Code, every dwelling structure
shall be located and maintained on a separate lot having no less than the
minimum area, width, depth, frontage, and public improvements required by this
Development Code for the zone district in which the dwelling structure is
located, except group dwelling complexes under single ownership and management
which are permitted by this Development Code may occupy one lot for each such
multi-structure complex. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.100: YARD SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY:
No required yard or other open space around a building, or which is hereafter
provided around any building, for the purpose of complying with the provisions
of this Development Code shall be considered as providing a yard or open space
for any other building, nor shall any yard or other required open space on an
adjoining lot be considered as providing the yard or open space on a lot
whereon a building is to be erected or established. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.110: YARD TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED; EXCEPTIONS:
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except
for accessory buildings or structures in a rear or side yard and for the
ordinary projections of sills, cornices, chimneys, flues, other ornamental
features which project into a yard not more than two feet (2'), and fire escape
structures shall not project into required setbacks. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.120: CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS:
Except as provided below, in all districts or uses for which a front yard is
required and located on a local street or controlled intersection, no opaque
obstruction to view in excess of three feet (3') high (above top back of curb)
shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the back
edge of the right-of-way and a line connecting them at points thirty feet (30')
from the intersection of the right-of-way except a reasonable number of trees
pruned to permit unobstructed views to automobile drivers. Corner lots not on a
local street or controlled intersection shall be subject to AASHTO standards.
Deviations from these requirements must be reviewed by the City Engineer to
determine if there is an acceptable degree of safety.
FIGURE 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3746.png]
(Ord. 18-07, 2-28-2018)
13.02.130: SALE OR LEASE OF REQUIRED SPACE:
No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking, or other
requirements of this Development Code for a lot or building may be sold or
leased apart from such lot or building. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.140: DIVISION OF LOTS BELOW MINIMUM SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
No parcel of land which has less than the minimum width and area requirements
for the zone district in which it is located may be divided from a larger
parcel of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of a building or
development as a lot. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.150: CONSERVATION OF VALUES:
It shall be the responsibility of each property owner to maintain their
property in a good, clean condition, making necessary repairs to the home,
accessory structures, e.g., fencing, yard lights, other appurtenances, and
landscaping. Good condition shall mean properly painted structures, fences in a
freestanding, upright and stable position, landscaping free of weeds, dead
materials, e.g., dead trees or shrubs, as well as generally accepted
maintenance practices for residential property, as more specifically addressed
within title 9, chapter 9.08 of the Taylorsville code. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.160: GUARANTEE FOR IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   A Guarantee For Improvements Is Required Prior To Final Project
Approval: Owners/developers/contractors who are proposing any new commercial or
substantially modified existing commercial projects, or residential projects,
other than individual home construction, with required on site or off site
improvements in the city shall be required to post one or more guarantees for
improvements prior to final approval by the city. "Approval" in this subsection
shall mean recommendation from all appropriate city departments that the owner/
developer/contractor be allowed to proceed with construction of the proposed
project.
   B.   Developer Responsible For Performing Improvements: All improvements,
required by the approved site plan or other drawings and documents, are the
responsibility of the owner/developer/contractor, except as approved by the
city engineer.
   C.   Purpose Of, Number Of, And Forms Used For Guarantees For Improvements:
To guarantee to the city the construction, repair, and/or replacement of
required improvements, the owner/developer/contractor shall post one or more
guarantees for improvements in a form approved by the city attorney.
   D.   City Engineer's Estimate: The amount of each guarantee shall be based
on the city engineer's estimate(s) of the reasonable construction cost of the
required improvements ("estimate(s)"). The city engineer or his representative
shall prepare one or more estimates, the maximum number of which shall be
determined by the city engineer. Each separate guarantee amount shall be the
total amount shown on the city engineer's separate estimate form(s).
   E.   Itemization Of Required Improvements On The Engineer's Estimate: The
city engineer or his representative shall prepare one or more estimates that
may include, but shall not be limited to:
      1.   Irrigation and flood control systems.
      2.   Any roadway improvements that are proposed to be maintained by the
city, such as curb and gutter, drive approaches, waterways, sidewalks, trails,
bike paths, raised medians, asphalt paving, road base, geotextile fabric,
painting, and striping, etc.
      3.   Survey monuments.
      4.   Survey rivets.
      5.   Streetlights.
      6.   Landscaping and sprinkling systems.
      7.   Streetscape (trees, benches, etc.).
      8.   Any roadway or parking lot improvements that are proposed to be
privately maintained, such as curb and gutter, drive approaches, waterways,
sidewalks, trails, bike paths, raised medians, asphalt paving, road base,
geotextile fabric, painting and striping, etc.
      9.   Fencing and walls.
      10.   Retaining walls.
      11.   Trash enclosures.
      12.   In PUDs, required landscaping and sprinkling system of designated
yard or lot for individual home or pad.
      13.   Any other required improvements determined by the city engineer or
the director.
   F.   Purpose Of Separate Estimates: The city engineer may provide separate
estimate lists, itemizing certain groups of improvements, with the intent of
providing the opportunity to the developer to perform each certain group of
improvements completely and then apply for release of the guarantee associated
with that certain group of improvements. Generally, there may be up to four (4)
estimates as determined by the city engineer.
      1.   Estimate containing items in subsection E1 of this section and
sometimes subsection E13 of this section.
      2.   Estimate containing items in subsections E2 through E4, E8 through
E11 of this section, and sometimes subsection E13 of this section.
      3.   Estimate containing items in subsections E5 through E7 of this
section and sometimes subsection E13 of this section.
      4.   Estimate containing the item in subsection E12 of this section.
All items listed on each separate estimate form, as well as all other items
required by the city engineer and the director, shall be performed completely,
to the satisfaction of city inspectors, before any portion of the guarantee
associated with a specific estimate shall be released. Portions of the
guarantee will not be released for individual items listed on an estimate, even
though they have been completed.
   G.   All Required Improvements Are Part Of Estimate And Guarantee: All
improvements by the approved site plan, standard specifications and details,
the building or grading permit, city ordinance or other drawings and documents,
shall be part of the estimate(s) and covered by the guarantee(s), whether or
not they are specifically listed in the estimate(s).
   H.   Amount Of The Guarantee:
      1.   A guarantee in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
total reasonable construction costs of improvements, as determined by the city
engineer, of the above referenced improvements (subsections E1 through E11 and
E13 of this section) shall also be provided prior to final project approval.
      2.   A guarantee in the amount of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
total reasonable construction costs, as determined by the city engineer, of the
above improvements (subsection E12 of this section) shall be provided at the
time either power to panel (permanent power) or a certificate of occupancy is
requested, whichever is requested first, if those improvements have not been
installed, inspected, and approved at the time of the request.
   I.   Performance Of Required Improvements Prior To Occupancy Of The Site:
Improvements listed in subsections E1 through E5 and E8 of this section, or as
specified by the director and city engineer, shall be satisfactorily installed
prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for the development unless
otherwise approved by the director and city engineer.
   J.   Time Period For Performance Of Required Improvements: All improvements
listed in subsections E1 through E13 of this section shall be satisfactorily
installed within a period of one year from the date the guarantee is posted
with the city, unless otherwise approved by the director and city engineer.
   K.   Specified Sequence: In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare
of the city or its residents from traffic, flood, drainage, or other hazards,
the city engineer may require that the improvements, including improvements
found damaged or defective prior to the final acceptance of the improvements
and one hundred percent (100%) release of the guarantee, be installed or
repaired in specified sequence and/or within a specified period of time, which
may be less than one year. The city engineer will notify owner/developer/
contractor in writing, at such time as he deems it is appropriate, of such
requirement. Upon the failure of the owner/developer/contractor to perform the
specified improvements or repairs as required by the city engineer, the city
may take whatever action it deems appropriate, including foreclosure on the
guarantee, to secure the improvements or repairs.
   L.   Release Of Guarantee: The estimate shall be the document that governs
what amounts can be released at any given time upon approval of the city
engineer.
   M.   No Release Of Guarantee For Private Improvements: No portion of the
guarantee will be released prior to one hundred percent (100%) completion of
all required private improvements.
   N.   Initiating Inspections For Release Of Guarantee: Upon written request
for inspections by the owner/developer/contractor, inspections of the
improvements by city inspectors will be scheduled, weather permitting.
   O.   Partial Release For Public Improvements: Upon one hundred percent
(100%) completion of the items in each estimate and approval by the city
engineer, the city may release seventy five percent (75%) of the original
amount of the guarantee.
   P.   One Year Warranty Period: As a warranty period, the remaining balance
of the guarantee amount for the public improvements shall be held and shall
extend for a one year period beyond the date of the partial release.
   Q.   One Hundred Percent Release Of Guarantee: Upon completion of the one
year warranty period and needed repair of any improvements, the owner/
developer/contractor shall submit a written request for inspection to the city
engineer. Inspections of the improvements by city inspectors will be scheduled,
weather permitting. Subsequent to field observation by city inspectors and
their submittal to the developer of a notice of any deficiencies, such
deficiencies shall be corrected within thirty (30) days from time of
notification. If not completed within thirty (30) days, the city has the right
to effect the completion of the improvements and/or take other action it deems
appropriate. Upon approval by the city engineer, the city may release all
remaining portions of the guarantee. This constitutes a one hundred percent
(100%) release of guarantee.
   R.   Type Of Guarantee: Every guarantee required by this development code
shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and shall be in the form of:
      1.   An irrevocable letter of credit form, submitted on forms provided by
the city, from a bank or credit union, chartered under the laws of the state of
Utah or the United States Of America, licensed and regulated by the department
of financial institutions of the state of Utah or its successor and having an
office in the state of Utah, which is insured by the federal depository
insurance corporation or national credit union share insurance fund, and which
has an office in the state of Utah as its place of presentation signed by the
owner/developer/contractor and bank or credit union; or
      2.   An escrow bond form, submitted on forms provided by the city, having
as guarantor an organization licensed and regulated by the department of
financial institutions of the state of Utah or its successor, having an office
in the state of Utah, and which is insured by the federal depository insurance
corporation or national credit union share insurance fund, and which has an
office in the state of Utah as its place of presentation. Escrow bonds shall be
submitted on forms provided by the city and approved by the city attorney and
shall consist of a letter of commitment, signed by both the guarantor and
owner/developer/contractor and guarantor; or
      3.   A cash bond form, submitted on forms provided by the city, and
signed by the owner/developer/contractor.
   S.   Special Requirements Of The Guarantee Form: The following conditions
apply to all types of guarantees and may be required as a statement or included
on the form thereof:
      1.   The city engineer's estimate(s) of the reasonable construction cost
of the required improvements ("estimate(s)") shall be considered a part of the
guarantee.
      2.   Upon completion of all required public improvements, and following
inspection and approval of the improvements by the city, a portion of the
guarantee may be released and a portion of the original estimate amount will be
held for one year after inspection, as set forth in the development code, which
amounts will be available to the city in case of defective workmanship or
materials not corrected by the owner/developer/contractor. After inspection and
authorization from the city, and following the one year warranty period, this
final amount may be released. This final portion is held to guarantee the
improvements against faulty workmanship, deterioration, failure, faulty design,
and all other situations that do not conform to the applicable city
specifications and approved drawings for the period up to the date of the final
one hundred percent (100%) guarantee release.
      3.   A statement shall be signed by the owner/developer/contractor and
filed with the city engineer certifying that no material liens or mechanic
(workmanship) liens exist with regard to the improvements related to any part
of the guarantee.
      4.   Upon the request of the city engineer, the guarantor shall certify
the amount existing in the escrow account pertaining to the guarantee, noting
the amount of the current balance and amounts released and the date of such
releases.
      5.   The guarantees shall be issued in the name of the party signing the
guarantee for improvement.
      6.   The developer/owner/contractor may be required to sign a statement
that certifies that he has or will notify all subcontractors working under him
that the city will not release any portion of the guarantee until all required
improvements are completed, and the work has been inspected and accepted by the
city, at which time the city may release a portion of the guarantee.
   T.   Duration, Terms, Extensions: Every guarantee authorized by this
development code shall run to the benefit of the city and have an express term
of at least one year from the date the guarantee is posted for any development
to which it applies. Further, such guarantee shall contain language ensuring
the performance of the required improvements by the owner/developer/contractor
and a provision for unconditional payment of the face amount of the guarantee
within ten (10) days from any declaration of default or forfeiture. Guarantee
extensions beyond one year may be allowed under special circumstances upon
written request by the owner/developer/contractor and written approval of the
city engineer. The guaranteeing institution shall provide a written extension
of the guarantee if it is not already within the express term.
   U.   Default: In the event that the owner/developer/contractor is in default
or fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the required improvements within
one year from the date of posting of the guarantee, or other development
approval by the city, or earlier time as established by this title, the city
may declare the guarantee forfeited, and the city may, in its sole discretion,
install or cause the required improvements to be installed, using the proceeds
of the guarantee to defray the expense thereof, including administrative
overhead and/or take any other action legally available. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012)
13.02.170: NONCONFORMING USES AND NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES PROVISIONS; PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of these regulations to control and gradually eliminate those
uses of land or buildings, which, although legal at the time of their
establishment, do not now conform to the use regulations of the district within
which they are situated. Such uses shall be deemed nonconforming uses.
Likewise, these regulations are intended to control and gradually eliminate
structures which, although legal at the time of their erection, do not now
conform to the height, bulk, and location regulations of the zone district
within which they are situated. Such structures shall be deemed to be
noncomplying structures. Any building or use which was permitted prior to
enactment of this development code, but which is designated by this development
code as a conditional use, shall not be considered nonconforming and shall not
be subject to the provisions of this chapter. This chapter is also established
to control and gradually eliminate sites and lots which were legal at the time
of their establishment but no longer meet the regulations of the district
within which they are located. Such sites and lots shall be designated as
nonconforming sites and lots. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.180: CONTINUING EXISTING USES:
Except as hereinafter specified, any use, building, or structure lawfully
existing at the time of the enactment or subsequent amendment of this
development code may be continued even though such use, building, or structure
does not conform with the provisions of this development code for the district
in which it is located. Except as otherwise provided by law, nothing in this
development code shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by proper
authority. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.190: CONSTRUCTION APPROVED PRIOR TO NEW DEVELOPMENT CODE:
A building, structure, or part thereof which does not conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is situated, but for which a building
permit was legally issued and construction started prior to the enactment of
this development code, may be completed in accordance with such plans providing
work has progressed continuously and without delay. Such building or structure
shall be deemed to be nonconforming and shall be subject to the regulations set
forth herein. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.02.200: NONCONFORMING USES AND NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURES; SUBSTITUTION,
EXTENSION, DISCONTINUANCE, ETC.:
Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, a nonconforming use shall
not be enlarged, extended, or changed unless the use is changed to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located, and a nonconforming structure
shall not be reconstructed or structurally altered unless such alteration shall
result in removing those conditions of the building which render it
nonconforming, except as follows:
   A.   Substitution Or Extension:
      1.   When authorized by the planning commission in accordance with this
development code, a nonconforming use which is determined to be of a more
desirable nature may be substituted for another nonconforming use or to more
closely meet the use permitted in the district in which it is located.
      2.   Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use,
such use shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use.
      3.   Repairs and structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming
structure provided that the floor space of such structure is not increased.
      4.   A structure lacking sufficient automobile parking space in
connection therewith as required by this Development Code may be altered or
enlarged provided additional automobile parking space is supplied to meet the
requirements of this Development Code for such alterations or enlargement.
      5.   In the event a nonconforming structure is damaged or partially
destroyed by calamity or act of nature to the extent of not more than one-half
(1/2) of its market value, the occupancy or use of such building, structure or
part thereof which existed at the time of such partial destruction may be
continued or resumed provided that restoration is started within a period of
six (6) months and is diligently pursued to completion. In the event such
damage or destruction exceeds one-half (1/2) of its market value of such
nonconforming building or structure, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made
except in the case of residences or accessory farm buildings unless every
portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all regulations for
new buildings in the district in which it is located, as determined by the City
and other requirements as may be imposed at site plan review.
      6.   Application for substitution, enlargement, or extension of a
nonconforming use as provided in this section shall be made to the Planning
Commission.
      7.   A vacant building or structure may be occupied by a use for which
the structure is designed or intended if so occupied within a period of one
year after the use became nonconforming.
   B.   Cessation Of Use: A use shall be deemed to have ceased when it has been
discontinued for a period of one year or more, whether or not the intent is to
abandon said use. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   C.   Appeal: Any person adversely affected by a decision of the Planning
Commission regarding nonconforming uses or noncomplying structures may, within
ten (10) days of the decision, appeal the decision to the Hearing Officer by
alleging that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 18-09, 2-28-2018)
13.02.210: AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING USES:
In order to respond to exceptional or unusual circumstances involving the
termination of nonconforming uses, the City Council may approve an amortization
formula for the termination of such uses over a period of time to be agreed
upon with the owner of the property, subject to reasonable regulations with
respect to the continuation of the nonconforming use during the amortization
period. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.03
OFFICERS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION:
13.03.010: Purpose
13.03.020: Community Development Director
13.03.030: Land Use Authorities
13.03.040: Appeal Authorities
13.03.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter sets forth the purpose, duties, organization, and powers of City
boards, commissions, and other bodies charged in making decisions and
recommendations under this Development Code. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.03.020: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR:
The Community Development Director, hereinafter referred to as the "Director",
in addition to duties elsewhere in this Development Code, is charged with the
responsibility of interpretation and enforcement of this Development Code.
Interpretation of this Development Code includes, but is not limited to,
clarification of intention, determination of zoning classifications of land
uses not specified in this Development Code, the delegation of processing
procedures and requirements, and enforcement of Development Code provisions.
The specific duties of the Director shall include the following:
   A.   Reviews And Decisions: The Director shall be authorized to undertake
reviews, recommendations and decisions as described in this Development Code.
The Director shall be governed by the standards and procedures as set forth in
this Development Code for the specific review, determination, or appeal which
has been delegated to him.
   B.   General Plan: The Director shall assist the Planning Commission and
City Council in the development and implementation of the General Plan for the
physical and economic growth of the City and shall prepare population and
growth studies in support of the General Plan. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   C.   Administrative Staff Assistance And Technical Advice: The Director
shall provide staff, including secretarial assistance, to the Planning
Commission and Appeal Authority. Staff assistance shall include attendance at
regularly scheduled meetings and the preparation and publication of agendas and
required public notices. The Director shall act as technical advisor to the
Mayor, City Council, other City departments upon request, and other committees
and commissions as the Mayor may designate. (Ord. 18-09, 2-28-2018)
   D.   Development Code Enforcement: The Director is hereby designated and
authorized as the officer charged with the enforcement of this Development
Code. He shall enforce all the provisions of this Development Code, including
court action when necessary, and his failure to do so shall not legalize any
violation of such provisions. The Police Department is also hereby designated
and authorized with enforcement of any nuisance provision of this Development
Code.
   E.   Delegate Responsibility: The Director may designate representatives to
execute the responsibilities in this Development Code.
   F.   Administrative Conditional Uses: The Director shall be authorized to
review and decide administrative conditional uses. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.03.030: LAND USE AUTHORITIES:
   A.   Planning Commission:
      1.   Purpose: The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the
Mayor and the City Council as more specifically set forth herein and make
determinations as specifically delegated to it as set forth in this Development
Code. This does not include policy making powers of the City that remain under
the control of elected officials.
      2.   Creation And Membership:
         a.   Membership And Alternates: There is hereby created a Planning
Commission for the City, to be known as the Taylorsville Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) regular members and one
alternate to be appointed by the City Council. The alternates shall attend all
meetings but shall not vote on Planning Commission decisions unless serving in
the place of a regular member. Funding for the Planning Commission shall be
established annually by the City Council and may include a stipend for members
and alternates for each official meeting attended.
         b.   Terms For Members: The terms of office for the members of the
Planning Commission shall be four (4) years commencing on July 1 of the year
the appointment is made. The terms of office for the Planning Commission
members shall be staggered at intervals so as to provide continuity. Vacancies
for the term of any member whose term is not complete shall be filled for the
unexpired portion of the term in the manner provided for in this section. A
member whose term has expired shall continue to serve until his successor has
been appointed and approved. Members of the Planning Commission may be removed
as established by the City's administrative and legislative codes.
         c.   Selection Of Members: Members of the Planning Commission shall be
selected from residents of the City with experience in related fields including
planning, architecture, real estate, law, engineering, land development,
contracting, or substantial community involvement. Any member or alternate
member of the Planning Commission relocating their primary residence outside
the limits of the City shall resign their appointment within thirty (30) days
prior to their relocation, if possible. In order to promote geographical
representation on the Planning Commission, one member of the Planning
Commission shall be appointed from each City Council district, and two (2)
members, plus the alternate member, shall be appointed at large. No more than
two (2) members of the Planning Commission shall be from any one City Council
district.
      3.   Powers And Duties:
         a.   Recommendations To The City Council: The Planning Commission
shall prepare and make a recommendation to the City Council for:
            (1)   A General Plan and amendments to the General Plan.
            (2)   Land use ordinances, zoning maps, official maps, and
amendments.
            (3)   Subdivision regulations and amendments.
            (4)   Application processes that may include:
               (A)   A designation of routine land use matters that, upon
application and proper notice, will receive informal streamlined review and
action if the application is uncontested.
               (B)   Processes that protect the rights of each applicant and/or
third parties concerning formal consideration of any application by a Land Use
Authority.
               (C)   The right of each applicant, adversely affected party, or
Municipal officer or employee to appeal a Land Use Authority's decision to a
separate Appeal Authority.
               (D)   The right of each participant to be heard in each public
hearing on a contested application.
            (5)   Zoning of property annexed into the City.
            (6)   Vacation of an entire subdivision plat.
            (7)   Other matter as established by the City Council.
         b.   Recommendation To Mayor: The Planning Commission shall consider
and provide a recommendation to the Mayor for:
            (1)   Vacating, closing, or altering any portion of a street or
alley within a subdivision.
            (2)   Subdivision plats.
            (3)   Other matters as established by the City Council.
         c.   Reviews And Decisions: The Planning Commission shall review and
decide the following:
            (1)   Nonadministrative conditional uses.
            (2)   Expansion or alteration of a nonconforming structure or use
after determination by the Director.
            (3)   Site plans delegated to it in this Development Code or by the
Director.
            (4)   Administrative conditional uses delegated to it by the
Director.
            (5)   Reasonable accommodation.
            (6)   Other matters as established by the City Council.
         d.   Policies And Procedures: Adopt rules that comply with applicable
State Statutes and City ordinances.
   B.   Administrative Officer: The Director is hereby designated to review and
decide the following:
      1.   Applications for site plan review and approval as delegated in this
Development Code.
      2.   Determination of the nonconforming status of a building, structure,
or use.
      3.   Routine and uncontested matters as delegated in this Development
Code.
      4.   Other matters as established by the City Council.
      5.   Property line adjustments.
      6.   Administrative conditional uses. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.03.040: APPEAL AUTHORITIES:
   A.   Hearing Officer:
      1.   Purpose: In order to provide for just and fair treatment in the
administration of local land use ordinances and to ensure that substantial
justice is done, a Hearing Officer shall be appointed to exercise the powers
and duties provided hereafter.
      2.   Creation And Appointment: The Hearing Officer shall be appointed or
removed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
      3.   Procedures:
         a.   The Hearing Officer shall adopt rules that comply with all
applicable State Statutes and City ordinances.
         b.   Meetings shall be conducted in compliance with the requirements
of State Statutes and City ordinances concerning the keeping of minutes.
         c.   The Hearing Officer shall make decisions on scheduled agenda
items. Decisions of the Hearing Officer become effective at the meeting in
which the decision is made unless a different time is designated by the Hearing
Officer at the time the decision is made.
         d.   All hearings of the Hearing Officer shall be open to the public.
         e.   The Hearing Officer shall receive a stipend for each meeting.
      4.   Powers And Duties: The Hearing Officer shall hear and decide:
         a.   Requests for variances from the terms of the land use ordinance.
         b.   Appeals from decisions where it is alleged that there is an error
in the order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official or director in the enforcement or interpretation of this Development
Code. Appeals may not be used to waive or modify the terms or requirements of
the Development Code. No authority has been granted to the Hearing Officer to
make determinations regarding the existence, expansion, or modification of
nonconforming structures or nonconforming uses.
         c.   All appeals of decisions regarding administrative and non-
administrative conditional uses.
         d.   Appeals from a fee charged in accordance with State Code section
10-9a-510.
         e.   Other matters as established by the City Council.
   B.   Administrative Officer: The Director is designated as an Appeal
Authority for the purpose of reviewing and deciding matters as established by
the City Council. (Ord. 18-09, 2-28-2018)
CHAPTER 13.04
ZONE DISTRICTS
SECTION:
13.04.010: Purpose
13.04.020: Residential Districts
13.04.030: Mixed Use Districts
13.04.040: Commercial Districts
13.04.050: Office/Industrial Districts
13.04.060: Open Space/Institutional Districts
13.04.070: Site Specific Districts
13.04.080: Overlay Districts
13.04.090: Minimum Area And Location Information For Nonresidential And Mixed
Use Districts
13.04.100: Location And Boundaries Of Districts
13.04.110: Boundary Interpretation
13.04.120: Applicability Of Zoning Districts
13.04.010: PURPOSE:
The city designates land use zone districts to promote compatibility between
land uses, buildings and structures, efficient use of land, transportation
options and accessibility, and crime prevention and safety. The districts
classify, regulate, and restrict uses, as well as combine uses and encourage
the location of compatible land uses close to one another. The district
regulations provide development standards pertaining to the intensity of land
uses and development, density, height, bulk of buildings and structures, area
of yards, and other open areas between buildings and structures. (Ord. 12-15,
7-11-2012)
13.04.020: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Single-family residential:
 
Abbreviated Designation Zone District Name Minimum Lot Size
                                           (Square Feet)
   R-1-Residential district R-1-40            40,000
   R-1-Residential district R-1-30            30,000
   R-1-Residential district R-1-20            20,000
   R-1-Residential district R-1-15            15,000
   R-1-Residential district R-1-10            10,000
   R-1-Residential district R-1-8             8,000
   R-1-Residential district R-1-7             7,000
   R-1-Residential district R-1-6             6,000
   R-1-Residential district R-1-5             5,000
   MH  Manufactured home residential district  
 
   B.   Multi-family residential:
 
Abbreviated Designation Zone District Name          Minimum Lot Size
                                                    (Square Feet)
   R-2-8             Residential district R-2-8  8,000
   R-2-10            Residential district R-2-10 10,000
   RM                Residential multiple-family Varies - see chapter 13.20
                        district                    of this title
 
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.04.030: MIXED USE DISTRICTS:
 
Abbreviated Designation Zone District Name
MU                      Mixed use district
TC                      Transit corridor district
 
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.04.040: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
 
Abbreviated Designation Zone District Name
RC                      Regional Commercial District
CC                      Planned Center - Community Commercial District
NC                      Planned Center - Neighborhood Commercial District
LC                      Limited Commercial District
BC                      Boulevard Commercial District
 
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.04.050: OFFICE/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
 
Abbreviated Designation Zone District Name
PO                      Professional Office District
ID                      Industrial District
RD                      Research and Development District
 
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.04.060: OPEN SPACE/INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS:
 
Abbreviated Designation Zone District Name
IC                      Institutional Care District
H                       Hospital District
OS                      Open Space District
 
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.04.070: SITE SPECIFIC DISTRICTS:
 
Abbreviated Designation Zone District Name
SSD                     Site Specific Development District
 
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.04.080: OVERLAY DISTRICTS:
 
Abbreviated Designation Zone District Name
   HISHistoric Resources Overlay Zone
   PUDPlanned Unit Development District
   TNDTraditional Neighborhood Development Overlay Zone
        Sensitive Area Overlay Zone
        Floodplain Overlay Zone
   DWSDrinking Water Source Protection Overlay Zone
   DESDesign District Overlay Zone
 
(Ord. 18-15, 8-1-2018)
13.04.090: MINIMUM AREA AND LOCATION INFORMATION FOR NONRESIDENTIAL AND MIXED
USE DISTRICTS:
 
Abbreviated Designation Minimum Area Required To Applicable Location
                        Establish District       Information
   RC Distric2 acres Shall be adjacent to a major intersection at Redwood
                        Road, 5400 South, Interstate 215, or Bangerter Highway
   CC Distric5 acres Shall be located on an arterial street preferably at an
                        intersection at such streets
                        Shall be located on at least a major collector street
   NC Distric3 acres and in a location that is conveniently accessible from
                        its service area
                        Shall be limited to the Redwood Road corridor from the
   BC Distric1 acre  northern City boundary to 5000 South. If a parcel has
                        additional frontage on another street, the BC
                        regulations shall apply
   LC Distric2 acres -
   PO Distric1 acre  -
   ID Distric1 acre  -
   RD Distric1 acre  -
   SSD Distri2 acres -
   MU Distric2 acres -
   TC Distric1 acre  -
 
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.04.100: LOCATION AND BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS:
The locations and boundaries of the zone districts are established as they are
shown on the map entitled zoning map, City of Taylorsville, Utah. Where
uncertainty exists to the boundaries of districts as shown on the zoning map,
the following rules shall apply:
   A.   Roads, Streets, Highways, Or Alleys: Boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerlines of roads or streets, highways, or
alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   B.   Platted Lot Lines: Boundaries indicated as approximately following
platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
   C.   City Limits: Boundaries indicated as approximately following City
limits shall be construed as following such City limits.
   D.   Streams Or Canals: Boundaries indicated as approximately following
centerlines of streams or canals shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   E.   Extensions And Distances: Boundaries indicated as parallel to or
extensions of features indicated in subsections A through D of this section
shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map
shall be determined by the scale of the map. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.04.110: BOUNDARY INTERPRETATION:
Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are different than
shown on the zoning map or in other circumstances not covered by subsection
13.04.100A of this chapter, the Director shall interpret the district
boundaries. Any appeal of boundary interpretation shall be made to the Hearing
Officer. (Ord. 18-09, 2-28-2018)
13.04.120: APPLICABILITY OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
The standard commercial, office, and industrial districts are defined as
follows:
   A.   Regional Commercial District (RC): This district is established to
stimulate economic development by allowing for a diversity of land uses in
areas of the City that are accessible to regional transportation facilities and
developed within planned commercial centers. This district is intended to
stimulate creative development and site design for highway commercial uses.
   B.   Regional Commercial-Planned Unit Development District (RC-PUD): This
district is established to provide for an area of diverse but integrated
commercial and nonindustrial uses. Emphasis is placed on achieving an
aesthetically attractive, functional area of wide ranging commercial and
industrial activity.
   C.   Community Commercial District (CC): This district is established to
allow for retail businesses and related uses to be grouped together into well
planned and designed planned commercial centers.
   D.   Neighborhood Commercial District (NC): This district is established to
allow for the creation of commercial centers to serve the convenience shopping
and service needs of neighborhood areas of the City within planned commercial
centers. The Neighborhood Commercial District designation is intended for
commercial developments that will relate to residential neighborhoods and will
be compatible with residential character.
   E.   Limited Commercial District (LC): This district is established for the
development of well designed planned commercial centers and professional office
developments that complement each other and act as buffers to adjacent
residential districts. It is intended that businesses in this zone will both
enhance and blend into surrounding residential neighborhoods through creative
architectural, development, and site designs.
   F.   Professional Office District (PO): This district is established to
provide an area for professional and business offices, nonretail services, and
other uses not including merchandising, warehousing, and manufacturing with
business hours consistent with those of contiguous property. Developments
adjacent to residential areas shall have a residential look to enhance
compatibility. Developments adjacent to commercial zones shall act to buffer
less dense residential developments or districts.
   G.   Industrial District (ID): This district is established to provide for
an area of diverse but integrated industrial and commercial uses. Emphasis is
placed on achieving an aesthetically attractive, functional area of wide
ranging industrial and commercial activity.
   H.   Mixed Use District (MU): This district is established to provide a zone
to be used near city transportation corridors that allows a mix of specific
land uses that are typically found separately in mutually exclusive zoning
districts. Mixed use represents a departure from characteristic zoning to the
extent that it encourages a combination of land uses which might normally be
regarded as incompatible.
The intent of this zone is to create self-sustaining walkable neighborhoods in
which residents may walk to work, to shopping, to recreational facilities, and
have access to mass transit. These neighborhoods are to provide a variety of
housing opportunities and choices that include a range of household types,
family sizes, and incomes. They shall provide convenient pedestrian commercial
services, employment opportunities, and shall be located in areas with existing
or probable future multiple transportation choices. Design standards include
requirements that help provide a true neighborhood by stipulating various mix
of uses, build-to lines, compact parking concealment, architectural control,
and maintenance. Proposed developments with increased land intensity and
housing density but without the above walkable elements are unacceptable and
will not be approved.
   I.   Boulevard Commercial District (BC): This district is established to
provide guidelines for the development of properties fronting on Redwood Road
between 4100 South and 5000 South. Regulations are intended to allow a
selective variety of uses within planned commercial centers in a manner that
will contribute to efficient traffic flow and architectural elements compatible
with adjoining residential neighborhoods.
   J.   Transit Corridor District (TC): This district is established to provide
a means by which the Utah transit authority (or its successors) may develop and
operate a public transportation system under consistent regulations. It is not
the intent nor the purpose of this zone to exempt the operators of the public
transportation service from federal or state regulatory requirements governing
rail service or other public transit regulations.
      1.   Location: The transit corridor district shall be located along
transit corridors identified in the Wasatch Front regional council adopted
plans.
      2.   Previous Agreements, Permits, And Approvals Remain In Effect: All
previous agreements, permits, conditional use permits, and other approvals
entered into between the city and the Utah transit authority for activities
occurring within the existing transit corridor remain in effect and shall be
enforced.
      3.   Governing Regulatory Bodies For Transit Corridor: The Utah transit
authority or its successors are required to comply with all applicable
regulations, requirements, laws, and obligations as specified by the following
federal and state agencies:
 
Acronym Agency Name
   EPEnvironmental protection agency
   FHFederal highway administration
   FRFederal railroad administration
   FTFederal transit administration
   MAMountainland association of governments
   UDUtah department of environmental quality
   UDUtah department of transportation
   WFWasatch Front regional council
 
      4.   Development Of Public Transit: The Utah transit authority or its
successors shall be permitted to develop a public transit system within the
transit corridor district consistent with the interlocal agreement.
"Development of a public transit system" shall include the following
activities:
Public transit system: "System" means a surface public transportation facility
that occupies a separate railroad right of way exclusively for public
transportation or a shared railroad right of way with access rights for public
transportation, including by way of example, light rail, commuter rail,
trolleys, guided busways, or similar technology for surface transportation
purposes.
System includes all things necessary to construct and/or operate a public
transportation facility within the transit corridor including all rails,
fastenings, switches, switch mechanisms and frogs with associated materials,
ties, ballast, signals, and communications devices (and associated equipment),
passenger facilities, platforms, drainage facilities, automatic warning
devices, traction power substations, overhead catenary systems, bumpers,
roadbed, embankments, bridges, trestles, culverts, or any other structures or
things necessary for the support thereof and, if any portion thereof is located
in a thoroughfare, the term includes pavement, crossing planks, and other
similar materials or facilities used in lieu of pavement or other street
surfacing materials at vehicular and pedestrian crossings of tracks, and any
and all structures and facilities required by lawful authority in connection
with the construction, renewal, maintenance, and operation of any of the
foregoing.
System does not include transportation facilities such as passenger terminals,
park and ride facilities, maintenance facilities, or other auxiliary
facilities, nor does system include development and use of facilities by the
Utah transit authority within a transit corridor for purposes other than public
transportation such as billboards, telecommunication towers, and signage
provided any regulation of such facilities would not interfere with the
operation of the system.
   K.   Research And Development District (RD): This district is established to
provide locations for commerce, service, research, and employment activities.
Such locations and site improvements shall project a desirable appearance
toward public streets and maintain compatibility with adjacent land uses. (Ord.
12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.05
ENACTMENT OF OR AMENDMENT TO DEVELOPMENT CODE AND ZONING MAP
SECTION:
13.05.010: Purpose
13.05.020: Amendments And Corrections
13.05.030: Planning Commission And City Council Review
13.05.040: Resubmission Of Amendment Request
13.05.010: PURPOSE:
The city council may enact and amend land use ordinances and a zoning map
consistent with the purposes set forth in this development code, the general
plan, and the land use development and management act 1 . This chapter sets
forth the procedure and responsibilities of the planning commission and city
council in making decisions relating to the amendment of the development code
and the zoning map. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-9a-101 et seq.
13.05.020: AMENDMENTS AND CORRECTIONS:
   A.   Amendments To The Zoning Map: Amendments to the zoning map shall be
made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Utah code. After the
amendment has been approved by the city council, the zoning map shall be
modified reflecting the said amendment.
   B.   Corrections To The Zoning Map: The director may make corrections to the
zoning map if it is determined that the original boundary line or other
information was not properly transferred to the zoning map after review of the
official record and ordinance adopting that boundary location. When making such
a correction, the director shall place the correct information on the zoning
map and the date of revision thereon. The director shall forward the corrected
zoning map to the city recorder and city council together with all supporting
documentation.
   C.   Proposals For Amendments And Corrections: The planning commission, city
council, or the director may initiate proposals for change or modification of
any chapter or regulation of this code.
   D.   Application To Amend Or Correct: In addition, any person seeking an
amendment to the development code or zoning map shall submit a written request
designating the change desired to the director and shall include reasons
wherein the proposed amendment would further promote the objectives and
purposes of the development code and the general plan and shall include the
required fee as required in the application form. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.05.030: PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL REVIEW:
   A.   Planning Commission: The planning commission shall:
      1.   Recommend to the city council a land use ordinance and zoning map or
any amendment to either regulate the use and development of land within all or
any part of the area of the city.
      2.   Hold a public hearing on a proposed land use ordinance or zoning map
amendment.
   B.   City Council: The city council:
      1.   May adopt or amend:
         a.   The number, shape, boundaries, or area of any zoning district;
         b.   Zoning conditions on any zoning map amendment which limit or
restrict the following:
            (1)   Uses,
            (2)   Dwelling unit density,
            (3)   Building square footage,
            (4)   Height and/or setbacks of structures;
         c.   Any regulation of or within the zoning district; or
         d.   Any other provision of the development code.
      2.   Shall consider at a public meeting each proposed amendment
recommended to it by the planning commission and may adopt or reject the
amendment either as proposed by the planning commission or after making any
revision the city council considers appropriate. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.05.040: RESUBMISSION OF AMENDMENT REQUEST:
If an application for amendment is denied by the city council, resubmission of
an application for the same amendment shall not be allowed for a period of
twelve (12) months unless significant new facts or information is presented.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.06
GENERAL PLAN
SECTION:
13.06.010: Purpose And Scope
13.06.020: Plan Elements
13.06.030: General Plan Adoption And Amendments
13.06.040: Effect Of The General Plan
13.06.050: Public Use To Conform To The General Plan
13.06.060: Effect Of The Official Street Map
13.06.070: Effect Of The Official Parks, Recreation, And Trails Map
13.06.010: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The city has adopted a comprehensive, long range general plan for the present
and future needs of the city and for the general purpose of guiding and
accomplishing coordinated, efficient, and harmonious growth and development of
all or any part of the land within the city, including any areas outside of its
boundaries that, in the city's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the
city. Except as otherwise provided by law or with respect to a municipality's
power of eminent domain, when considering territory outside the boundaries of
the city, action may be taken only with the concurrence of the county or other
municipalities affected. Any amended or revised general plan may provide for:
   A.   Health, general welfare, safety, energy conservation, transportation,
prosperity, civic activities, aesthetics and recreational, educational, and
cultural opportunities.
   B.   The reduction of waste of physical, financial, or human resources that
result from either excessive congestion or excessive scattering of population.
   C.   The efficient and economical use, conservation, and production of the
supply of:
      1.   Food and water; and
      2.   Drainage, sanitation, and other facilities and resources.
   D.   The use of energy conservation and solar and renewable resources.
   E.   The protection of urban development.
   F.   The protection and promotion of housing, including moderate income
housing.
   G.   The protection and promotion of air quality.
   H.   The protection of open space and natural areas.
   I.   Historic preservation.
   J.   Identification of uses of land that are likely to require an expansion
or significant modification of services or facilities provided by affected
entities.
   K.   The protection and promotion of economic growth and development.
   L.   An official street map.
   M.   An official parks, recreation, and trails map. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.06.020: PLAN ELEMENTS:
The general plan includes the following elements:
   A.   Community character and land use element: This element designates the
long term goals and the proposed extent, general distribution, and location of
land for housing, business, industry, agriculture, recreation, education,
public buildings and grounds, open space, and other categories of public and
private uses of land as appropriate; and may include a statement of the
projections for and standards of population density and building intensity
recommended for the various land use categories covered by the general plan.
   B.   Transportation element: This element consists of the general location
and extent of existing and proposed freeways, arterial and collector streets,
bicycle and pedestrian ways, trails, mass transit, and any other modes of
transportation that the planning commission and city council considers
appropriate, all correlated with the population projections and the proposed
land use element of the general plan.
   C.   Neighborhood and housing element: This element includes goals and
policies addressing the housing needs in the city. These needs include a
variety of housing types and choices. The housing element not only addresses
single-family subdivisions but also includes mixed use development, planned
unit development, apartment complex development, and mobile home park
development. Moderate income housing is also addressed and includes goals and
policies to facilitate it.
   D.   Economic development: This element may be composed of appropriate
studies and forecasts, as well as an economic development element, that may
include review of existing and projected municipal revenue and expenditures,
revenue sources, identification of basic and secondary industry, primary and
secondary market areas, employment, and retail sales activity.
   E.   Parks, recreation, and trails element: This element covers a broad
range of recreational and cultural activities that are important to the city's
quality of life including parks, recreation, open space, urban forestry,
multiuse trails, arts and entertainment, and cultural resources. It reviews and
summarizes key issues and policies addressed in detail in the general plan.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.06.030: GENERAL PLAN ADOPTION AND AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Planning Commission:
      1.   The planning commission shall provide notice, as provided in this
development code and Utah code, of its intent to make a recommendation to the
city council for a general plan or general plan amendment when the planning
commission initiates the process of preparing its recommendation.
      2.   After completing its recommendation for a proposed general plan or
amendment, the planning commission shall schedule and hold a public hearing on
the proposed plan or amendment. The planning commission shall provide notice of
the public hearing, as provided by this development code and Utah code.
      3.   After the public hearing, the planning commission may modify the
proposed general plan or amendment.
      4.   The planning commission shall forward its recommendation and the
proposed amendment to the city council.
   B.   City Council:
      1.   The city council shall consider the recommendation of the planning
commission for a proposed amendment at a public meeting after notice as
provided by this development code and Utah code and may:
         a.   Make any revisions to the proposed amendment that it considers
appropriate.
         b.   Adopt or reject the proposed amendment either as proposed by the
planning commission or after making any revision that the city council
considers appropriate.
         c.   Provide suggestions to the planning commission for its
consideration if the city council rejects the proposed amendment. (Ord. 12-15,
7-11-2012)
13.06.040: EFFECT OF THE GENERAL PLAN:
Except as provided in the following section, the general plan is an advisory
guide for land use decisions. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.06.050: PUBLIC USE TO CONFORM TO THE GENERAL PLAN:
No street, park, or other public way, ground, place, or space, no publicly
owned building or structure, and no public utility, whether publicly or
privately owned, may be constructed or authorized until and unless it conforms
to the current general plan. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.06.060: EFFECT OF THE OFFICIAL STREET MAP:
   A.   The city may adopt an official street map.
   B.   The effect of the official street map:
      1.   May require a landowner to dedicate and construct a street as a
condition of development approval; and
      2.   Does not require the city to immediately acquire property it has
designated for eventual use as a public street.
   C.   This section does not prohibit the city from:
      1.   Recommending that an applicant consider and accommodate the location
of the proposed streets in the planning of a development proposal in a manner
that is consistent with the Utah code concerning exactions.
      2.   Acquiring the property through purchase, gift, voluntary dedication,
or eminent domain.
      3.   Requiring the dedication and improvement of a street if the street
is found necessary by the municipality because of a proposed development and if
the dedication and improvement are consistent with law concerning exactions.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.06.070: EFFECT OF THE OFFICIAL PARKS, RECREATION, AND TRAILS MAP:
   A.   The city may adopt an official parks, recreation, and trails map.
   B.   The effect of the official parks, recreation, and trails map:
      1.   May require a landowner to dedicate and construct parks, recreation,
and trails as a condition of development approval; and
      2.   Does not require the city to immediately acquire property it has
designated for eventual use for parks, recreation, and trails.
   C.   This section does not prohibit the city from:
      1.   Recommending that an applicant consider and accommodate the location
of the proposed parks, recreation, and trails in the planning of a development
proposal in a manner that is consistent with law concerning exactions.
      2.   Acquiring the property through purchase, gift, voluntary dedication,
or eminent domain.
      3.   Requiring the dedication and improvement of parks, recreation, and
trails if it is found necessary by the municipality because of a proposed
development and if the dedication and improvement are consistent with law
concerning exactions. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.07
LAND USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
13.07.010: Purpose And Applicability
13.07.020: Permitted Land Use Table By The Residential Districts
13.07.010: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Purpose: The Residential Districts are designed to create neighborhoods
ranging in density from low to moderately high. The differences in these
densities and regulations are intended to support the varying lifestyles of the
City's residents. The zoning districts provide for a range of residential
habitation including rural agricultural, single-family, multi-family,
manufactured home, and combinations thereof. It also provides for home
occupations, schools, parks, and public services necessary for neighborhood
living.
   B.   Applicability: Residential Zoning Districts fall under four (4)
categories:
      1.   Single-Family Residential (SFR):
         R-1-5
         R-1-6
         R-1-7
         R-1-8
         R-1-10
         R-1-15
         R-1-20
         R-1-30
         R-1-40
      2.   Two-Family Residential (TFR):
         R-2-8
         R-2-10
      3.   Manufactured Home (MH):
         MH
      4.   Multi-Family Residential (MFR):
         RM-6
         RM-8
         RM-10
         RM-12
         RM-16
         RM-S
   C.   Applicability Of Other Code Chapters: Uses permitted under this chapter
shall conform to the development standards provided elsewhere in this Code and
to the application procedures for development as applicable. For each zoning
district or land use type additional regulations may apply as defined in this
Code. Uses shall also conform to any Overlay District requirements that are
applicable. Uses permitted as a conditional use shall also comply with the
requirements for conditional use permits as required in this title. (Ord. 18-
26, 10-17-2018; amd. Ord. 20-12, 4-15-2020)
13.07.020: PERMITTED LAND USE TABLE BY THE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Table Explanation: The table below identifies permitting types within
the Residential Districts:
 
P   =Permitted
AC  =Administrative conditional
NC  =Nonadministrative conditional
N   =Not permitted
PLC =Permitted with local consent
 
For those letters which are followed by a slash "/", the second letter shall
indicate those location restrictions for uses located within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of a Residential District (unless bisected by a principal arterial
road as determined by the City Engineer or as identified in the transportation
element of the City general plan).
For those land uses marked with a superscript number (i.e., AC1), refer to the
notes following the table for explanation.
For those land uses marked with a - the use will be determined by the
applicable section of this Code.
   B.   Categorizing: The land uses outlined in this title are intended to
categorize uses and are not intended to be exhaustive or mutually exclusive
descriptions of all possible land uses.
   C.   Uses Not Listed: Any land use type not listed or included in the table
of uses is prohibited unless the Director determines that the use is of the
same character and intensity as another permitted or conditional use so listed.
The Director may allow the establishment of the said use subject to a
determination of the following criteria:
      1.   The establishment of the use will be in accordance with the purposes
of the district in which that use is proposed.
      2.   The use will be an appropriate addition to the zone because it has
the same basic characteristics as the other uses permitted in the district.
      3.   The use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
      4.   The use shall not adversely affect the character of that district in
which it is proposed to be established.
      5.   The use will not create more traffic, odor, dust, dirt, smoke,
noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness, or any other
objectionable influence than the amount normally created by any of the uses
listed as uses in that district.
   D.   Uses Not Similar: Where a use not listed is found by the Director to
not be similar to any other permitted or conditional use, the use shall be
permitted only following a text amendment to this title.
   E.      Table Of Uses: The table below classifies land uses, zoning
districts and permitting types within Residential Districts:
 
Land Use R-1- R-1- R-1- R-1- R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-7 R-1-6 R-1-5 R-2-10 R-2-8 RM MH
Category 40   30   20   15
Accessory          AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   N1    N1
apartments
Accessory
structure (unless  P/AC1 P/AC1 P/AC1 P/AC1 P/AC1 P/AC1 P/AC1 P/AC1 P/AC1 P/AC1 P/AC1 P/AC1 P/AC1
otherwise
specified)
Alcoholic                                                                       
beverage:
Single event       PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC
permit
Special use permit PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC
Temporary beer     PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC   PLC
event permit
Assisted living
facility - large
capacity (must
comply with
development
standards for that N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     NC    N
zone, i.e.,
setback, height,
bulk, minimum/
maximum square
footage)
Assisted living
facility - limited
capacity (must
comply with
development
standards for that P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P
zone, i.e.,
setback, height,
bulk, minimum/
maximum square
footage)
Bed and breakfast  NC1,4 NC1,4 NC1,4 -     -     -     -     -     -     -NC4  -     NC1,4 -
facility                             NC1,4 NC1,4 NC1,4 NC1,4 NC1,4 NC1,4       NC1,4       NC1,4
Boarding house     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
Botanical gardens  P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P
Congregate care    N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     AC    N
facility
Dwelling, duplex   N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     P     P     P     N
Dwelling,          N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     AC    N
multiple-unit
Dwelling, single-  P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     N     P
family
Extended living    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    N     N
areas
Fraternity or      N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
sorority house
Garage sales       P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1
(residential)
Guesthouse         AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    N     N
Half pipe ramps    N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
Home occupation
(categories A, B,  AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1   AC1
C, D)
Homeless shelter   N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
Manufactured homes P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    N1    P1
Manufactured/      N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     P
mobile home park
Mixed use
development
(residential with  N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
office and/or
commercial uses)
Mobile homes       N1    N1    N1    N1    N1    N1    N1    N1    N1    N1    N1    N1    P1
Model home         P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1
Modular home/unit  P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     N     P
Nursing care       N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
facility
Nursing home,
convalescent home,
and rest home
(must comply with
development
standards for that N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
zone, i.e.,
setback, height,
bulk, minimum/
maximum square
footage)
Parking,           N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     AC    N
structure/terrace
Parking,           N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     AC    N
underground
Parks, public and  AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC
private
Planned unit
development        NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC
(residential)
Protective housing N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     NC    NC    NC    N
facility
Public service     AC2   AC2   AC2   AC2   AC2   AC2   AC2   AC2   AC2   AC2   AC2   AC2   AC2
Public utility     NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1
station
Recreation center  N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
Recreation, indoor N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
Recreation,        NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC    NC
outdoor
Recreational       N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
vehicle park
Recycling
materials          N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
collection/drop
off facility
Rehabilitation/    N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
treatment facility
Reiki              N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
Religious or       NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1
cultural activity
Residential
facility for
elderly persons
(must comply with
development
standards for that P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1
zone, i.e.,
setback, height,
bulk, minimum/
maximum square
footage)
Residential
facility for
persons with a
disability (must
comply with
development        P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1    P1
standards for that
zone, i.e.,
setback, height,
bulk, minimum/
maximum square
footage)
Residential
healthcare
facility,          N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
residential care
facility
Residential lease, N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
short term
School, charter    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC
School, commercial N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
School, commercial NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1   NC1
(low impact)
School, private or AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC    AC
quasi-public
School, public     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P     P
Sexually oriented
business (escort
agencies, outcall  N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
service agencies
and seminude
dancing agencies)
Sheltered workshop N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
Trade or           N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
vocational school
Transient lodging  N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
Transitional care  N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
development
Transitional
housing facility
(must comply with
development
standards for that N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N
zone, i.e.,
setback, height,
bulk, minimum/
maximum square
footage)
Twin home          N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     N     P     P     AC    N
Wireless           P/    P/    P/    P/    P/    P/    P/    P/    P/    P/    P/    P/    P/
telecommunications AC1,3 AC1,3 AC1,3 AC1,3 AC1,3 AC1,3 AC1,3 AC1,3 AC1,3 AC1,3 AC1,3 AC1,3 AC1,3
facility
 
Notes:
    1.    Reference regulatory standards in the special use standards section
of this Code.
    2.    Public service uses with maintenance facilities shall not be allowed
in Residential Districts.
    3.    May require technical necessity exception from the Planning
Commission. See wireless telecommunication facilities section of this Code.
    4.    Permitted in Historic Resources Overlay Zone.
(Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
CHAPTER 13.08
LAND USES IN THE COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, INDUSTRIAL, MIXED USE, TRANSIT CORRIDOR,
AND RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
SECTION:
13.08.010: Purpose And Applicability
13.08.020: Permitted Land Use Table By The Commercial, Office, Industrial,
Mixed Use, Transit Corridor, And Research And Development Districts
13.08.010: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Purpose: The Commercial Districts land use standards are intended to:
      1.   Allow a mixture of complementary land uses that may include retail,
offices, commercial services, civic uses, and housing to create economic and
social vitality, and to encourage the linking of trips; and
      2.   Develop commercial areas that encourage walking as an alternative to
driving and provide employment and housing options.
   B.   Applicability: Uses permitted under this chapter shall conform to the
development standards provided elsewhere in this Development Code, and to the
application procedures for development as applicable. For each zoning district
or land use type additional regulations may apply as defined in this Code. Uses
shall also conform to any Overlay District requirements that are applicable.
Uses permitted as a conditional use shall also comply with the requirements for
administrative conditional use permits and nonadministrative conditional use
permits as required in this title. (Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.08.020: PERMITTED LAND USE TABLE BY THE COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, INDUSTRIAL,
MIXED USE, TRANSIT CORRIDOR, AND RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS:
   A.   Table Explanation: The table below identifies permitting types within
the Commercial, Office, Industrial, Mixed Use, Transit Corridor, and Research
and Development Districts:
 
P   =Permitted
AC  =Administrative conditional
NC  =Nonadministrative conditional
N   =Not permitted
PLC =Permitted with local consent
 
For those letters which are followed by a slash "/", the second letter shall
indicate those location restrictions for uses located within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of a Residential District (unless bisected by a principal arterial
road as determined by the City Engineer or as identified in the transportation
element of the City general plan).
For those land uses marked with a superscript number (i.e., AC1), refer to the
notes following the table for explanation.
   B.   Categorizing: The land uses outlined in this title are intended to
categorize uses and are not intended to be exhaustive or mutually exclusive
descriptions of all possible land uses.
   C.   Uses Not Listed: Any land use type not listed or included in the table
of uses is prohibited unless the Director determines that the use is of the
same character and intensity as another permitted or conditional use so listed.
The Director may allow the establishment of the said use subject to a
determination of the following criteria:
      1.   The establishment of the use will be in accordance with the purposes
of the district in which that use is proposed.
      2.   The use will be an appropriate addition to the zone because it has
the same basic characteristics as the other uses permitted in the district.
      3.   The use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
      4.   The use shall not adversely affect the character of that district in
which it is proposed to be established.
      5.   The use will not create more traffic, odor, dust, dirt, smoke,
noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness, or any other
objectionable influence than the amount normally created by any of the uses
listed as uses in that district.
   D.   Uses Not Similar: Where a use not listed is found by the Director to
not be similar to any other permitted or conditional use, the use shall be
permitted only following a text amendment to this title.
   E.   Table Of Uses: The table below classifies land uses, zoning districts
and permitting types within the Commercial, Office, Industrial, Mixed Use,
Transit Corridor, and Research and Development Districts:
 
Land Use RC         BC         CC         NC           LC Limited PO           ID         MU    TC       RD Research
Category Regional   Boulevard  Community  Neighborhood Commercial Professional Industrial Mixed Transit  And
         Commercial Commercial Commercial Commercial              Office       District   Use   Corridor Development
Accessory          N       N       N       N     N     N       N       AC    AC    N
apartments
Accessory
structure (unless  N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     NC
otherwise
specified)
Agriculture        N       N       N       N     N     N       N       AC    AC    N
Alcoholic
beverage:
Bar establishment  NC/N7   NC/N7   NC/N7   N     N     N       N       N     N     N
license
Hotel alcohol      PLC7    PLC7    PLC7    N     N     PLC7    N       PLC7  PLC7  PLC7
license
Off premises beer  PLC7    PLC7    PLC7    PLC7  PLC7  PLC     PLC     PLC7  PLC7  PLC
retailer license
On premises
banquet and        PLC7    PLC7    PLC7    PLC7  PLC7  PLC7    PLC7    PLC7  PLC7  PLC7
catering license
On premises beer
retailer/tavern    NC/N7   NC/N7   NC/N7   N     N     NC/N7   NC/N7   NC7   NC7   N
license
Package agency     P/AC7   AC/NC7  P/AC7   N     N     P/AC7   P/AC7   N     N     N
license
Reception center   PLC7    PLC7    PLC7    PLC7  PLC7  PLC7    PLC7    PLC7  PLC7  PLC7
license
Restaurant - beer  PLC7    PLC7    PLC7    PLC7  PLC7  PLC7    PLC7    PLC7  PLC7  PLC7
only
Restaurant - full  P/AC7   P/AC7   P/AC7   AC/   AC/   P/AC7   P/AC7   AC7   AC7   AC7
service                                    NC7   NC7
Restaurant -       PLC7    PLC7    PLC7    PLC7  PLC7  PLC7    PLC7    PLC7  PLC7  PLC7
limited service
Single event       PLC     PLC     PLC     PLC   PLC   PLC     PLC     PLC   PLC   PLC
permit
Special use permit PLC7    PLC7    PLC7    PLC7  PLC7  PLC7    PLC7    PLC7  PLC7  PLC7
State liquor store P7      P7      P7      N     N     P7      P7      P7    P7    P7
Temporary beer     PLC     PLC     PLC     PLC   PLC   PLC     PLC     PLC   PLC   PLC
event permit
Ancillary          P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
commercial
Animal hospital,   P       P       P       P     P     P       P       AC    AC    P
veterinary office
Animal kennel,     AC/NC   AC/NC   AC/NC   N     N     N       P       N     N     N
commercial
Animals (farm)     N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
Aquarium           P       P       P       N     N     N       P       NC    NC    N
Arcade             P/AC    P/AC    P/AC    N     N     N       AC      NC    NC    N
Art gallery        P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
Athletic, tennis,  P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
health club
Assisted living
facility - large
capacity (must
comply with
development
standards for that N       N       N       AC    AC    N       N       AC    AC    N
zone, i.e.,
setback, height,
bulk, minimum/
maximum square
footage)
Assisted living
facility - limited
capacity (must
comply with
development
standards for that N       N       N       P     P     N       N       P     P     N
zone, i.e.,
setback, height,
bulk, minimum/
maximum square
footage)
Auto, light
trucks, RV, all-
terrain vehicle    AC      NC      NC      N     N     N       AC      N     N     N
dealerships (new)
- sales and
service agencies
Auto, light
trucks, RV, all-
terrain vehicle    NC      NC      N       N     N     N       AC      N     N     N
dealerships (used)
- sales and
service agencies
Auto, truck, RV,   N       N       N       N     N     N       AC      N     N     N
equipment storage
Automobile rental  AC      AC      AC      AC/NC AC/NC N       AC      N     N     N
facility
Automotive self-   P/AC    P/AC    P/AC    P/AC  P/AC  N       P       N     N     N
service station
Automotive service N       NC      AC      N     N     N       AC      N     N     N
and repair, major
Automotive service N       AC      AC      AC/NC AC/NC N       AC      N     N     NC
and repair, minor
Automotive service NC      AC/NC   AC/NC   AC/NC AC/NC N       AC/NC   N     N     N
station
Automotive service
station,           NC      AC      AC      AC/NC AC/NC N       AC      N     N     N
nonmechanical
Bed and breakfast  N       N       N       NC13  NC13  N       N       NC    NC    N
facility
Boarding house     N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
Botanical gardens  P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
Business or        P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
financial services
Car wash           AC/NC   AC/NC   AC/NC   AC/NC AC/NC N       P       N     N     N
Cemetery,
columbarium,       N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
mausoleum
Commercial, heavy  N       N       N       N     N     N       P       N     N     N
Commercial,        P       P       P/AC    NC    NC    P       P       P     P     P
parking garage
Commercial repair  P       P       P       P     P     N       P       NC    N     P
services
Commercial retail  P       P       P       P     P     N       P       P     P     P
sales and services
Community
correctional       N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
facility
Conference,
exposition, and    NC      NC      NC      N     N     NC      NC      NC    NC    NC
convention
facilities
Congregate care    N       N       N       N     N     N       N       AC    AC    N
facility
Correctional       N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
facility
Cosmetic services  P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
Crematory,         N       NC      N       N     N     N       NC      N     N     N
embalming facility
Dance hall         NC/N    NC/N    NC/N    N     N     N       N       NC    N     N
Daycare, adult     N       P       P       P     P     AC      AC      P     P     P
Daycare, elderly   N       P       P       P     P     AC      AC      P     P     P
Daycare, group     P/AC    P/AC    P/AC    P/AC  P/AC  AC      P       P     P     P
Drive-up window
(nonfood), banks,
ATMs, dry          P       P       P       AC    AC    AC      P       N     N     AC
cleaners,
pharmacy, etc.
Dwelling, duplex   N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
Dwelling,          N       N       N       N     N     N       N       AC11  AC11  N
multiple-unit
Dwelling, single-  N       N       N       N     N     N       N       AC    N     N
family
Earth station      NC10,12 NC10,12 NC10,12 N     N     NC10,12 NC10,12 N     N     NC12
Educational
facility with      N       N       N       N     N     AC      N       AC    AC    AC
housing
Equestrian         N       N       N       N     N     N       AC      N     N     N
facilities
Equipment sales    P       P       P       AC    AC    N       P       N     N     NC1
and services
Extended living    N       N       N       N     N     N       N       P12   N     N
areas
Flea market        N       NC      NC      N     N     N       AC      N     N     N
Food trucks        P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
Fraternity or      N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
sorority house
Garage sales       N       N       N       N     N     N       N       P12   N     N
(residential)
Glazing contractor N       NC1,10  N       N     N     N       AC      N     N     N
Half pipe ramps    N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
Healthcare         N       P       AC      AC    AC    P       P       AC    AC    P
facility
Home occupation    N       N       N       N     N     N       N       AC    AC    N
Homeless shelter   N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
Hospital           N       NC      NC      N     N     NC      N       N     N     N
Hotel              P/AC    AC      AC/NC   N     N     AC      N       AC    AC    AC
Industry, heavy    N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
Industry, light    N       N       N       N     N     N       P       N     N     AC1
Industry, medium   N       N       N       N     N     N       P       N     N     N
Jail               N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
Juvenile detention
or security        N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
facility
Library            P       P       P       P     P     P       N       P     P     P
Manufactured homes N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
Massage therapy
(soft tissue and   P       P       P       AC    AC    P       P       P     P     P
physical therapy)
Medical and        P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
healthcare offices
Mixed use          NC14    NC14    NC14    NC14  NC14  N       N       NC14  NC14  N
structure
Mobile home park   N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
Mobile homes       N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
Mortuary, funeral  N       P       P       P     P     AC      N       AC    AC    N
home
Motel              P/AC    AC      AC      N     N     N       N       N     N     AC
Nondepository      NC      NC      NC      N     N     N       NC      N     N     N
institutions
Nursing home,
convalescent home,
and rest home
(must comply with
development
standards for that N       N       N       N     N     NC      N       AC    N     N
zone, i.e.,
setback, height,
bulk, minimum/
maximum square
footage)
Office call center N       AC      NC      NC    NC    P       P       P     P     P
Office             P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
professional
Office research    N       N       N       N     N     NC9     P       N     N     P
facility
Park and ride      N       AC      AC      AC    AC    AC      AC      NC    AC    AC
facilities
Parking,           P       P/AC    AC/NC   AC/NC AC/NC P       P       P     P     P
structure/terrace
Parking,           P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
underground
Parks, public and  P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
private
Pawnshop           N       N       N       N     N     N       AC      N     N     N
Permanent makeup   P       P       P       P     P     N       N       P     N     N
Plant nursery      P/AC    P/AC    P/AC    P/AC  P/AC  N       P       N     N     N
Prison             N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
Protective housing N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
facility
Public service     P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
Public utility     N       NC      NC      NC    NC    NC      NC      NC    N     NC
station
Reception center   N       NC      NC      NC    NC    NC      N       NC    NC    N
Recreation center  P       P/AC    P/AC    P/AC  P/AC  N       AC      AC    NC    N
Recreation, indoor P       P       P       P     P     N       AC      AC    NC    NC
Recreation,        N       N       N       AC/NC AC/NC N       AC      AC    N     N
outdoor
Recreational       N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
vehicle park
Recycling          N       N       N       N     N     N       AC/NC   N     N     N
(commercial)
Recycling
materials          AC      AC      AC      NC    NC    AC      AC      N     N     AC
collection/drop
off facility
Rehabilitation/    N       NC      NC      N     N     N       NC      N     N     N
treatment facility
Reiki              NC      NC      NC      NC    NC    NC      N       NC    NC    N
Religious or       AC      AC      AC      AC    AC    AC      AC      AC    AC    AC
cultural activity
Research and
development        N       N       N       N     N     NC      AC      N     N     P
facility
Residential
facility for
elderly persons
(must comply with
development
standards for that N       AC/NC   AC/NC   AC/NC AC/NC AC/NC   N       AC/NC AC/NC N
zone, i.e.,
setback, height,
bulk, minimum/
maximum square
footage)
Residential
facility for
persons with a
disability (must
comply with
development        N       AC/NC   AC/NC   AC/NC AC/NC AC/NC   N       AC/NC AC/NC N
standards for that
zone, i.e.,
setback, height,
bulk, minimum/
maximum square
footage)
Residential
healthcare
facility,          NC      NC      NC      NC    NC    N       N       NC    N     N
residential care
facility
Restaurant, drive- AC/N2   AC/N2   AC/N2   AC/N2 AC/N2 N       P       N     N     NC
up window
Restaurant, sit    P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     P     P
down
School, charter    N       N       N       N     N     AC      AC      AC    AC    AC
School, commercial P       P       P       P     P     P       P       AC    NC    P
School, commercial P       P       P       P     P     P       P       P     AC    P
(low impact)
School, private or N       N       N       N     N     AC      AC      AC    AC    AC
quasi-public
School, public     N       N       N       N     N     AC      AC      AC    AC    AC
Secondhand goods   NC      NC      NC      NC    NC    N       N       NC    NC    N
store
Sexually oriented
business (escort
agencies, outcall  N       N       N       N     N     N       P4      N     N     N
service agencies
and seminude
dancing agencies)
Social center      P       P       P       P/AC  P/AC  P       AC      AC/NC AC/NC N
Social
detoxification     N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
facility
Solar equipment    P12     P12     P12     P12   P12   P12     P12     P12   P12   P12
Stadium            NC      N       N       N     N     N       N       NC    NC    N
Storage
(ministorage)      N       N       N       N     N     N       P5      N     N     NC
facilities
Street vendors     P12     P12     P12     P12   P12   P12     P12     P12   P12   P12
Tattoo parlor      N       N       N       N     N     N       AC2     N     N     N
Theater            P/AC    P/AC    P/AC    AC/N  AC/N  N       N       AC    AC    N
Tobacco specialty  NC7     NC7     NC7     N     N     N       NC7     N     N     N
business
Transitional care  N       N       N       N     N     N       N       N     N     N
development
Twin home          N       N       N       N     N     N       N       P     N     N
Warehouse          N       N       N       N     N     N       P       N     N     NC1
Wind conversion    NC12    P6,12   P6,12   P6,12 P6,12 P6,12   P6,12   P6,12 P6,12 P6,12
Wireless
telecommunications P6,12   P6,12   P6,12   P6,12 P6,12 P6,12   P6,12   P6,12 P6,12 P6,12
facility
Zoological gardens P/N     P/N     N       N     N     N       P/N     P/N   N     N
 
Notes:
    1.    The use is not permitted if any part of the proposed/existing
building containing the use is within 100 feet of a dwelling or probable
location of a dwelling on existing residentially zoned property.
    2.    The use is not permitted if any part of the proposed/existing
building containing the use is within 500 feet of an agricultural or
residential use or residential zoning boundary.
    3.    Reserved.
    4.    This use is not permitted if any part of the proposed/existing
building containing the use is within 1,000 feet of any school, public park,
library, or religious or cultural activity; within 500 feet of any other
sexually oriented business, escort agency, outcall service agency, or seminude
dancing agency; within 600 feet of an agricultural or residential use or
residential zoning boundary, beginning at the property line of such use.
    5.    Facility storage may not be used to conduct commercial business on
site. A ministorage facility may include a caretaker's residence and areas for
the outdoor storage of recreational vehicles (RVs) within a ministorage
building project according to the following restrictions and standards:
      a.    Outdoor storage areas are for recreational vehicle storage only,
e.g., boats, campers, trailers, jet skis, snowmobiles, automobiles.
      b.    Outdoor vehicle storage areas shall be located only at the rear of
the project where vehicles will not be visible from any public streets.
      c.    Outdoor vehicle storage areas shall be designed so as not to block
any driveways, accessways, or parking aisles within the project.
      d.    Outdoor vehicle storage areas must be surrounded by a 6 foot high
masonry wall on the exterior boundaries of the ministorage project.
    6.    May require staff or Planning Commission review and approval. (See
wireless telecommunication facilities section of this Code.)
    7.    Proximity requirements are as established in the Utah Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act.
    8.    Reserved.
    9.    The use is permitted only on properties comprising at least 4
contiguous acres and having access off a collector or arterial roadway. The use
is not permitted if any part of the proposed/existing building is within 75
feet of any residential zoning boundary.
    10.    The use is not permitted if any opening (door, window, etc.) of the
proposed/existing building containing the use is within 100 feet of a dwelling
or probable location of a dwelling on existing residentially zoned property.
    11.    The use is permitted when constructed in conjunction with an
approved master plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Master plan shall
identify permitted residential densities and establish strategies to assure
harmonious integration into the surrounding community.
    12.    Reference regulatory standards in the special use standards section
of this Code.
    13.    Permitted in Historic Resources Overlay Zone.
    14.    Commercial land uses in a mixed-use structure shall only be allowed
as permitted otherwise in the zone. Residential density shall be permitted as
determined by the Planning Commission in the non-administrative conditional use
process.
(Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018; amd. Ord. 20-15, 7-1-2020)
CHAPTER 13.09
INSTITUTIONAL CARE (IC) DISTRICT
SECTION:
13.09.010: Purpose And Applicability
13.09.020: Institutional Care District Standards And Requirements
13.09.030: Permitted Land Uses By The Institutional Care District
13.09.010: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
The institutional care (IC) district is designed to provide a safe, quiet
living arrangement for patients and tenants who are in need of special care or
medical attention. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.09.020: INSTITUTIONAL CARE DISTRICT STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: The institutional care district is established to provide a
residential environment within the city for institutional care developments
such as:
      1.   Transitional care development.
      2.   Assisted living facility.
      3.   Nursing home/convalescent home/rest home.
      4.   Congregate care facility.
      5.   Nursing care facility.
      6.   Alzheimer's facility.
      7.   Hospice.
      8.   Medical and healthcare offices as ancillary use only.
      9.   Other similar land uses that are constructed and used primarily for
long term or permanent residence by the elderly and persons with a disability.
This does not include any facility licensed or operating as a general acute or
specialty hospital, day treatment, domestic violence treatment program,
residential support, residential treatment, secure treatment, youth program,
community correctional center, correctional facility, secure correctional
facility, rehabilitation/treatment facility, transitional housing facility, or
protective housing facility,
It is intended that this zone district be placed in areas along a principal
arterial street, preferably within reasonable walking distance to either
general commercial centers or mass transit.
   B.   Development Standards: The following development standards apply to all
developments within the institutional care district regardless of the type of
use. Additional development standards for institutional care and transitional
care development specific land uses are listed elsewhere in this section.
      1.   Parcel Size: Any development within the institutional care district
shall be of sufficient size, composition, and arrangement to enable its
feasible development as a complete unit.
      2.   Building Height: The maximum height for all buildings shall be
thirty five feet (35') from average grade to the peak of the roof.
      3.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   Front Setback: No building shall be closer to a public street
right of way than twenty feet (20'). Porticoes, porte-cochere, and similar
walkway coverings may project into the front setback and front landscape area a
maximum of ten feet (10').
         b.   Side Setback: Side setback areas shall be a minimum of ten feet
(10') excluding porticoes and similar overhangs except where a side property
line abuts a residential (R-1) district, in which case the side setback area
shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30').
         c.   Rear Setback: Rear setback areas shall be a minimum of ten feet
(10') except where a rear property line abuts a residential (R-1) district, in
which case the rear setback area shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30').
         d.   Interpretation: It shall be within the authority of the director
to determine for any lot in this district as to which property line or lines
shall be considered as side or rear lines for the purpose of administering this
title.
      4.   Architectural Design And Materials:
         a.   Building Materials: All main buildings shall utilize a
combination of brick, stone, ceramic tile, masonry materials, and wood
composite siding. (Exposed concrete, cinder block, and concrete masonry unit
are not permitted, except for minimal foundation exposure.) Vinyl, aluminum, or
wood siding are to be used as accent materials only.
         b.   Building Design: All buildings shall have a residential look and
incorporate design elements such as dormers, a pitched roof, porticoes, quoins,
shutters, or other residential elements consistent with the immediate
residential neighborhood, as determined during site plan review. In addition,
all buildings shall follow the city architectural design standards.
      5.   Parking: Parking for all uses shall be in accordance with the
parking, access, and circulation requirements chapter of this development code.
In addition to the above code section, a minimum of one parking space shall be
provided on each site for bus only parking. This parking space must accommodate
handicap access and be clearly designated on the site.
      6.   Loading: All loading and unloading operations shall be performed on
the site in accordance with the parking, access, and circulation requirements
chapter of this development code.
      7.   Driveways: All driveways shall be located as required in the
parking, access, and circulation requirements chapter of this development code.
      8.   Storage Areas: All storage areas shall be developed in accordance
with the commercial, office, hospital, industrial, transit corridor, and multi-
family development standards chapter of this development code.
      9.   Refuse Collection Areas: All refuse areas shall be developed in
accordance with the commercial, office, industrial, and transit corridor
development standards chapter of this development code.
      10.   Landscaping: Landscaping is required in the setback as prescribed
below. The entire site shall conform to the following minimum requirements:
         a.   Front Setback: A minimum of twenty feet (20') measured from the
front property line after any required street dedication. This standard shall
apply to both frontages of a corner parcel.
         b.   Side And Rear Setback:
            (1)   A minimum of ten feet (10') between parking areas and side or
rear property lines.
            (2)   A minimum of ten feet (10') between an access driveway and a
side or rear property line unless said driveway is to be used for common access
by an adjacent commercial parcel.
            (3)   Other side and rear setback areas that are open to view from
public rights of way or from residentially zoned property shall be landscaped.
            (4)   Irrespective of other requirements, developments abutting
residential districts shall have a minimum of ten feet (10') of perimeter
landscaping that is compatible with adjacent land uses and existing
landscaping.
      11.   Screening At District Boundaries: An opaque screen shall be
installed and maintained along all district boundaries, other than streets,
where the premises abut areas zoned for residential uses, unless otherwise
provided.
         a.   Except where otherwise provided, the screen shall have a minimum
height of six feet (6').
         b.   Under special conditions where it has been determined that the
development may create unique impacts on an adjoining residential district,
such as in the case of hillside developments, the director may review and
approve other methods of screening such as bermed landscaping, screen height,
placement of screen, or other types of screening.
         c.   No signs or sign supports shall be permitted on any required
screen or fence.
         d.   Acceptable construction materials for screen walls shall include
only ceramic tile, stone, brick, concrete panel, concrete block, vinyl, or such
other materials as the director may approve. Concrete panels and posts must be
reinforced with rebar and wire as determined by the chief building official.
   C.   General Amenities For Institutional Care Facilities: The following
amenities are required for all developments under this section, including all
multi-unit developments and similar developments intended for independent or
assisted living.
      1.   Amenities: Parking areas, service areas, buffers, entrances, exits,
yards, courts, landscaping, graphics, and lighting shall be designed as
integrated portions of the total planned development and shall project a
residential character.
      2.   Building Spaces: Each development shall provide reasonable visual
and acoustical privacy for dwelling units. Fences, insulation, walks, barriers,
landscaping, and sound reducing construction techniques shall be used as
appropriate for the aesthetic enhancement of property and the privacy of its
occupants, the screening of objectionable views or uses, and the reduction of
noise.
      3.   Elevators: All two-story or greater multi-unit buildings shall
include at least one elevator per building.
      4.   Common Areas: All projects shall provide accessible common areas.
For multi-unit enclosed projects, the common areas shall also exist within the
building. Such indoor common areas and accents may include a meeting area,
laundry facilities, large furnished lobby, artwork within the hallways,
library, reading room, game room, or exercise room. Exterior common areas may
include a walking path, garden area, outdoor sitting area, and an outdoor
eating area. Additional amenities may include an indoor/outdoor swimming pool,
pharmacy, beauty salon, ancillary interior convenience store for residents
only, nursing station, classrooms, and patios.
      5.   Transportation: All institutional care facilities shall provide
transportation options for its residents. Such transportation may include van
service operated by the facility or contracted out to a multi-facility
provider. Such facilities are encouraged to be located near mass transit lines
to provide alternative travel options for its residents. Such facilities shall
provide connections to public sidewalks, trail systems, and other compatible
land uses.
      6.   Twenty Four Hour On Site Facilities Manager: All institutional care
facilities shall provide at least one on site facilities manager twenty four
(24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week. The position may either be a live-
in manager or regular employee staffing.
   D.   Required Amenities And Development Standards For Transitional Care
Developments:
      1.   Land Use Classifications: A transitional care development must
contain at least two (2) of the following land use classifications to qualify
under this section:
         a.   Single-family unit development (either detached or attached, such
as a traditional home or twin home development).
         b.   Congregate care facility.
         c.   Assisted living facility.
         d.   Nursing home/convalescent home/rest home.
         e.   Hospice.
         f.   Nursing care facility.
         g.   Alzheimer's facility.
      2.   Comprehensive Design: The project shall be developed as a cohesive
development that will allow residents to remain in the same location during the
transition period from total independence to total dependence. The facility
should be constructed in a campus setting allowing residents to transition from
one location to another within the same complex. These standards do not apply
for stand alone assisted living facilities, nursing homes, or other similar
living arrangements not associated with the campus setting.
      3.   Amenities: The following amenities are required for all transitional
care developments that are developed under this section.
         a.   Parking: Parking for all uses shall be in accordance with the
uses in planned unit development regulations in residential development
districts section of this development code. No parking shall be permitted in
the minimum front, side, or rear landscape setback areas. No parking shall be
permitted between the street and all main buildings with the following
exceptions:
            (1)   Twin home developments may utilize private driveway areas for
parking.
            (2)   The completed parking ratio may be reduced to one space per
unit for any congregate care facility within the development, and to one-half
(1/2) space per unit for any assisted living center or nursing facility within
the development, provided that adequate space is created and landscaped that
can be converted to additional parking stalls to comply with the minimum
standards as set forth in the planned unit development regulations in
residential development districts section in this title. The area that is held
in reserve for additional parking shall not be located within a required
landscape setback area and shall not be used in the calculations for any
required landscaping or open space coverage percentage. This exception does not
apply to any other type of land use such as single-family dwellings, twin
homes, or traditional multi-family projects that may be associated with the
transitional care development.
         b.   Common Areas: All projects shall provide accessible common areas.
For multi-unit enclosed projects, the common areas shall also exist within the
building. Such indoor common areas and accents shall include a meeting area,
laundry facilities, large furnished lobby, and artwork within the hallways.
Exterior common areas shall include a walking path, garden area, outdoor
sitting area, and an outdoor eating area. Additional amenities may include an
indoor/outdoor swimming pool, pharmacy, beauty salon, nursing station,
classrooms, and patios. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.09.030: PERMITTED LAND USES BY THE INSTITUTIONAL CARE DISTRICT:
   A.   Matrix Explanation: The matrix below lists all uses permitted within
the city institutional care district:
 
P  =Permitted
AC =Administrative conditional
NC =Nonadministrative conditional
S  =Special use permit
N  =Not permitted
 
For those letters which are followed by a slash "/", the second letter shall
indicate those location restrictions for businesses located within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of a residential district (unless bisected by a principal
arterial road as determined by the city engineer or as noted in the
transportation element of the city general plan). (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   B.   Table Of Uses:
      LAND USES IN INSTITUTIONAL CARE DISTRICT
 
Uses Institutional Care District
Accessory apartments                                                      N
Accessory structure (unless otherwise specified)                          AC
Agriculture                                                               P
Alcoholic beverage:                                                        
 Dining clubs                                                            N
 Equity clubs                                                            N
 Fraternal clubs                                                         N
 On premises banquet and catering                                        N
 On premises beer retailer/tavern                                        N
 Package agency                                                          N
 Restaurant - full service                                               N
 Restaurant - limited service                                            N
 Social clubs                                                            N
 Special event beer license                                              S
 State liquor store                                                      N
Alzheimer's facility                                                      AC
Ancillary commercial as a stand alone use                                 N
Ancillary commercial as part of a mixed use building                      P
Animal hospital, veterinary office                                        N
Animal kennel, commercial                                                 N
Animals, household                                                        P
Arcade                                                                    N
Art gallery                                                               P
Artist's studio                                                           N
Assembly, high tech                                                       N
Assisted living facility - large capacity (must comply with development
standards for that zone, i.e., setback, height, bulk, minimum/maximum     P
square footage)
Assisted living facility - limited capacity (must comply with development
standards for that zone, i.e., setback, height, bulk, minimum/maximum     P
square footage)
Athletic, tennis, health club                                             N
Auto, truck, RV, equipment sales and rental                               N
Auto, truck, RV, equipment storage                                        N
Automotive dealerships (new cars and light trucks) sales and service      N
agencies
Automotive dealerships (used cars and light trucks)                       N
Automotive parts sales                                                    N
Automotive rental and leasing agencies                                    N
Automotive self-service station                                           N
Automotive service and repair - major                                     N
Automotive service and repair - minor                                     N
Automotive service (lube and oil)                                         N
Automotive service station                                                N
Bed and breakfast facility                                                N
Birthing center                                                           N
Boarding house                                                            N
Botanical and zoological gardens                                          N
Building lots that do not have frontage on a public street                NC
Business or financial services                                            N
Car wash and detailing shops                                              N
Cemetery, columbarium, crematory, mausoleum                               N
Commercial center, regional                                               N
Commercial, convenience store                                             N
Commercial, heavy                                                         N
Commercial, parking garage                                                N
Commercial repair services                                                N
Commercial retail sales and services                                      N
Commercial, specialty                                                     N
Commercial uses of a complementary nature which are shown to be           NC
compatible and necessary for the development project
Community correctional facility                                           N
Comprehensive mental health treatment                                     N
Conference and convention facilities                                      N
Congregate care facility                                                  NC
Conservation areas including, but not limited to, wilderness areas,
watershed areas, wildlife refuges, wetlands, and any lands under the      N
Jordan River Parkway authority
Convenience sales and services                                            N
Correctional facility                                                     N
Crematory, embalming facility                                             N
Dance hall, discotheque                                                   N
Daycare, adult                                                            NC
Daycare, elderly                                                          AC
Daycare, group                                                            N
Dwelling, duplex (not part of transitional care facility)                 N
Dwelling, earth sheltered                                                 N
Dwelling, multiple-unit                                                   N
Dwelling, multiple-unit - transitional care development                   AC
Dwelling, planned group                                                   N
Dwelling, single-family (not part of transitional care facility)          NC
Educational facility with housing                                         N
End stage renal disease facility                                          NC
Equestrian facilities                                                     N
Equipment sales and services                                              N
Extended living areas                                                     AC
Forests                                                                   N
Fraternity or sorority house                                              N
Half pipe ramps                                                           N
Home health agency                                                        NC
Home occupation (categories A, B, C, and D)                               N
Homeless shelter                                                          N
Hospice                                                                   P
Hospital                                                                  AC/NC
Hotel, motel                                                              N
Industry, light                                                           N
Industry, medium                                                          N
Jail                                                                      N
Juvenile detention facility                                               N
Juvenile secure facility                                                  N
Laboratories, development and testing                                     N
Library                                                                   N
Manufactured homes                                                        N
Medical and healthcare offices                                            P/AC
Mixed use commercial/residential development                              N
Mixed use, residential and office use                                     N
Mobile home park                                                          N
Mobile homes                                                              N
Model home                                                                N
Mortuary, funeral home                                                    N
Multi-family, 8 u/a                                                       N
Nursing care facility                                                     AC
Nursing home, convalescent home, and rest home (must comply with          P
development standards for that zone)
Office, administrative, corporate, and general                            NC
Open air theaters and meeting places                                      N
Open space in sensitive area overlay zone                                 AC
Park and ride facilities                                                  N
Park and ride facilities on arterial streets                              N
Parks                                                                     N
Pawnshop                                                                  N
Permanent makeup                                                          N
Planned unit development                                                  NC
Plant nursery                                                             N
Playgrounds                                                               AC
Prison                                                                    N
Protective housing facility                                               N
Prototype production facilities                                           N
Public and private parks and recreation areas including, but not limited
to, playgrounds, athletic fields, golf courses, country clubs, tennis     N
courts, and swimming pools
Public service                                                            N
Public utility station                                                    N
Publicly dedicated open space                                             P
Reception center                                                          N
Recreation center                                                         N
Recreation, indoor                                                        N
Recreation, outdoor                                                       N
Recreational vehicle park                                                 N
Recyclable materials collection/drop off facility                         N
Rehabilitation/treatment facility                                         N
Religious or cultural activity                                            N
Research, business and scientific                                         N
Research park                                                             N
Residential facility for elderly persons (must comply with development
standards for that zone, i.e., setback, height, bulk, minimum/maximum     P
square footage)
Residential facility for persons with a disability (must comply with
development standards for that zone, i.e., setback, height, bulk,         P
minimum/maximum square footage)
Residential lease, short term                                             N
Restaurant                                                                N
Restaurant, drive-up window                                               N
School, commercial                                                        N
School, commercial (low impact)                                           N
School, private or quasi-public                                           N
School, public                                                            N
Sculpture park                                                            N
Sheltered workshop                                                        N
Small healthcare facility                                                 AC
Social detoxification facility                                            N
Social or reception center                                                N
Storage (ministorage) facilities                                          N
Street vendors                                                            N
Tattoo parlor                                                             N
Theater                                                                   N
Trade or vocational school                                                N
Transitional care development                                             AC
Transitional housing facility (must comply with development standards for N
that zone, i.e., setback, height, bulk, minimum/maximum square footage)
Twin home (not part of transitional care facility)                        N
Veterinary hospital, small animal                                         N
Warehouse, wholesale                                                      N
Zero lot line development (detached only)                                 N
Zero lot line development (not part of transitional care facility)        N
 
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 16-05, 6-1-2016)
CHAPTER 13.10
OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
SECTION:
13.10.010: Purpose And Development Review
13.10.020: Permitted Land Uses In The Open Space District
13.10.010: PURPOSE AND DEVELOPMENT REVIEW:
   A.   Purpose: The open space (OS) district is designed to provide for an
enhanced natural environment, protecting the city's limited natural and
developed open spaces from further intrusions. The intent of the open space
district is to establish areas in the city where only open and generally
undeveloped lands are to be permitted. Development of a comprehensive network
of permanent, multifunctional, publicly and privately owned open spaces shall
be encouraged. Restrictions in this zone are designed to prevent the
encroachment of residential, commercial, and industrial uses into these open
space areas that would be contrary to the objectives and characteristics of
this zone.
   B.   Development Review: All developments within the open space district
shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission. The planning
commission shall review all requests for public facilities including parks,
pavilions, trails, equestrian areas, and indoor/outdoor recreation centers
within this district. During the review process, the planning commission shall
set appropriate building height, size, and setback requirements for each
specific development proposal. Development shall be landscaped as determined
appropriate by the planning commission upon consultation with the parks and
recreation department and in compliance with the city's water efficient
landscaping ordinance. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.10.020: PERMITTED LAND USES IN THE OPEN SPACE DISTRICT:
   A.   Matrix Explanation: The matrix below lists all uses permitted within
the open space district:
 
P  =Permitted
AC =Administrative conditional
NC =Nonadministrative conditional
S  =Special use permit
N  =Not permitted
 
For those letters which are followed by a slash "/", the second letter shall
indicate those location restrictions for businesses located within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of a residential district (unless bisected by a major
arterial road as determined by the city engineer or as noted in the
transportation element of the city general plan).
For those land uses marked with a superscript number (i.e., AC1), refer to the
notes following the table for explanation. (Ord. 13-35, 12-4-2013)
   B.   Table Of Uses:
   LAND USES IN OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
 
Uses Open Space District
Accessory apartments                                                      N
Accessory residential use (unless otherwise specified)                    N
Accessory structure (unless otherwise specified)                          N
Agriculture                                                               P
Alcoholic beverage:                                                        
 Dining clubs                                                            N
 Equity clubs                                                            N
 Fraternal clubs                                                         N
 On premises banquet and catering                                        N
 On premises beer retailer/tavern                                        N
 Package agency                                                          N
 Restaurant - full service                                               N
 Restaurant - limited service                                            N
 Social clubs                                                            N
 Special event beer license                                              S
 State liquor store                                                      N
Alzheimer's facility                                                      N
Ambulatory surgical facility                                              N
Ancillary commercial as a stand alone use                                 N
Ancillary commercial as part of a mixed use building                      N
Animal hospital, veterinary office                                        N
Animal kennel, commercial                                                 N
Arcade                                                                    N
Art gallery                                                               N
Artist's studio                                                           N
Assembly, high tech                                                       N
Assisted living facility - large capacity (must comply with development
standards for that zone, i.e., setback, height, bulk, minimum/maximum     N
square footage)
Assisted living facility - limited capacity (must comply with development
standards for that zone, i.e., setback height, bulk, minimum/maximum      N
square footage)
Auto, truck, RV, equipment sales and rental                               N
Auto, truck, RV, equipment storage                                        N
Automotive dealerships (used cars and light trucks)                       N
Automotive parts sales                                                    N
Automotive rental and leasing agencies                                    N
Automotive self-service station                                           N
Automotive service and repair - major                                     N
Automotive service and repair - minor                                     N
Automotive service (lube and oil)                                         N
Automotive service station                                                N
Bed and breakfast facility                                                N
Birthing center                                                           N
Boarding house                                                            N
Botanical and zoological gardens                                          AC
Building lots that do not have frontage on a public street                N
Business or financial services                                            N
Car wash and detailing shops                                              N
Cemetery, columbarium, crematory, mausoleum                               NC
Commercial center, regional                                               N
Commercial, convenience store                                             N
Commercial, heavy                                                         N
Commercial, parking garage                                                N
Commercial repair services                                                N
Commercial retail sales and services                                      N
Commercial, specialty                                                     N
Commercial uses of a complementary nature which are shown to be           N
compatible and necessary for the development project
Community correctional facility                                           N
Comprehensive mental health treatment                                     N
Conference and convention facilities                                      N
Congregate care facility                                                  N
Conservation areas including, but not limited to, wilderness areas,
watershed areas, wildlife refuges, wetlands, and any lands under a Jordan P
River Parkway authority
Convenience sales and service                                             N
Correctional facility                                                     N
Crematory, embalming facility                                             NC
Dance hall, discotheque                                                   N
Daycare, adult                                                            N
Daycare, group                                                            N
Dwelling, duplex                                                          N
Dwelling, earth sheltered                                                 N
Dwelling, multiple-unit                                                   N
Dwelling, multiple-unit - transitional care development                   N
Dwelling, planned group                                                   N
Dwelling, single-family                                                   N
Educational facility with housing                                         N
End stage renal disease facility                                          N
Equestrian facilities                                                     AC/NC
Equipment sales and services                                              N
Extended living areas                                                     N
Forests                                                                   P
Fraternity or sorority house                                              N
Historic preservation                                                     AC
Home health agency                                                        N
Home occupation, category I                                               N
Home occupation, category II                                              N
Homeless shelter                                                          N
Hospice                                                                   N
Hospital                                                                  N
Hotel, motel                                                              N
Industry, light                                                           N
Industry, medium                                                          N
Jail                                                                      N
Juvenile detention facility                                               N
Juvenile secure facility                                                  N
Laboratories, development and testing                                     N
Library                                                                   NC
Manufactured homes                                                        N
Medical and healthcare offices                                            N
Mixed use, commercial/residential development                             N
Mixed use, residential, and office use                                    N
Mobile home park                                                          N
Mobile homes                                                              N
Model home                                                                N
Mortuary, funeral home                                                    N
Multi-family, 8 u/a                                                       N
Nursing care facility                                                     N
Nursing home, convalescent home, and rest home (must comply with
development standards for that zone, i.e., setback, height, bulk,         N
minimum/maximum square footage)
Nursing home, convalescent home, and rest home (must comply with
development standards for that zone, i.e., setback, height, bulk,         N
minimum/maximum square footage)
Office, administrative, corporate, and general                            N
Open air theaters and meeting places                                      AC/NC
Open space in sensitive area overlay zone                                 P
Park and ride facilities                                                  N
Park and ride facilities on arterial streets                              N
Parks                                                                     NC
Pawnshop                                                                  N
Permanent makeup                                                          N
Planned unit development                                                  N
Plant nursery                                                             N
Playgrounds                                                               NC
Prison                                                                    N
Protective housing facility                                               N
Prototype production facilities                                           N
Public and private parks and recreation areas including, but not limited
to, playgrounds, athletic fields, golf courses, country clubs, tennis     NC
courts, and swimming pools
Public service                                                            AC
Public utility station                                                    NC
Publicly dedicated open space                                             P
Reception center                                                          N
Recreation center                                                         NC
Recreation, indoor                                                        NC
Recreation, outdoor                                                       NC
Recreational vehicle park                                                 N
Recyclable materials/collection/drop off facility                         N
Rehabilitation/treatment facility                                         N
Religious or cultural activity                                            N
Research, business and scientific                                         N
Research park                                                             N
Residential facility for elderly persons (must comply with development
standards for that zone, i.e., setback, height, bulk, minimum/maximum     N
square footage)
Residential facility for persons with a disability (must comply with
development standards for that zone, i.e., setback, height, bulk,         N
minimum/maximum square footage)
Residential healthcare facility, residential care facility                N
Residential lease, short term                                             N
Restaurant                                                                N
Restaurant, drive-up window                                               N
School, commercial                                                        N
School, commercial (low impact)                                           N
School, private or quasi-public                                           N
School, public                                                            N
Sculpture park                                                            NC
Sheltered workshop                                                        N
Skatepark                                                                 AC/NC
Small healthcare facility                                                 N
Social detoxification facility                                            N
Social or reception center                                                N
Storage (ministorage) facility                                            N
Street vendors                                                            N
Tattoo parlor                                                             N
Theater                                                                   N
Trade or vocational school                                                N
Transitional care development                                             N
Transitional housing facility (must comply with development standards for N
that zone, i.e., setback, height, bulk, minimum/maximum square footage)
Twin home                                                                 N
Veterinary hospital, small animal                                         N
Warehouse, wholesale                                                      N
Wireless telecommunications facility                                      S1
Zero lot line development                                                 N
Zero lot line development (detached only)                                 N
 
   Note:
      1.    May require staff or planning commission review and approval. (See
wireless telecommunications facilities section of this code.)
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 13-35, 12-4-2013; Ord. 16-05, 6-1-2016)
CHAPTER 13.11
SPECIAL USE STANDARDS
SECTION:
13.11.010: Accessory Apartments, Extended Living Areas, And Guesthouses
13.11.020: Residential Accessory Structures
13.11.030: Animals (Farm And Household Pets)
13.11.040: Home Occupations
13.11.050: Manufactured Homes
13.11.060: Mobile Homes
13.11.070: Residential Facility For Elderly Persons Or For Persons With A
Disability
13.11.080: Half Pipe Ramps In Residential Districts
13.11.090: Swimming Pool Regulations
13.11.100: Bed And Breakfast Facility
13.11.110: Commercial Schools (Low Impact)
13.11.120: Temporary/Special Uses
13.11.130: Garage Sales
13.11.140: Model Homes
13.11.150: Sexually Oriented Businesses
13.11.160: Standards For Church Development In All Zones
13.11.170: Food Trucks/Catering Trucks And Street Vendors As Mobile Businesses
13.11.180: Nondepository Institutions
13.11.190: Satellite Dishes/Earth Stations
13.11.200: Solar Equipment
13.11.210: Wind Conversion
13.11.220: Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
13.11.230: Tobacco Specialty Business
13.11.240: Public Utility Station Structures
13.11.010: ACCESSORY APARTMENTS, EXTENDED LIVING AREAS, AND GUESTHOUSES:
   A.   Purpose: This section is established to provide regulations and design
standards for accessory apartments, extended living areas, or guesthouses
related to single-family dwellings in Residential Zone Districts, which make
living units available which are appropriate for households at a variety of
stages in the life cycle.
   B.   General Requirements: The following requirements must be met in order
to have either an accessory apartment, extended living area, or a guesthouse:
      1.   Residence Required: The owner(s) of the residence shall live in the
dwelling in which the accessory apartment/extended living area was created, and
a letter of application, sworn before a notary public, shall be provided by the
owner(s) stating that such owner(s) will occupy the said dwelling, except for
bona fide temporary absences. For a guesthouse, the property owner shall live
in the primary dwelling unit on the same premises that a guesthouse is
proposed.
      2.   Number Permitted Within Each Single-Family Dwelling: Only one
accessory apartment/extended living area shall be created within a single-
family dwelling, and said area shall clearly be a subordinate part of the
dwelling. The accessory apartment/extended living area shall not occupy any
accessory buildings. No lot or parcel shall contain more than one guesthouse.
      3.   Home To Retain Single-Family Dwelling Appearance: The accessory
apartment/extended living area shall be designed so that, to the degree
reasonably feasible, the appearance of the building remains that of a single-
family residence, including retention and enhancement of landscaping. A carport
or garage may not be converted to living space to accommodate an accessory
apartment unless a new carport or garage of equal or greater size is
constructed or where another garage that meets current City standards already
exists on the property. Any garage or carport conversion or new garage or
carport construction shall be designed and constructed as to be compatible with
the architectural components of the primary dwelling, e.g., exterior materials,
color, and roof pitch. A guesthouse shall be designed and constructed as to be
compatible with the architectural components of the primary dwelling unit,
e.g., exterior materials, color, and roof pitch.
      4.   Utility Meters And Addressing: It shall be prohibited to install
separate utility meters and separate addresses.
      5.   Building Code Compliance Required: The design and size of the
accessory area shall conform to all applicable Building, Fire, and Health
Codes. The applicant shall obtain all necessary building permits prior to
construction of the accessory apartment, extended living area, or guesthouse.
      6.   Parking: At least one off street parking space shall be available
for use by the occupant(s) of the accessory apartment, extended living area, or
guesthouse. This space shall be in addition to those required for residents of
the main portion of the dwelling and shall comply with the City's adopted
residential parking standards. Any additional vehicles by occupants must be
accommodated on site. On street parking shall be reserved for visitors only.
      7.   Mobile Homes: It shall be prohibited to construct an accessory
apartment/extended living area within a mobile home.
      8.   Transferability: Upon sale of the home or change of primary
occupant, the approval for an accessory apartment/extended living area shall
expire and is not transferable. (Ord. 14-06, 4-16-2014)
   C.   Additional Requirements For Approval Of An Accessory Apartment:
Accessory apartments are allowed only with approval of an administrative
conditional use and subject to the provisions of title 5, chapter 5.76 of the
Taylorsville Code. Such use shall not exempt the applicant from meeting other
applicable ordinances, covenants, codes, or laws.
The following standards must be met in order to grant an administrative
conditional use:
      1.   Entrances: All entrances for an accessory apartment shall be located
on the side or in the rear of the dwelling.
      2.   Maximum Size Permitted: In no case shall an accessory apartment
comprise more than thirty percent (30%) of the building's total floor area nor
have more than two (2) bedrooms. An accessory apartment is a complete separate
housing unit that shall be within the original dwelling unit.
      3.   Recordation: The City shall keep approvals for an accessory
apartment, including any special conditions of approval to guarantee compliance
with the approval.
      4.   Duration Of Approval:
         a.   Approval Nontransferable: Upon sale of the home or change of
primary occupant, the conditional use shall expire and is not transferable.
         b.   Length Of Approval: The effective period of the administrative
conditional use for accessory apartments shall be two (2) years from the date
of the original approval. At the end of every two (2) years, the City may
investigate to determine if all conditions continue to be met. Notification may
be sent to the owner for response. Failure to meet the conditions may be the
basis for revocation of the conditional use.
      5.   Other Requirements: Any other appropriate or more stringent
conditions deemed necessary for accessory apartments in protecting public
health, safety, welfare, and the single-family character of the neighborhood
shall be established by the Director. (Ord. 18-08, 6-6-2018)
   D.   Additional Requirements For Approval Of An Extended Living Area:
Extended living areas are allowed only with the approval of an administrative
conditional use but are not subject to title 5, chapter 5.76 of the
Taylorsville Code. Such use shall not exempt the applicant from meeting other
applicable ordinances, covenants, codes, or laws recognized by the City. The
following standards must be met in order to grant an administrative conditional
use:
      1.   Occupancy Restrictions: Extended living areas shall be used for
extended family members only or for employed household maintenance personnel on
a nonrental basis. A letter of application sworn before a notary public by the
owner(s) stating that the individuals residing in the extended living area are
related by blood/marriage, adoption, or are employed household maintenance
personnel must be provided to the City.
      2.   Recordation: The City shall keep approvals for an extended living
area, including any special conditions of approval to guarantee compliance with
the approval.
         a.   Approval Nontransferable: Upon sale of the home or change of
primary occupant, the conditional use shall expire and is not transferable.
         b.   Length Of Approval: The effective period of the conditional use
for extended living areas shall be two (2) years from the date of the original
approval. At the end of every two (2) years, the City may investigate to
determine if all conditions continue to be met. Notification may be sent to the
owner for response. Failure to meet the conditions may be the basis for
revocation of the conditional use.
   E.   Additional Requirements For Approval Of A Guesthouse: A guesthouse may
be allowed only with approval of an administrative conditional use. Such use
shall not exempt the applicant from meeting other applicable ordinances, codes,
or laws recognized by the City. The following standards must be met in order to
grant a conditional use:
      1.   Occupants: Accessory dwellings in guesthouses are allowed only with
approval of an administrative conditional use and subject to the provisions of
title 5, chapter 5.76 of the Taylorsville Code. Such use shall not exempt the
applicant from meeting other applicable ordinances, covenants, codes, or laws.
      2.   Lot Size: A guesthouse will only be considered for a conditional use
on a lot containing at least one-third (1/3) acre which has an existing owner
occupied single-family dwelling unit, or where a building permit has been
issued and construction is in process for the single-family dwelling on a lot
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or larger.
      3.   Location: Guesthouse setbacks shall be no less than ten feet (10')
from the side and rear property lines and six feet (6') from the primary
dwelling unit. If a guesthouse is attached to an existing accessory structure,
the living space of the guesthouse shall be ten feet (10') from the property
line. The guesthouse may be located within the rear (the area lying between the
rear lot line and rear wall of the primary dwelling extended to the side lot
lines) of the primary dwelling or within the side yard, provided that the
guesthouse is located behind the front plane of the home (see figure 1 of this
section). If the guesthouse is located within the side yard, the side yard
setback shall be the same as the minimum in the zoning district in which the
lot is located.
   FIGURE 1
   SETBACKS AND NO BUILD AREAS (LOCATION)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3748.png]
      4.   Maximum Size Permitted: In no case shall the area of a guesthouse
comprise more than seventy five percent (75%) of the footprint area of the
principal dwelling and have no more than one bedroom. This square footage will
be considered part of the allowable square footage for the respective zoning
district for accessory structures.
      5.   Height: A guesthouse shall be limited to a single story.
      6.   Kitchen Facilities: A guesthouse may contain a full kitchen.
      7.   Site Plan: A site plan and architectural elevations shall be
submitted to the community development department to determine compliance with
the requirements herein prior to approval of an administrative conditional use.
The site plan shall be drawn to scale, clearly showing the location of all
existing and proposed structures, walls, parking, driveways, and walkways.
      8.   Conversions: Existing accessory structures (shed, garage, workshop,
etc.) may be converted to a guesthouse provided that the proposed guesthouse
complies with all development code standards and the adopted building codes.
The number of required off street parking stalls shall not be eliminated with
the conversion of an accessory garage.
      9.   Basements: No basements will be allowed within a guesthouse.
      10.   Recordation: The city shall keep approvals for a guesthouse,
including any special conditions of approval to guarantee compliance with the
approval.
      11.   Inspections: Yearly inspections may be required to determine
compliance if determined appropriate by the director or chief building
official.
      12.   Duration Of Approval:
         a.   Approval Nontransferable: Upon sale of the home or change of
primary occupant, the conditional use shall expire and is not transferable.
         b.   Length Of Approval: The effective period of the conditional use
for a guesthouse shall be two (2) years from the date of the original approval.
At the end of every two (2) years, the city may investigate to determine if all
conditions continue to be met. Notification may be sent to the owner for
response. Failure to meet the conditions may be the basis for revocation of the
conditional use. (Ord. 14-06, 4-16-2014)
13.11.020: RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The city recognizes the benefits of permitting
accessory structures on residential properties within the city. Accessory
structures can improve property values, enhance living conditions, and make
properties more useful. In its desire to protect the health, safety and welfare
of its residents, the city deems it necessary to regulate the location, height,
design and size of accessory structures within all residential zoning districts
to assure, among other considerations, that a proposed accessory structure is
properly sized for the lot and surrounding neighborhood, that its setbacks from
lot lines are appropriate, and that it does not adversely affect neighboring
properties.
   B.   Building Permit Required: Any resident or property owner that desires
to construct a residential or agricultural accessory structure that contains
more than two hundred (200) square feet of floor area, or more than one story,
shall submit a building permit application to the Taylorsville building
department for consideration. All accessory buildings must meet all
construction standards and fire rating requirements of applicable codes.
   C.   Applicability: This chapter shall be applicable to all R-1 (single-
family), R-2 (two-family), RM (residential multi-family) zones, and other
properties containing residential uses in all other zones with the exception of
dwellings located in MU (mixed use) and TND (traditional neighborhood
development) zones. Standards for accessory structures in mixed use,
traditional neighborhood development, and all other nonresidential uses in
nonresidential zones shall be determined by the provisions of the applicable
development standards. Existing accessory structures legally constructed that
are made noncompliant with the adoption of this chapter shall be considered
legal nonconforming structures and subject to all applicable codes for
nonconforming uses and structures in chapter 13.02 of this title.
   D.   General Requirements:
      1.   Any accessory structure located closer than five feet (5') to any
property line shall meet all applicable building codes for fire rated walls.
      2.   No accessory structure or group of accessory structures shall cover
more than twenty five percent (25%) of the yard area (rear yard, side yard,
etc.) in which they are located, unless specifically allowed by the provisions
of this chapter.
      3.   Accessory structures may not be located closer than six feet (6') to
any other building, including the main building or other accessory structures
on the same or adjacent properties. Eave projections shall not encroach more
than four inches (4") into the setback area. Setback areas shall be kept free
of weeds, trash and debris.
      4.   If an accessory structure is partially located in both a rear and
side yard, the entire structure is deemed to be within the side yard and must
comply with all applicable regulations for construction of an accessory
structure located within a side yard.
      5.   Any accessory structure that may be used for habitable space shall
conform to the provisions of section
13.11.010, "Accessory Apartments, Extended Living Areas, And Guesthouses", of
this chapter.
      6.   All storm drainage from an accessory structure shall be contained on
the same lot where it is located.
      7.   Exterior building materials for accessory buildings should use as a
minimum standard aluminum or vinyl siding, facia, and soffit. Other acceptable
materials include: brick, stone, stucco, cement fibrous board, exterior grade
wood siding, wood trim, and other similar products. Generally, colors and
materials of an accessory building should be compatible with the colors and
materials of the main building. Some accessory structures based on their height
or size are deemed conditional uses and subject to architectural design
standards.
      8.   Accessory structures used for the keeping of livestock shall not be
constructed closer than fifty feet (50') to any street, dwelling unit, or to
any property line and one hundred feet (100') to any neighboring dwelling unit.
      9.   No accessory structure shall be constructed or established on a
parcel unless there is a principal dwelling or building previously constructed,
or being constructed, on the same parcel of land.
      10.   Separate meter connections for electricity, water, sewer, or gas
utilities are not permitted for accessory structures.
      11.   Accessory buildings shall not encroach upon any easement or right
of way without proper written release or acknowledgment from all utility and
drainage easement holders. Copy of such release/acknowledgment shall be
presented at time of building permit application. Release of use of the
easement does not remove any other requirements as stated in this code.
   FIGURE 1
   FRONT, SIDE, AND REAR YARD ILLUSTRATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3748.png]
 
   FIGURE 2
   INTERIOR LOT SETBACKS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3750.png]
 
   FIGURE 3
   CORNER LOT SETBACKS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3752.png]
   E.   Standards For Parcels Measuring Less Than Fifteen Thousand Square Feet:
Accessory structures for single-family and two- family residential properties
on lots measuring less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet shall meet
the following requirements:
      1.   Structures located in a rear yard of an interior lot (see figure 1
of this section):
         a.   Allowed as a permitted use:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Sixteen feet (16').
            (2)   Maximum Area: The maximum area for all accessory structures
located in the rear yard combined shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the
rear yard area. The maximum area for any one accessory structure shall be five
hundred seventy six (576) square feet.
            (3)   Setbacks (See Figure 2 Of This Section):
               (A)   Accessory structures: Shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
from a main building/dwelling.
               (B)   Rear and side setbacks: Three feet (3') minimum from the
accessory structure to the property line. Any accessory structure located
closer than five feet (5') to any property line shall meet all applicable
building codes for fire rated walls.
         b.   Allowed as an administrative conditional use:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Twenty feet (20').
            (2)   Maximum Area: The maximum area for all accessory structures
located in the rear yard combined shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the
rear yard area.
            (3)   Setbacks (See Figure 2 Of This Section):
               (A)   Accessory structures: Shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
from a main building/dwelling.
               (B)   Rear and side setbacks: Three feet (3') minimum from the
accessory structure to the property line. Any accessory structure located
closer than five feet (5') to any property line shall meet all applicable
building codes for fire rated walls.
            (4)   Design Standards: As a conditional use, accessory structures
are subject to higher design standards. Accessory structures shall be
architecturally compatible with the main structure and shall be subject to a
design review, which may include, without limitation, review of height, size,
roof pitch, location, exterior colors and materials.
      2.   Structures located in a side yard of an interior lot, or within the
interior side yard of a corner lot (see figure 1 of this section):
         a.   Allowed as a permitted use:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Twelve feet (12').
            (2)   Maximum Area: The maximum area for all accessory structures
located in the side yard combined shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the
side yard area. The maximum area for any one accessory structure shall be two
hundred (200) square feet.
            (3)   Setbacks (See Figures 2 And 3 Of This Section):
               (A)   Accessory structures: Shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
from a main building/dwelling.
               (B)   Side and rear setbacks: Three feet (3') minimum from the
accessory structure to the property line. Any accessory structure located
closer than five feet (5') to any property line shall meet all applicable
building codes for fire rated walls.
               (C)   Front setback: Accessory structures shall be located a
minimum of ten feet (10') behind the front of the main building/dwelling.
         b.   Allowed as an administrative conditional use:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Sixteen feet (16').
            (2)   Maximum Area: The maximum area for all accessory structures
located in the side yard combined shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the
side yard area.
            (3)   Setbacks (See Figure 2 Of This Section):
               (A)   Accessory structures: Shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
from a main building/dwelling.
               (B)   Side and rear setbacks: Three feet (3') minimum from the
accessory structure to property line. Any accessory structure located closer
than five feet (5') to any property line shall meet all applicable building
codes for fire rated walls.
               (C)   Front setback: Accessory structures shall be located a
minimum of ten feet (10') behind the front of the main building/dwelling.
            (4)   Design Standards: As a conditional use, accessory structures
are subject to higher design standards. Accessory structures shall be
architecturally compatible with the main structure and shall be subject to a
design review, which may include, without limitation, review of height, size,
roof pitch, location, exterior colors and materials.
      3.   Structures located in a rear yard of a corner lot (see figure 1 of
this section):
         a.   Allowed as a permitted use:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Sixteen feet (16').
            (2)   Maximum Area: The maximum area for all accessory structures
located in the rear yard combined shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the
rear yard area. The maximum area for any one accessory structure shall be five
hundred seventy six (576) square feet.
            (3)   Setbacks (See Figure 3 Of This Section):
               (A)   Accessory structures: Shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
from a main building/dwelling.
               (B)   Rear setback: Three feet (3') minimum from the accessory
structure to the property line. Any accessory structure located closer than
five feet (5') to any property line shall meet all applicable building codes
for fire rated walls.
               (C)   Side setbacks: Three feet (3') minimum from the accessory
structure to the interior side property line and ten feet (10') from the street
side property line. Any accessory structure located closer than five feet (5')
to any property line shall meet all applicable building codes for fire rated
walls.
         b.   Allowed as an administrative conditional use:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Twenty feet (20').
            (2)   Maximum Area: The maximum area for all accessory structures
located in the rear yard combined shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the
rear yard area.
            (3)   Setbacks (See Figure 3 Of This Section):
               (A)   Accessory structures: Shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
from a main building/dwelling.
               (B)   Rear setback: Three feet (3') minimum from the accessory
structure to the property line. Any accessory structure located closer than
five feet (5') to any property line shall meet all applicable building codes
for fire rated walls.
               (C)   Side setbacks: Three feet (3') minimum from the accessory
structure to the interior side property line and ten feet (10') from the street
side property line. Any accessory structure located closer than five feet (5')
to any property line shall meet all applicable building codes for fire rated
walls.
            (4)   Design Standards: As a conditional use, accessory structures
are subject to higher design standards. Accessory structures shall be
architecturally compatible with the main structure and shall be subject to a
design review, which may include, without limitation, review of height, size,
roof pitch, location, exterior colors and materials.
   F.   Standards For Parcels Measuring Fifteen Thousand Square Feet Or More:
Accessory buildings for single-family and two-family residential properties on
lots measuring fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more shall meet the
following requirements:
      1.   Structures located in a rear yard of an interior lot (see figure 1
of this section):
         a.   Allowed as a permitted use:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Twenty feet (20').
            (2)   Maximum Area: The maximum area for all accessory structures
located in the rear yard combined shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the
rear yard area. The maximum area for any one accessory structure shall be eight
hundred sixty four (864) square feet.
            (3)   Setbacks (See Figure 2 Of This Section):
               (A)   Accessory structures: Shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
from a main building/dwelling.
               (B)   Rear and side setbacks: Three feet (3') minimum from the
accessory structure to the property line. Any accessory structure located
closer than five feet (5') to any property line shall meet all applicable
building codes for fire rated walls.
         b.   Allowed as an administrative conditional use:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Twenty four feet (24').
            (2)   Maximum Area: The maximum area for all accessory structures
located in the rear yard combined shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the
rear yard area.
            (3)   Setbacks (See Figure 2 Of This Section):
               (A)   Accessory structures: Shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
from a main building/dwelling.
               (B)   Side and rear setbacks: Three feet (3') minimum from the
accessory structure to the property line. Any accessory structure located
closer than five feet (5') to any property line shall meet all applicable
building codes for fire rated walls.
            (4)   Design Standards: As a conditional use, accessory structures
are subject to higher design standards. Accessory structures shall be
architecturally compatible with the main structure and shall be subject to a
design review, which may include, without limitation, review of height, size,
roof pitch, location, exterior colors and materials.
      2.   Structures located in a side yard of an interior lot, or within the
interior side yard of a corner lot (see figure 1 of this section):
         a.   Allowed as a permitted use:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Sixteen feet (16').
            (2)   Maximum Area: The maximum area for all accessory structures
located in the rear yard combined shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the
rear yard area. The maximum area for any one accessory structure shall be eight
hundred sixty four (864) square feet.
            (3)   Setbacks (See Figures 2 And 3 Of This Section):
               (A)   Accessory structures: Shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
from a main building/dwelling.
               (B)   Side and rear setbacks: Three feet (3') minimum from the
accessory structure to the property line. Any accessory structure located
closer than five feet (5') to any property line shall meet all applicable
building codes for fire rated walls.
               (C)   Front setback: Accessory structures shall be located a
minimum of ten feet (10') behind the front of the main building/dwelling.
         b.   Allowed as an administrative conditional use:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Twenty feet (20').
            (2)   Maximum Area: The maximum area for all accessory structures
located in the rear yard combined shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the
rear yard area.
            (3)   Setbacks (See Figures 2 And 3 Of This Section):
               (A)   Accessory structures: Shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
from a main building/dwelling.
               (B)   Side and rear setbacks: Three feet (3') minimum from the
accessory structure to the property line. Any accessory structure located
closer than five feet (5') to any property line shall meet all applicable
building codes for fire rated walls.
               (C)   Front yard setback: Accessory structures shall be located
a minimum of ten feet (10') behind the front of main building/dwelling.
            (4)   Design Standards: As a conditional use, accessory structures
are subject to higher design standards. Accessory structures shall be
architecturally compatible with the main structure and shall be subject to a
design review, which may include, without limitation, review of height, size,
roof pitch, location, exterior colors and materials.
      3.   Structures located in a rear yard of a corner lot (see subsection D,
figure 1 of this section):
         a.   Allowed as a permitted use:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Twenty feet (20').
            (2)   Maximum Area: The maximum area for all accessory structures
located in the rear yard combined shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the
rear yard area. The maximum area for any one accessory structure shall be eight
hundred sixty four (864) square feet.
            (3)   Setbacks (See Subsection D, Figure 3 Of This Section):
               (A)   Accessory structures: Shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
from a main building/dwelling.
               (B)   Rear setback: Three feet (3') minimum from the accessory
structure to the property line. Any accessory structure located closer than
five feet (5') to any property line shall meet all applicable Building Codes
for fire rated walls.
               (C)   Side setbacks: Three feet (3') minimum from the accessory
structure to the interior side property line and ten feet (10') from the street
side property line. Any accessory structure located closer than five feet (5')
to any property line shall meet all applicable Building Codes for fire rated
walls.
         b.   Allowed as an administrative conditional use:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Twenty four feet (24').
            (2)   Maximum Area: The maximum area for all accessory structures
located in the rear yard combined shall be twenty five percent (25%) of the
rear yard area.
            (3)   Setbacks (See Subsection D, Figure 3 Of This Section):
               (A)   Accessory structures: Shall be a minimum of six feet (6')
from a main building/dwelling.
               (B)   Rear setback: Three feet (3') minimum from the accessory
structure to the property line. Any accessory structure located closer than
five feet (5') to any property line shall meet all applicable Building Codes
for fire rated walls.
               (C)   Side setbacks: Three feet (3') minimum from the accessory
structure to the interior side property line and ten feet (10') from the street
side property line. Any accessory structure located closer than five feet (5')
to any property line shall meet all applicable Building Codes for fire rated
walls.
            (4)   Design Standards: As a conditional use, accessory structures
are subject to higher design standards. Accessory structures shall be
architecturally compatible with the main structure and shall be subject to a
design review, which may include, without limitation, review of height, size,
roof pitch, location, exterior colors and materials. (Ord. 16-18, 12-14-2016)
13.11.030: ANIMALS (FARM AND HOUSEHOLD PETS):
   A.   Purpose: This section is established to provide regulations for animals
within residential neighborhoods. Animal permits are not transferable and are
subject to review upon substantiated and unresolved complaint.
   B.   Submitting Information: Prior to the issuance of any animal permit, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
      1.   A completed signed application and affidavit.
      2.   Appropriate fee.
      3.   A site plan showing the exact location of any required animal
enclosure.
      4.   A photograph or illustration with measurements of the proposed
animal enclosure.
      5.   Documentation that all household pets are vaccinated.
      6.   If required, documentation that all household pets are rendered
sterile.
   C.   Farm Animals:
      1.   Designation Of Appropriate Zone Districts: Farm animals are allowed
in any R-1-40 Residential District.
      2.   Ratio Of Animals To Lot Size For Farm Animals:
         a.   Large animals may be kept at a ratio of two (2) animals for each
one acre of lot size (not less than 40,000 square feet).
         b.   Medium animals may be kept at a ratio of five (5) animals for
each one acre of lot size (not less than 40,000 square feet).
         c.   Small animals may be kept at a ratio of fifty (50) animals for
each one acre of lot size (not less than 40,000 square feet).
         d.   Vietnamese potbellied pigs may be permitted with a hobby permit
issued by the City and shall comply with all requirements of the hobby license
provisions for Vietnamese potbellied pigs. Vietnamese potbellied pigs may be
kept at a ratio of one animal per twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, with a
maximum of two (2) potbellied pigs per lot.
   D.   Household Pets: No more than two (2) adult dogs or cats, of either
species and no more than a total of four (4) dogs, cats, or Vietnamese
potbellied pigs in any combinations on a nonnuisance basis for family use only
(noncommercial) are allowed. Exceptions are allowed only with approval of a
fancier's permit, animal hobby permit, foster animal permit, dangerous animal
permit, guard dog permit, exotic animal permit, and feral cat colony permit,
and must comply with the provisions of title 8, chapter 8.12 of the
Taylorsville Code.
   E.   Backyard Chickens: Persons may keep backyard chickens on single-family
owner occupied residential lots in accordance with the provisions of section
8.12.140 of the Taylorsville Code.
   F.   Outdoor Animal Domicile Structures: Partially enclosed and/or roofed
structures, e.g., barns, corrals, cages, pens, coops, kennels, and runs, etc.,
are encouraged to be provided and maintained for all animals kept outdoors.
Such structures shall be sited at the rear of the main dwelling and at least
thirty feet (30') from neighboring dwellings and comply with all other setback
and yard regulations for accessory structures. The facilities shall be placed
in compliance with all animal regulations, noise and nuisance regulations, and
Salt Lake County Health Department regulations and procedures, with the
following exceptions:
      1.   All dog kennels and dog runs must be set back at least ten feet
(10') from the property line and at least forty feet (40') from all neighboring
dwellings.
      2.   For properties no less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet, the
Director may allow an outdoor animal domicile structure for farm animals to be
constructed prior to construction of a main dwelling under the following
conditions:
         a.   The structure complies with all accessory structure setbacks,
height, and size standards.
         b.   The structure is in scale and character with other accessory
buildings located within 0.50 mile of the property.
         c.   That an agreement be recorded against the property that the
structure will be relocated or removed as necessary to comply with setback
standards upon additional development of the property, e.g., construction of
the main dwelling, subdivision, etc.
Note: This section applies only to those animal facilities placed outside the
main dwelling unit. This regulation does not apply to any location within the
interior of the home including the garage or other attached interior space.
      3.   All chicken coops must meet the setback requirements of section
8.12.140 of the Taylorsville Code. (Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.11.040: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: This section is established to:
      1.   Provide an opportunity for home occupations as an accessory use when
they are compatible with the neighborhoods in which they are located. A home
occupation shall not be construed to mean an employee working in his home in
the service of an employer whose principal place of business is licensed at
another location.
      2.   Provide an opportunity for a home occupation to engage in the
business of childcare and other group child activities and encourage this type
of home occupation to draw clients/customers from their immediate neighborhood.
      3.   Guide business activities which are not compatible with
neighborhoods to appropriate Commercial Zones.
      4.   Safeguard peace, quiet, and domestic tranquility within all
residential neighborhoods. Protect residents from the adverse effects of
business uses being conducted in residential areas from noise, nuisance,
traffic, fire hazards, and other possible business uses that create significant
impacts on a neighborhood.
      5.   Provide a means to enforce and regulate the businesses that are
licensable through the authority of the business license regulations of the
applicable ordinances, and if necessary, terminate home occupations if
violations of the ordinances regulating home occupations occur.
   B.   Administrative Conditional Use Permit And Home Occupation License: Home
occupations are allowed only with approval of an administrative conditional use
permit and a home occupation business license from the City.
   C.   Categories And Requirements Of Home Occupation Licenses: Home
occupation businesses are licensable as Class A, Class B, Class C, Class D, and
family childcare/home preschool Class D.
   D.   General Requirements: The following requirements must be met in order
to have a home occupation:
      1.   Obtain a home occupation administrative conditional use permit and
business license from the City.
      2.   Remain compliant with all applicable statutes, rules and
regulations.
      3.   Activity shall be clearly incidental to the dwelling or residential
use.
      4.   Storage of stock in trade, inventory or commodities shall not occupy
more than five hundred (500) cubic feet of the area being used for the home
occupation and shall not be visible outside the dwelling unit.
      5.   Signage shall be limited to one nonilluminated nameplate sign that
does not exceed three (3) square feet in area, and vehicles or equipment may
not be used for the primary purpose of advertising the home occupation at the
site of the home occupation.
      6.   Employees shall be limited to bona fide resident(s) of the dwelling
unit, except that an employee living outside the residence may work in the
residence in a home occupation Class D - family childcare/home preschool when
required by State law.
      7.   Activities associated with the home occupation shall not produce
traffic, light, glare, noise, fumes, odor or vibration that will diminish the
residential character of the neighborhood.
      8.   Owners of the property or property manager where the home occupation
is to be located must give written consent to the home occupation.
      9.   Home occupations are subject to review upon complaint. If a
complaint is received by the City, the home occupation will be reviewed for
compliance with applicable ordinances and conditions of approval.
      10.   Dwelling units and landscape areas shall be well maintained.
      11.   Alterations shall not be made to the dwelling or the yard area that
will change its residential character.
      12.   Property address numbers need to be identified and maintained on
the home. Address letters should be a minimum of four inches (4") in height and
a contrasting color from the main building.
      13.   One vehicle only may be associated with the home occupation. Said
vehicle must be parked on site in a garage or driveway and may not exceed a ten
thousand (10,000) pound gross vehicle weight rating or have no more than two
(2) axles.
      14.   No more than two (2) home occupation businesses shall be allowed
per dwelling unit.
   E.   Additional Requirements For Class A; Conducted Entirely Within A
Dwelling Unit In Which No Clients Or Customers Visit The Home: Specific
operational requirements for a home occupation Class A include the following:
      1.   No clients, customers, or patrons of the home occupation business
are allowed to visit the home occupation location for business purposes.
      2.   The yard of the dwelling unit and any detached accessory building(s)
shall not be used in conjunction with the home occupation activity.
   F.   Additional Requirements For Class B; Conducted Entirely Within A
Dwelling Unit In Which No Clients Visit The Home Occupation But Produces Or
Assembles A Product On A Small Scale: Specific operational requirements for a
home occupation Class B include the following:
      1.   No clients, customers, or patrons of the home occupation business
are allowed to visit the home occupation location for business purposes.
      2.   The yard of the dwelling unit and any detached accessory building(s)
shall not be used in conjunction with the home occupation activity.
      3.   Delivery of commodities used in connection with the home occupation
shall be provided by parcel or letter carrier service only.
   G.   Additional Requirements For Class C; Conducted Entirely Within A
Dwelling Unit In Which Clients Or Customers Visit The Home: Specific
operational requirements for a home occupation class C include the following:
      1.   The yard of the dwelling unit and any detached accessory building(s)
shall not be used in conjunction with the home occupation activity.
      2.   Delivery of commodities used in connection with the home occupation
shall be provided by parcel or letter carrier service only.
      3.   A minimum of two (2) parking spaces comprising at least three
hundred sixty (360) square feet of paved hard surface area shall be provided
for clients, customers, or patrons of the home occupation business in addition
to required residential parking. The director may waive the additional parking
space requirement for home occupations located in planned unit developments,
manufactured home parks, condominium developments, and apartment complexes.
Required parking for a class C home occupation shall be located in the
dwelling's front and/or side yard.
      4.   Required parking for the home occupation shall not detract from the
residential character of the property. An appropriate amount of landscaping
shall be preserved and maintained.
      5.   Only one class C home occupation shall be allowed per dwelling unit.
      6.   Hours of operation for class C home occupations will be determined
through the conditional use permit process. Hours exceeding six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. will be considered with documented need or
justification.
   H.   Additional Requirements For Class D; Provides For Care, Supervision,
And/Or Home Preschool Instruction Of Children Less Than Fourteen Years Of Age
Within An Occupied Dwelling And A Secure Yard: Specific operational
requirements for a home occupation class D include the following:
      1.   Applicants for a class D home occupation shall obtain and remain
compliant with all applicable licenses/approvals from all pertinent City,
county, state, and federal agencies and comply and remain compliant with all
statutes, rules and regulations including obtaining, if applicable, a
certificate as a residential childcare provider from the Utah state department
of health.
      2.   Secure outdoor play areas are required for all class D home
occupations.
         a.   The outdoor play area shall consist of a minimum of eighty (80)
square feet in area per child.
         b.   The play area shall be located in the rear and/or side yard of
the dwelling.
         c.   The outdoor play area shall be secured by an appropriate, well
maintained fence not less than six feet (6') in height. The director may
require a fence that exceeds six feet (6') in height as it determines
necessary.
         d.   The hours of operation for the outdoor play area shall not exceed
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
      3.   The dwelling unit should provide an indoor play area at a minimum of
thirty five (35) square feet in area per child.
      4.   A minimum of two (2) parking spaces comprising at least three
hundred sixty (360) square feet of paved hard surface area shall be provided
for clients, customers or patrons of the class D home occupation business in
addition to required residential parking. The director may waive the additional
parking space requirement in planned unit developments, manufactured home
parks, condominium developments, and apartment complexes. Required parking for
the home occupation shall be located in the dwelling's front and/or side yard.
      5.   The designated number of children includes the caregiver's own
children under the age of six (6) who are not yet in full day school.
      6.   Required parking for the home occupation shall not detract from the
residential character of the property. An appropriate amount of landscaping
shall be preserved and maintained.
      7.   Only one class D home occupation shall be allowed per dwelling.
      8.   Hours of operation for class D home occupations will be determined
through the conditional use permit process. Hours exceeding six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. will be considered with documented need or
justification.
      9.   Home preschools shall allow no more than twelve (12) children per
preschool session. Home preschool sessions shall be limited to no more than
four (4) hours and preschool sessions shall be limited to two (2) per weekday.
Instructor licensing and curriculum requirements shall comply with the
requirements of the state of Utah.
      10.   Home daycare and home preschools shall be required to submit a
scaled floor plan drawing to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of
subsection H3 of this section.
   I.   Conditional Use Permit Process: A person seeking a home occupation
conditional use permit shall file a written application with the community
development department of the city in a form prescribed by the city.
      1.   Home occupation classes A, B, C, and D1, D2, D3, and D4 conditional
use permit may be approved and issued by the director. Any person shall have
the right to appeal the decision of the director to the planning commission
within ten (10) business days of the director's decision, stating the reason
for the appeal and requesting a hearing before the planning commission at the
earliest possible regular meeting of the commission.
      2.   All home occupation conditional use permits granted by the City are
subject to review upon complaint. The City may revoke a permit issued for a
home occupation upon notice and hearing for violation of any governing
ordinance or law of the City, State or Federal government, or for any
unresolved and substantiated reason.
      3.   A home occupation permit granted by the City shall not be assignable
or transferable to another person or another location without first being
reviewed and approved by the City. (Ord. 14-02, 2-19-2014)
   J.   Home Occupations Not Allowed: The following uses are not allowed as
home occupations:
Any use that requires or utilizes chemicals or hazardous materials in excess of
volumes allowed by the International Fire Code in a residential situation.
Auto body or fender work.
Auto, truck, diesel, boat, trailer, or motorcycle repair or services at the
residence.
Furniture or cabinet making.
Junkyards, storage or recycling yards.
Lawn mower, small engine or motor repair or services.
Major appliance repair (washers, dryers, refrigerators, etc.).
Manufacture or sale of explosives or similar products.
Medical clinics and laboratories.
Mortuaries or crematoriums.
Reiki type therapy.
Sexually oriented businesses.
Short term rental.
Vehicle sales or rental exceeding two (2) sales per year.
Vehicle towing operations.
Welding or ironworks.
Any other use that would produce traffic, light, glare, noise, fumes, odor or
vibration that will diminish the residential character of the neighborhood.
(Ord. 15-06, 11-4-2015)
   K.   Exceptions: Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, a home
occupation conditional use permit is not required for the following activities:
      1.   Garage and yard sales. Refer to section
13.11.130 of this chapter.
      2.   Temporary social gathering sales that do not exceed one day, such as
Tupperware parties, book parties, candle parties, etc., not to exceed four (4)
occurrences per year. (Ord. 14-02, 2-19-2014)
13.11.050: MANUFACTURED HOMES:
Manufactured homes are a permitted land use. All manufactured homes shall
install a concrete foundation wall around the perimeter of the structure. Such
structures shall also include a required two car garage (attached or detached)
prior to occupancy of the structure. (Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.11.060: MOBILE HOMES:
No mobile home shall be placed, used, or occupied except within the Mobile Home
(MH) zoning designation, approved mobile home subdivisions, mobile home
communities, or mobile home sales lots. (Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.11.070: RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS OR FOR PERSONS WITH A
DISABILITY:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to comply with Utah Code and
avoid discrimination in housing against persons with disabilities pursuant to
the Utah Fair Housing Act and the Federal Fair Housing Act as interpreted by
courts whose decisions are binding in Utah. This section is not a separate zone
for such facilities but applies to all Residential Zones within the City. If
any facility, residence, congregate living, or other housing arrangement meets
the definition of a "residential facility for elderly persons" or a
"residential facility for persons with a disability" as set forth in this
title, the requirements of this section shall govern the same notwithstanding
any conflicting provision of this title or the revised ordinances of the City.
Except as provided herein, the requirements of this section shall not be
construed to prohibit or limit other applicable provisions of this title, the
revised ordinances of the City, or other local, County, State, or Federal laws.
   B.   Scope: If any facility, residence, congregate living or other housing
arrangement meets the definition of a "residential facility for elderly
persons" or a "residential facility for persons with a disability" as set forth
in this title, the requirements of this section shall govern the same
notwithstanding any conflicting provision of this title or the Taylorsville
Code. The requirements of this section shall not be construed to prohibit or
limit other applicable provisions of this title, the Taylorsville Code, or
other laws.
   C.   Notice Of Intent:
      1.   Prior to submitting an application to the Utah Department of Human
Services, Office of Licensing, for a license to operate a residential treatment
program, as defined in Utah Code section 62A-2-101, as amended, the applicant
shall provide notice to the Mayor, with a copy to the Community Development
Director, of its intent to operate the program.
      2.   The notice of intent shall include the following information
relating to the residential treatment program:
         a.   An accurate description of the residential treatment program;
         b.   The location where the residential treatment program will be
operated;
         c.   The services that will be provided by the residential treatment
program;
         d.   The type of clients that the residential treatment program will
serve;
         e.   The category of license for which the residential treatment
program is applying;
         f.   The name, telephone number, and address of a person that may be
contacted to make inquiries about the residential treatment program; and
         g.   Any other information that the Utah Department of Human Services
may require by administrative rule.
   D.   Permitted Uses; Termination:
      1.   Permitted Uses: Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this
title, a residential facility for elderly persons and a residential facility
for persons with a disability shall be permitted uses in any zone where a
dwelling is allowed as a permitted or conditional use subject to the
development standards in subsection F of this section.
      2.   Termination: A use permitted by this section is nontransferable and
shall terminate if:
         a.   The facility is devoted to a use other than a residential
facility for elderly persons or a residential facility for persons with a
disability.
         b.   Any license or certification issued by the Utah Department of
Health or the Department of Human Services for such facility terminates or is
revoked.
         c.   The facility fails to comply with requirements set forth in this
section.
   E.   Review Process: In order to evaluate the impact of the proposed
facility and its similarity to the impact of a single- family dwelling occupied
by a family or, where applicable, in multiple-family zones or a multiple-family
dwelling, the following information must be submitted with the notice of intent
application. Additional information may be requested to aid in that review.
      1.   Sufficiently detailed site plans, building plans, and other
information necessary to determine compliance with building, safety, and health
regulations and standards applicable to similar residential dwellings permitted
in that zone.
      2.   Drawings or photographs depicting the elevations of all sides of all
buildings.
      3.   Specific type of facility (as defined by State regulations) and by
which agency it is regulated.
      4.   Number of residents, resident and nonresident staff, and expected/
typical number of visitors per day.
      5.   Location and number of similar facilities in the vicinity of the
proposed facility.
      6.   Type of operation - business, family, eleemosynary, charitable, or
beneficial organization.
      7.   Supervision - hours and degree of supervision to be provided.
      8.   Typical or average length of stay of the residents.
      9.   Special accommodation(s), waivers, or exceptions requested or
necessary, to extent thereof, and basis for need for the same.
      10.   Location of residences within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
proposed site that are similar in scope to the accommodation request.
      11.   Location of any schools within five hundred feet (500') of the
property line of the proposed site.
      12.   Dedicated off street parking to accommodate staff.
   F.   Development Standards: The development standards set forth in this
section shall apply to any residential facility for elderly persons or
residential facility for persons with a disability.
      1.   The facility shall comply with building, safety, and health
regulations applicable to similar structures.
         a.   Each facility shall be subject to the same development standards
applicable to similar structures located in the same zoning district in which
the facility is located.
         b.   The minimum number of parking spaces required for a facility
shall be the same as for similar structures located in the same zone in which
the facility is located.
      2.   Pursuant to the definition of "family" in section
13.36.070 of this title, not more than three (3) unrelated persons shall occupy
a residential facility for elderly persons or any residential facility for
persons with a disability established in a dwelling unit unless a reasonable
accommodation for a greater number of occupants is granted.
      3.   No facility shall be made available to an individual whose tenancy
would:
         a.   Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals, or
         b.   Result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.
      4.   Prior to occupancy of any facility, the person or entity operating
the facility shall:
         a.   Obtain a City business license, if required under applicable
provisions of this Code;
         b.   Provide to the Community Development Director a copy of any
license or certification required by the Utah Department of Health or
Department of Human Services; and
         c.   Certify in a sworn statement that no person will reside or remain
in the facility whose tenancy would:
            (1)   Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other
individuals; or
            (2)   Result in substantial physical damage to the property of
others. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   G.   Accommodation:
      1.   Accommodation Required: None of the requirements of this section
shall be interpreted to limit any accommodation which is reasonable and
necessary to allow the establishment or occupancy of a residential facility for
persons with a disability.
      2.   Application: Any person or entity wanting an accommodation shall
make application to the Planning Commission and shall articulate in writing the
nature of the requested accommodation and the basis for the request.
      3.   Appeal: If an accommodation request is denied, the decision may be
appealed to the Hearing Officer in the manner provided for appeals of
administrative decisions set forth in this title.
      4.   Prohibited Accommodations: The requested accommodation must relate
to the use of the property so that it may be enjoyed as other similarly
situated properties. An example would include a reduction in setback
requirements for the installation of handicapped accessibility improvements. An
accommodation cannot be granted to waive a zoning requirement, general setback
reduction requests not related to the occupants, increase the profitability of
the facility, or increase the maximum number of unrelated occupants above eight
(8) plus two (2) additional persons acting as house parents or guardians. (Ord.
18-09, 2-28-2018)
   H.   Reasonable Accommodations: A residential facility for persons with a
disability shall not include facilities which house persons who are violent,
who are not voluntarily residing therein, or who are residing therein as a part
of or in lieu of confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional
facility.
      1.   None of the requirements of this section shall be interpreted to
limit a reasonable accommodation when an accommodation is necessary to afford
persons with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.
      2.   Any person or entity wanting a reasonable accommodation shall make
application therefor to the Community Development Director and shall state in
writing the nature of the requested accommodation and the basis for the
request.
      3.   The Planning Commission shall render a decision on each application
for a reasonable accommodation within sixty (60) days. The decision shall be
based on evidence of record demonstrating all of the following:
         a.   The requested accommodation will not undermine the legitimate
purposes of existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the benefit that the
accommodation would provide to a person with a disability.
         b.   That but for the accommodation, one or more persons with a
disability will be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy housing of their
choice.
         c.   That equal results will be achieved as between the person with a
disability requesting the accommodation and a nondisabled person.
      4.   Any person adversely affected by a final decision regarding a
request for a reasonable accommodation may appeal that decision to the Board of
Adjustment. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.11.080: HALF PIPE RAMPS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Residential Zones: The following standards must be met:
      1.   Drawings: Drawings showing the scale, design, and materials of which
the half pipe ramp is to be built. This is to evaluate the noise, vibration,
and nuisance impact of the half pipe ramp.
      2.   Description: A written description of the materials and location of
all screening to evaluate the half pipe ramp's impact upon and harmony with
adjacent properties.
      3.   Lighting: A written description of the scale, location, and
direction of all lighting.
      4.   Rules: A set of written rules which will govern the use and
operation of the half pipe ramp.
      5.   Affidavit: A written statement that the owner has reviewed all laws,
ordinances, and regulations related to half pipe ramp construction and use and
a written agreement to comply therewith.
   B.   Development Standards:
      1.   Design: Every proposed half pipe ramp shall be of a scale and design
and constructed of materials which will minimize noise, vibration, and other
nuisance factors commonly associated with half pipe usage. Portions of the half
pipe may be located below ground level, but in no case shall any portion of the
half pipe ramp exceed six feet (6') in height above ground level, excluding
handrails. Hours of operation shall be from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to eight
o'clock (8:00) P.M. during standard time, and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to nine
o'clock (9:00) P.M. during daylight saving time.
      2.   Screening: Walls, fences, hedges, trees, and other screen planting
shall be installed sufficient to ensure harmony with adjacent properties and to
conceal any unsightly development.
      3.   Lighting: Half pipe ramp lighting shall not be installed more than
six feet (6') above ground level and shall be directed in such a manner as to
not cause disturbance to neighboring residents.
      4.   Personal Use: No commercial or advertised use of the half pipe ramp
shall be permitted, and no donations or contributions shall be solicited or
received for use or attendance at half pipe ramp activities.
      5.   Rules: Written rules shall be adopted by property owners to ensure
safe and reasonable use and operation of the half pipe ramp.
      6.   Agreement To Comply: Property owners shall review the laws,
ordinances, and regulations related to half pipe ramp construction and use and
have agreed to comply with such provisions.
      7.   Compliance To Codes: The proposed half pipe ramp shall comply with
all pertinent sections of all applicable Building Codes and all zoning
requirements, including side and rear yard setbacks and size regulations for
accessory structures.
      8.   Penalty: It shall be a Class C misdemeanor for any owner of
residential property upon which a half pipe ramp is located to permit the half
pipe ramp to be used in violation of any ordinance of the City or any rule or
regulation of the Salt Lake Valley Health Department, regardless of whether the
property owner had knowledge of the actual violation. (Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.11.090: SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Private Swimming Pools: Any private swimming pool not completely
enclosed within a building having solid walls shall be set back at least five
feet (5') from property lines. Any swimming pool shall be completely surrounded
by a fence or wall having a height of at least six feet (6'). All fence
openings shall be gated and equipped with self-closing and self-latching
devices. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   B.   Semiprivate Swimming Pools Exception: A semiprivate swimming pool or
recreational facility is allowed only in the zoning districts identified in
chapters 13.07, 13.08, 13.09, and 13.10 of this title. The following standards
must be met:
      1.   The facilities shall be owned and maintained by the members and a
minimum of seventy five percent (75%) of the membership must be residents of
the neighborhood or section of the subdivision in which the recreational
facility is to be located.
      2.   The area to be used for recreational purposes is of sufficient size
to accommodate all proposed facilities, together with off street parking, where
required by the Director. A landscaped front yard of not less than thirty feet
(30') and a landscaped side yard on both sides and rear of not less than ten
feet (10') are required.
      3.   The area to be developed into a recreational area must be of such
size and shape as to cause no undue infringement on the privacy of the abutting
residential areas and be in keeping with the design of the neighborhood in
which the recreational area is to be situated.
      4.   A solid wall or substantial six foot (6') fence shall be required
around the entire recreational area. The fence across the front of the property
shall be constructed no closer to the front property line than the required
front setback, unless otherwise approved by the Director.
      5.   Under no condition may any type of retail or business facilities be
permitted in the recreational area except those specifically approved by the
Director.
      6.   Before authorizing the recreational facility, complete plans for the
development of the area must be submitted to the Director. Together with the
plans, there must be submitted a detailed outline showing how the area is to be
funded, managed, and maintained. The Director may require a bond by the owners
to guarantee performance of the regulations placed as conditions upon which the
area is approved. If any of the requirements are not complied with, the
authorization will be void.
      7.   The owners of the proposed recreational facility must have a
statement from the owners of all abutting properties and at least seventy five
percent (75%) of the property owners within a radius of three hundred feet
(300') of said development giving permission to develop a recreational
facility. Covenants and conditions regulating the use of the facility shall be
submitted to the Director and the Salt Lake Valley Health Department for review
and approval. (Ord. 18-07, 2-28-2018)
13.11.100: BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY:
This section is established to provide regulations and site standards for bed
and breakfast facilities located within residential Historic Resources Overlay
Zones and in designated Commercial Districts as may be allowed through the
development review process. Bed and breakfast facilities may be allowed as
specified in the respective land use tables (sections
13.07.020 and
13.08.020 of this title) where the applicant can show evidence of compliance
with outlined standards and procedures and where there are clearly minimal
impacts on adjacent residential properties and neighborhoods.
   A.   Requirements For Approval: The Planning Commission may grant a
conditional use for a bed and breakfast facility provided the requirements
herein are met. The granting of a conditional use permit for a bed and
breakfast facility shall not exempt the applicant from meeting other applicable
ordinances, covenants, codes, or laws recognized by the City. The following
preconditions and documentation are required:
      1.   A letter of application sworn before a notary public shall be
provided by the owner(s) stating that such owner(s) or live-in residential
manager will occupy the facility except for bona fide temporary absences.
      2.   Building plans or a floor plan (1/4 inch to the foot) showing the
bed and breakfast facility shall be provided.
      3.   The conditional use permit may be revoked by the Planning Commission
upon failure in compliance with the conditions precedent to the original
approval of the permit or for any violations of this title occurring on the
site for which the permit was approved. Prior to taking action concerning
revocation of a conditional use permit, a meeting will be held by the granting
authority. Notice of the meeting and the grounds for consideration of
revocation shall be mailed to the permittee at least ten (10) days prior to the
hearing.
   B.   Development Standards And Requirements For Bed And Breakfast
Facilities:
      1.   The owner(s) of the property or live-in residential manager shall
live within the facility except for bona fide temporary absences.
      2.   The location of a bed and breakfast facility shall have direct
access to an arterial or collector through street. Said facility will typically
be isolated somewhat from adjoining residential properties and will not unduly
increase local traffic in the immediate neighborhood.
      3.   The location of a bed and breakfast facility shall be at least one-
fourth (1/4) mile from any other similarly approved facility unless it is
determined by the Planning Commission that extraordinary circumstances warrant
a shorter distance.
      4.   In no case shall the parcel be less than one-fourth (1/4) acre in
size unless it is determined by the Planning Commission that the site is
architecturally or historically significant enough to justify a smaller parcel.
The parcel shall also be of sufficient size to be in scale with the size of
structures, the number of people using the facility, parking areas, open space
areas, etc.
      5.   The bed and breakfast facility shall be designed or modified so
that, to the degree reasonably feasible, the appearance of the structure
remains as a residential dwelling. Where possible, unique architecture is
encouraged in keeping with the local area.
      6.   Signage for a bed and breakfast facility shall be low key,
identifying the name of the facility without any advertising copy. Natural
materials are encouraged for sign construction and should be architecturally
compatible with the bed and breakfast facility. Sign size shall be no more than
four (4) square feet.
      7.   The Planning Commission may require additional setbacks, buffering,
landscaping, and natural setting to mitigate impacts on adjoining residential
properties.
      8.   At least one off street parking space shall be provided for each
guestroom in addition to needed parking for owners/employees of the facility.
      9.   The design and size of the bed and breakfast facility shall conform
to all applicable standards in the Fire, Building, and Health Codes. The
facility shall be licensed in conformance with all City ordinances.
      10.   If the bed and breakfast facility is located in the Historic
Resources Overlay Zone it must comply with all applicable standards of the
Overlay Zone as defined in this Code.
      11.   Any other appropriate or more stringent conditions deemed necessary
for bed and breakfast facilities protecting public health, safety, welfare, and
the residential character of the neighborhood may be required by the Planning
Commission. (Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.11.110: COMMERCIAL SCHOOLS (LOW IMPACT):
   A.   Permitted Locations: Commercial schools (low impact) are allowed
according to the commercial and residential land use tables, and all must
comply with the following restrictions:
      1.   Access: The proposed use must have direct access to an arterial or
major collector street with no access permitted to any minor collector or local
street.
      2.   Structure Appearance: The appearance of the structure shall be
compatible to other uses within the same zoning district.
      3.   Occupancy: Occupancy shall be limited to no more than two (2)
instructors and a total of twenty (20) students at any one time. However, the
number of instructors may be increased up to four (4), and/or the number of
students may be increased up to a total of thirty (30) students if it is found
by the Planning Commission that the site can adequately contain the required
parking while still meeting the requirements of subsection A4b of this section
and if such allowance does not adversely impact the surrounding neighborhood.
      4.   Required Parking:
         a.   Required parking shall consist of at least one space for each
instructor, four (4) visitor spaces, and four (4) queuing spaces.
         b.   In addition, one visitor space is required for every five (5)
students or portion thereof allowed beyond the first twenty (20) students.
      5.   Drop Off Area: An on site drop off area shall be provided.
   B.   Commercial School: Any commercial school (low impact) which cannot meet
the above criteria must meet the standard location and use allowances for
"commercial school" as shown in the land use tables. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.11.120: TEMPORARY/SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose and intent of the temporary/special use
permit is to allow certain uses within the City which are transitory in nature
as either accessory or seasonal uses in a manner that will assure compatibility
with the zone district and adjacent properties.
   B.   Standards For Temporary/Special Use: A temporary/special use shall
comply with the general standards, as provided below, plus any additional
conditions as may be established by the City.
      1.   Acceptable space shall be available for any off street parking and
traffic circulation generated by the use. Roadside stands for produce or retail
sales require curb and gutter and paved or graveled surface on site.
      2.   Sanitary facilities shall be available for waste disposal for
protection of community health and safety.
      3.   Night lighting shall be compatible with adjacent uses, shielded and
directed downward to avoid light spill onto adjacent properties.
      4.   Hours of operation shall be compatible with adjacent uses.
      5.   Signs must comply with the City adopted sign regulations.
      6.   No use shall be placed in the public right-of-way, display areas
shall be limited, and temporary businesses shall comply with the regulations of
the Business Licensing Department.
      7.   No more than two (2) temporary/special uses are allowed per site at
one time.
      8.   No temporary business or its customer service area shall be located
on a landscaped surface or an area required to be landscaped. The director may
grant an exception for temporary businesses that will be in operation for less
than five (5) days.
   C.   Planning Commission Review: When considered appropriate by the
director, a temporary/special use permit may be referred to the planning
commission for review.
   D.   Temporary/Special Use Permit Required: A temporary/special use permit
and a business license, where applicable, shall be required for the following:
 
Temporary/Special Use Type Location Standards Duration
Circus or carnival and    Permitted in               10 consecutive days in a
related accessory uses    nonresidential zones and   calendar year per
(bazaar, fair, street     with institutional         applicant
dance, etc.)              buildings
Construction office,                                 Allowed on a site until
staging areas, and        Permitted in all zones     final inspections of the
equipment sheds                                      project are completed
                          Permitted only on parcels  May not begin prior to May
Farmers' market           or within developments     1 and must terminate by
                          larger than 3 acres in     November 1. Requires a new
                          size                       permit annually
Produce stands: Includes
goods grown and prepared
by the operator and sold  Must be located in a       Growing season (generally
primarily for consumption nonresidential zone        the summer months)
(e.g., fruits and
vegetables)
Roadside stands,                                     No more than 150 licensed
temporary retail sales,   Allowed if the use is      days per site each
and street vendors:       permitted in the zone and  calendar year (i.e., 2
includes Christmas tree   accessory to the principal businesses licensed to
lots, firework stands,    use or if no principal use operate for 30 days each
snow shacks, ice cream    exists, would be permitted on a site will amount to
vendors, food vendors,    as a stand alone use on    60 days on that site no
antique, rug, art, plant  the site                   matter if they are on the
sales, or other similar                              premises at the same time
retail uses                                          or not)
                          Subject to the             Subject to the
Special event (temporary) requirements of Utah Code  requirements of Utah Code
beer sales                Annotated section 32B-1-   Annotated section 32B-9-
                          202                        304
                          Allowed if the use is
                          permitted in the zone and
                          accessory to the principal 8 consecutive days in a
Temporary auto sales      use or if no principal use calendar year per
                          exists, would be permitted applicant
                          as a stand alone use on
                          the site
                          Permitted upon issuance of Maximum temporary use
                          a building permit for a    permit period shall be 12
Temporary trailer for     permanent structure and    months. The permit may be
retail sales and/or       facilities on the affected renewed and extended upon
office space              site. Shall also include   planning commission review
                          installation of adequate   up to 6 month increments
                          temporary parking
 
 
   E.   Application For Temporary/Special Use Permit: An application for a
temporary/special use permit shall be made to the community development
department at least ten (10) business days prior to the date of requested use.
The community development department may issue or deny the application for a
temporary/special use permit. In authorizing a temporary/special use, the
community development department shall impose such requirements and conditions
as considered necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the
public safety and welfare in conformance with standards as provided in this
section.
      1.   Information Required For Application: An application for a
temporary/special use permit shall be accompanied by the following information:
         a.   Description: A written description of the proposed use including
requested length of permit and hours of operation.
         b.   Authorization For Use: If the applicant is not the owner of the
property, the ownership shall be identified along with evidence of permission
of the owner for such temporary/special use to take place.
         c.   Site Review: A vicinity map and plot plan with sufficient
information to determine the yard requirements, sanitary facilities, and
availability of parking to serve the use.
      2.   Bond Required: Bond requirements are set forth in the city business
licensing ordinance.
   F.   Revocation Of Temporary/Special Use Permit:
      1.   The director is empowered to suspend or revoke the temporary/special
use permit of any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or
any of the conditions set forth on their permit.
      2.   If at any time a permit under the provisions of this chapter is
suspended or revoked, it shall thereafter be unlawful for any person to
operate, open, maintain, manage, or conduct such affected temporary/special use
until a new permit is granted. (Ord. 12-26, 10-17-2012)
13.11.130: GARAGE SALES:
The following standards shall apply to all garage sales at residences within
the city:
   A.   Frequency: There shall be no more than two (2) garage sales at a
residence per calendar year. The "calendar year" is defined as January 1
through December 31. Garage sale events must be separated by at least a
fourteen (14) day period.
   B.   Duration Of Sale: A garage sale is permitted for a period no longer
than forty eight (48) consecutive hours.
   C.   Location Of Garage Sale: The garage sales shall be located at the
actual residence of the owner of the materials to be sold. At a neighborhood
garage sale event, i.e., three (3) to five (5) neighbors pool their belongings
into a super garage sale, the materials must be located at the residence of
only one of the participating sellers.
   D.   Goods To Be Sold: The items that are permitted to be sold must be used
items from that residence. Items purchased or obtained from other locations
with the intent to be resold at a garage sale are prohibited and a violation of
this section.
   E.   Temporary Sales: Temporary sales within commercial areas are permitted
as regulated elsewhere in this code. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.11.140: MODEL HOMES:
The following standards shall apply to all model homes within the city:
   A.   Location: Model homes are only allowed within city approved and
recorded residential developments of five (5) units or more. They must be
located on a platted lot or site within the advertised development.
   B.   Duration: Model homes may be operated for no more than two (2) years
from first occupancy of a dwelling unit in the development or until the second
to last unit is sold within the advertised development, whichever comes first.
The director may approve an extension on a case by case basis.
   C.   Construction Standards: Model homes must comply with all standards and
conditions of approval for the advertised development including building
materials, setbacks, landscaping, etc., and must comply with all applicable
residential dwelling standards upon discontinued use as a sales office. (Ord.
12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.11.150: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
   A.   Purpose Of Provisions: It is the purpose and objective of this section
that the city establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
location of sexually oriented businesses in areas deleterious to the city; to
regulate the signage of such businesses; and to control the adverse effects of
such signage. This section is to be construed as a regulation of time, place
and manner of the operation of these businesses, consistent with the
limitations provided by provisions of the constitutions of the United States
and the state of Utah.
   B.   Definitions: As used in this section:
PUBLIC PARK: A park, playground, swimming pool, or athletic field which is
under the control, operation or management of the state, a state agency, a
county agency, or a municipality. For purposes of this section, public park
does not include golf courses.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building which is used primarily for religious worship
and related religious activities.
SCHOOL: A public institution of learning or instruction primarily catering to
minors, which is accredited as such by the state of Utah. This definition shall
include kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools, middle high
schools, senior high schools, or any special institution of learning under the
jurisdiction of the Utah state department of education, but shall not include
home occupations represented as schools, trade schools, charm schools, dancing
schools, music schools or similar limited schools, nor public or private
universities or colleges.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Shall have the same meaning as defined in the
city's sexually oriented business and employee licensing ordinance.
   C.   Businesses Permitted; Restrictions:
      1.   Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted only in areas zoned
industrial district (ID), subject to the following additional restrictions:
         a.   No sexually oriented business shall be located within six hundred
sixty feet (660') from any agricultural or residential zone, public school,
public park, or religious institution. The above distance shall be reduced to
two hundred fifty feet (250') if the sexually oriented business is separated
from any agricultural or residential zone, public school, public park, or
religious institution by any principal arterial transportation corridor as
identified in the Taylorsville general plan.
         b.   The distance requirements for this section shall be measured in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest
property line of the public school, public park, religious institution,
agricultural zoning district, or residential zoning district.
      2.   Escort agencies shall be permitted only in the ID zone as an office
use only.
   D.   Sign Restrictions: Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in
chapter 13.26 of this title, signs for sexually oriented businesses shall be
limited as follows:
      1.   No more than one exterior sign shall be allowed;
      2.   No sign shall be allowed to exceed eighteen (18) square feet;
      3.   No animation, flashing or strobing lights, shall be permitted on or
around any sign, or on the exterior walls or roof of such premises;
      4.   No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment on the
premises shall be displayed in window areas or in any area where they can be
viewed from the sidewalk in front of the building;
      5.   Only flat signs shall be permitted;
      6.   Painted wall advertising shall not be allowed;
      7.   A one square foot sign may be placed on the door to state hours of
operation and admittance to adults only.
   E.   Severability: If any provision or clause of this section or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction,
such invalidity shall not affect other sections, provisions, clauses or
applications hereof which can be implemented without the invalid provision,
clause or application hereof, and to this end the provisions and clauses of
this section are declared to be severable. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.11.160: STANDARDS FOR CHURCH DEVELOPMENT IN ALL ZONES:
   A.   Development Standards:
      1.   Location Of Sites: All church sites shall be located adjacent to
streets which are a minimum of fifty feet (50') wide. No church shall be
located where access is less than the above except for churches which can show
that members will come from the local neighborhoods so that traffic impacts are
lessened.
      2.   Access: Churches are encouraged to be located where there is access
to two (2) streets (corner lots) and are subject to site plan review.
      3.   Parcel Size: No minimum parcel size is required, however, the parcel
chosen for a church must be adequate to meet all of the development standards
to be listed below that include, but are not limited to, setbacks, landscaping,
parking, improvements, and dedications.
      4.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   Commercial Zone:
            (1)   Front: Thirty feet (30') from property line. (If project
fronts on more than 1 street, setback applies to all street frontages.)
            (2)   Side and rear: Minimum ten feet (10') unless located adjacent
to a Residential Zone. In this case, the minimum setback must be thirty feet
(30').
         b.   Residential Zone:
            (1)   Front: Thirty feet (30') from front property line. (If
project is on a corner lot, setbacks are 30 feet on 1 street and 20 feet on the
other.)
            (2)   Side and rear: Follow setbacks required according to zone
property is in. A greater setback may be needed as may be deemed necessary by
the Planning Commission by larger structures.
      5.   Building Height: Maximum building height shall follow zoning that
the project is in. Thirty five feet (35') is the maximum height in a
Residential Zone or in any zone adjacent to a Residential Zone (not including
chimneys, steeples and the like).
      6.   Landscaping Setbacks:
         a.   Front: Thirty feet (30') minimum from property line. (If on a
corner lot in a Residential Zone, 20 feet on shorter setback side.)
         b.   Sides and rear: Five feet (5') minimum.
         c.   Landscaping in the front areas shall also include the park strip
adjacent to the curb including grass and street trees (minimum 2 inch caliper
and spaced 30 feet on center).
         d.   Landscaping shall also be required within the parking lot itself
where large expanses of asphalt occur. There shall be a minimum of one 10-foot
wide planter within the parking lot area where over one hundred twenty five
(125) linear feet of asphalt occurs.
      7.   Fencing: Acceptable fence types shall include vinyl, precast
concrete, decorative iron, architecturally designed brick or block.
      8.   Parking:
         a.   All parking for church facilities shall be on site.
         b.   No parking is permitted within the front landscape setback.
      9.   Trash Enclosures And Accessory (Maintenance Or Storage) Buildings:
         a.   All trash bins shall be surrounded with six foot (6') high
masonry or precast enclosures to match the main building with solid metal
gates. Trash enclosures may be combined with accessory (maintenance or storage)
buildings. The setback of such structure shall be at least the same as the
minimum required front landscape setback, but in no case shall trash enclosures
be located any closer than ten feet (10') to a Residential District lot line or
five feet (5') to a Commercial District lot line.
         b.   Accessory (maintenance or storage) buildings shall be built of
the same materials as the main building (siding and roofing) so as to blend in
with the entire project. Minimum setbacks to the front property line(s) shall
be the same as the main building. Buildings adjacent to a side or rear property
line (other than a street side of the property), which are built of one hour
fire rated construction, can be considered an accessory structure and may be
set back as close as three feet (3') to a side or rear property line.
      10.   Lighting: All lighting for church buildings, parking lots, and
accessory uses, if applicable, shall be downlit and minimize any adverse impact
on adjacent residential areas.
   B.   Ancillary Uses: Ancillary uses such as parks, ball diamonds, pavilions,
etc., shall not count toward landscaping on the church site but shall stand
alone and be considered as a separate site and subject to separate conditional
use approval. Any such ancillary uses are subject to, but not limited to, the
standards of this Code (if applicable).
   C.   Procedure For Approval: All church sites are subject to site plan
review by the staff. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.11.170: FOOD TRUCKS/CATERING TRUCKS AND STREET VENDORS AS MOBILE BUSINESSES:
   A.   Purpose: This section is established to provide regulation and design
standards for permitted mobile businesses in commercial or industrial land use
areas, except as otherwise allowed herein. These regulations are designed to
expand the opportunity of various types of temporary mobile businesses in the
City, while guiding them to appropriate locations, and ensuring they are
conducted safely and in harmony with the surrounding land uses.
   B.   General Requirements: The following requirements must be met for all
mobile businesses. Provisions found in this section shall not apply to other
uses identified as "temporary use" that are specifically regulated in this
title.
      1.   No person shall operate a mobile business without obtaining a
business license from the City of Taylorsville in accordance with this title.
Licenses will expire on the earliest date of expiration of the required health
or safety inspections, or one year from the date of issuance.
      2.   No alcohol shall be provided/sold by a mobile business.
      3.   Mobile businesses shall be allowed to operate on property within all
commercial or industrial land use areas, in accordance with the provisions of
this section. Each business shall abide by the following:
         a.   Property owner consent is required for every location a mobile
business or street vendor desires to operate.
         b.   Acceptable space shall be available for any off-street parking
and traffic circulation generated by the uses. The location and use of a site
may not interfere with the existing parking demand and circulation of the
surrounding development.
         c.   Prior to operating a food truck or street vending business on a
vacant lot (where there is no current licensed business with a permanent
structure on-site) the improvements outlined within this title for temporary
uses are required.
         d.   If a mobile business will operate more than ten (10) hours a week
at the same private property location a site plan submission to the City of
Taylorsville will be required. The site plan shall include parking, traffic
circulation patterns, pedestrian access, right-of-way, restroom facilities,
distances between adjacent property owners and other materials deemed
applicable by the Director for review.
      4.   Food trucks and street vendors may be allowed to operate in the
public right-of-way in accordance with the provisions in this section and with
written authorization from the City of Taylorsville or any other governmental
agency with jurisdiction over the right-of-way. Authorization from UDOT will be
required as part of the City review process for any mobile food business
operating within a UDOT right-of-way. Each business seeking to operate within
the public right-of-way shall abide by the following conditions and
requirements.
         a.   A special events permit must be obtained from the City to operate
a business in the right-of-way. Said permission may be granted if an applicant
can demonstrate compliance with the regulations in this section.
         b.   Mobile food businesses shall obey all on-street parking and
traffic regulations as stated in State Statute and/or City ordinances.
         c.   Parking on a sidewalk, park strip, or other landscaped area is
not allowed.
         d.   Mobile food businesses utilizing parking space within the public
right-of-way shall park only in parallel parking spaces. Mobile food businesses
must be parked so that neither the vehicle nor the customers interfere with
public access to adjacent parking stalls or to driveways or entrances of
existing buildings or uses.
         e.   The operator shall locate the vending window facing the sidewalk
or on private property unless the roadway has been closed to vehicular traffic
for a public event.
         f.   No mobile food business shall create a parking issue for the
surrounding primary uses.
         g.   No sales shall be made to any person standing in a roadway unless
the roadway has been closed to vehicular traffic for a public event.
         h.   Mobile food businesses shall not operate on public streets where
the speed limit exceeds thirty five (35) miles per hour, unless the roadway has
been closed to vehicular traffic for a public event, nor locations that are
otherwise deemed hazardous by the City Engineer.
         i.   When locating on public property, each applicant for a license or
renewal under this chapter shall submit, with the application, a certificate of
insurance executed by an insurance company or association authorized to
transact business in this State, showing that there is in full force and
effect, for the full term of the license, general liability insurance in the
amount not less than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for personal
injury to each person, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for each
occurrence, and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for each occurrence
involving property damage; or a single limit policy of not less than five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) covering all claims per occurrence. Such
policy or policies shall also include coverage of all motor vehicles used in
connection with applicant's business and the coverage shall be primary. A
current certificate of insurance shall be kept on file with the Business
License Administrator at all times that applicant is licensed by the City
verifying such continuing coverage and naming Taylorsville City, its officers,
officials, and employees as additional insureds. The certificate shall contain
a statement that the City will be given written notification at least thirty
(30) days prior to cancellation or material change in the coverage.
Cancellation shall constitute grounds for suspensions or revocation of the
license issued hereunder unless another insurance policy complying herewith is
provided and is in effect at the time. In the case of a mobile food court, a
certificate of insurance would be required for each vehicle.
         j.   A signed statement that the licensee shall hold the City and its
officers and employees harmless from any and all liability and shall indemnify
the City and its officers and employees from any claims for damage to property
or injury to persons arising from any activity carried on under the terms of
the license.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any mobile food business to operate
adjacent to or in a public park, or in an OS Zone, without a special events
permit from the City of Taylorsville. Authorization does not supersede or
replace the requirement that the business obtain a Taylorsville City business
license.
      6.   The business shall ensure that its use of the right-of-way,
including the sidewalk, in no way interferes with or limits sidewalk users'
free and unobstructed passage. Vendor must maintain clear, continuous sidewalk
width of no less than four feet (4').
      7.   Must not be located within:
         a.   Ten feet (10') of any fire hydrant;
         b.   Ten feet (10') of any bus or transit stop;
         c.   Ten feet (10') or one stall away from any handicap parking space
or access ramp;
         d.   Ten feet (10') from any curb cut;
         e.   Ten feet (10') from any other mobile food business or street
vendor;
         f.   Thirty feet (30') from any intersection or driveway; and
      8.   The business license, fire inspection certificate, and Health
Department inspection must be displayed in a visible location on the vehicle,
trailer, or cart. The vehicle, trailer, or cart must also have the license
plate, proof of insurance coverage, safety inspection, and vehicular
registration.
      9.   The business may operate from several locations (both public and
private) within the City under the same business license.
      10.   All business activity related to mobile food businesses shall be of
a temporary nature, the duration of which shall not extend for more than twelve
(12) hours within any twenty four (24) hour period at any one location, unless
the Director approves a longer time on either public or private property. All
vehicles, trailers, or carts must be removed from the public right-of-way or
private property at the close of each business day. The hours of operation
shall be restricted to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.,
unless approved by the Director if one or more of the following conditions are
met:
         a.   The extended hours are part of an approved special event.
         b.   The location is a site that contains a business that has been
approved for extended hours.
      11.   The business shall not have or operate as a drive-thru.
      12.   The mobile food vehicle, trailer, or cart shall be kept in a good
operating condition and no peeling paint or rust shall be visible.
      13.   Any auxiliary power required for the operation of the mobile food
business shall be self-contained. The use of power or water located in private
property is not allowed, unless the property owner grants permission.
      14.   It is illegal to discharge or dispose of any substance, material,
food, or waste into the storm drain system.
      15.   All garbage or other refuse generated from a mobile food business
shall be disposed of properly. All grounds utilized by a mobile food business
shall at all times be maintained in a clean and attractive condition. Trash
containers shall be provided for use of the business patrons. The mobile food
business shall be responsible for cleaning up litter dropped or discarded prior
to leaving the location.
      16.   Signage shall be allowed as part of the design of the vehicle,
trailer, or cart itself or upon the canopy or umbrella. One menu board A-frame
sign may be used with a maximum size of 3' x 4'. Signs shall not block or
impede pedestrian traffic.
      17.   Professional or personal services shall not be provided from a
mobile food business or street vendor.
      18.   All vendors are subject to the Taylorsville City Sales Tax for
goods sold within the boundaries of the City. Vendors shall be required to keep
accurate records of daily sales that occur within the City limits. Taylorsville
City reserves the right to audit sales records. Failure to keep accurate
records may result in revocation of the Taylorsville City business license.
   C.   Operation And Design: Mobile food businesses shall comply with the
following design and operational requirements:
      1.   Any canopy extensions must be integrated into the design of the
mobile food business vehicle and must not project onto or over the public
sidewalk or any other part of the public right- of-way in a way that impedes
pedestrian passage or is lower than seven feet (7') measured from the lowest
portion of the canopy to the sidewalk or ground surface. Walled enclosures,
whether hard or soft, are not authorized. Chairs and tables are not allowed in
the public right-of-way.
      2.   Licensees/owners will ensure their business vehicles are at all
times in compliance with all applicable laws or ordinances regulating motor
vehicles.
   D.   Street Vendor Carts: Street vendor carts shall comply with the
following design standards:
      1.   Umbrellas or canopies shall be a minimum of seven feet (7') and a
maximum of ten feet (10') above the sidewalk if they extend beyond the edge of
the cart.
      2.   Umbrellas or canopies shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet
in area.
      3.   The cart shall not exceed three and one-half feet (3.5') in width
and eight feet (8') in length, including the hitch. The height of the mobile
device or push cart, excluding canopies, umbrellas, or transparent enclosures,
shall not exceed five feet (5').
   E.   Special Events: The restrictions of this chapter notwithstanding,
nothing herein shall prohibit the City from authorizing mobile food businesses
other than those licensed under this section, to conduct concurrent vending
operations within the public right-of-way, or such other areas as the City may
deem appropriate, during special events. The special event vendors shall still
be governed by this section, except as specifically provided otherwise by the
special event permit or such other ordinance, policy, or executive order as may
be applicable. However, as long as the public right-of-way remains open to the
general public, such authorization or special event vendors shall not require
removal of a permittee under this section from operating within an otherwise
lawfully occupied location of a mutually acceptable adjacent alternative
location during such special event, unless otherwise provided under City
ordinances. If the City is closing a public right-of-way to general access,
either partially or fully, in order to accommodate a special event, a mobile
food business may not access that right-of-way unless specifically authorized
by the City.
   F.   Failure To Comply: Failure to comply with the requirements of this
section shall be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a business
license as described in this title. Failure to comply may result in the
suspension or revocation of a business license, and is a Class B misdemeanor.
(Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.11.180: NONDEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS:
Nondepository institutions are subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   Shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the same type
of use inside or outside the City geographical boundaries. This distance shall
be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening streets, from the
entry door of each business.
   B.   Shall conform to the architectural design standards as described in
chapter 13.37, "Design Standards", of this title. In addition to these
guidelines, the following will also be required: The color of the building
shall be restricted to earth tones or shall match the design theme of the
center in which it is a part.
      1.   At least twenty five percent (25%) of the first floor facade that
faces a public street or sidewalk shall be windows or doors of clear or lightly
tinted glass that allows views into and out of the building at eye level.
      2.   The use of bars, chains, or similar security devices that are
visible from a public street or sidewalk shall be prohibited.
      3.   The use of neon lighting shall be prohibited on the building
exterior exclusive of building signage.
   C.   Shall conform to the sign regulations as described in this Code.
   D.   Shall be limited to one nondepository institution per ten thousand
(10,000) in population to include all residents in the City. The total
population figures shall be based on the U.S. Census Bureau's annual estimates.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.11.190: SATELLITE DISHES/EARTH STATIONS:
   A.   Scope And Applicability: Earth station regulations shall apply to earth
stations with a dish diameter over four feet (4') in size.
   B.   Location:
      1.   Residential Districts: Location of earth stations over four feet
(4') in diameter in Residential Districts:
         a.   Ground Mounted In All Residential Districts:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Maximum height from grade to the top of the
dish shall be twelve feet (12'). Any ground mounted earth station with a height
exceeding twelve feet (12') shall be allowed only with a non-administrative
conditional use approval. The overall height of the structure shall not exceed
the maximum height limits established within the zone in which the earth
station is to be located.
            (2)   Number Per Lot: A maximum of one earth station structure
shall exist at any one time on any residentially zoned property.
            (3)   Front Yard: Not allowed.
            (4)   Rear And Side Yards: Earth stations shall be located in rear
yards, where possible. If rear yards are not acceptable for proper reception of
signals, the earth station may be located in either side yard and screened
properly.
            (5)   Corner Lots: On corner lots, an earth station may be situated
to the rear of the main dwelling and within the area between the main building
and street when approved as a non-administrative conditional use.
            (6)   Easements, Rights-Of-Way: No earth station shall be located
on any legally recorded public utility easement right-of-way.
            (7)   Multi-Family: One earth station shall be allowed per
building. A second earth station may be allowed as a non- administrative
conditional use approval.
   FIGURE 5
   GROUND STATION LOCATIONS IN
   MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3756.png]
         b.   Roof Mounted In All Residential Zones:
            (1)   Approval: If the rear and side yards are deemed unacceptable
for suitable signal reception, then roof mounted earth stations may be
permitted with non-administrative conditional use review and approval. Such
roof installations must meet the following criteria:
               (A)   Roof mounted earth stations shall be mounted directly upon
the roof of a primary structure and shall not be mounted upon appurtenances
such as chimneys, towers, trees, poles, or spires.
               (B)   The height of the structure shall not exceed the maximum
height limits established within the zone in which the earth station is to be
located.
               (C)   Evidence of wind loading and structural safety of the
earth station shall be provided to the Planning Commission by the applicant.
               (D)   An earth station mounted on a roof shall be located on the
portion of the roof which is oriented to the rear yard rather than located on
the portion of the roof visible from the street.
               (E)   Other criteria as deemed appropriate by the Planning
Commission.
      2.   Commercial And Industrial Districts: Location of earth stations over
four feet (4') in diameter in Commercial and Industrial Districts:
         a.   Ground Mounted In Commercial And Industrial Districts:
            (1)   Maximum Height: Maximum height from grade to the top of the
dish shall be fifteen feet (15'). Any earth station with a height exceeding
fifteen feet (15') shall be allowed only with a non- administrative conditional
use approval.
            (2)   Number Allowed: Two (2) earth station structures shall be
permitted at any one time per separate commercial or industrial business,
unless approved by the Planning Commission.
            (3)   Advertising: No earth station shall display lettering or
numbers for advertising purposes.
            (4)   Rear And Side Yards: An earth station in any Commercial or
Industrial District shall be located in the rear or side yard area, if
possible.
            (5)   Front Yards: Not allowed.
            (6)   Easements, Rights-Of-Way: No earth station shall be located
on any legally recorded public utility easement or right-of-way.
         b.   Roof Mounted In All Commercial And Industrial Zones:
            (1)   Approval: If the front, rear, and side yards are deemed
unacceptable for suitable signal reception or pose a negative aesthetic or
neighborhood impact, then roof mounted earth stations may be permitted with a
non-administrative conditional use review and approval. Such roof installations
may be permitted under the following criteria:
               (A)   Roof mounted earth stations shall be mounted directly upon
the roof of a primary structure and shall not be mounted upon appurtenances
such as chimneys, towers, trees, poles which exceed the minimum height of mast
required to mount the antennas to the roof, spires, or similar structures.
               (B)   The height of a roof mounted earth station located in any
Commercial or Industrial District shall not exceed twelve feet (12') above the
highest point of the roof upon which the structure is located. Height increases
over twelve feet (12') may be approved by the Planning Commission as deemed
appropriate. The roof mounted earth station shall not exceed the maximum height
limits established within the zone in which the earth station is to be located.
               (C)   Other criteria as deemed appropriate by the Planning
Commission.
               (D)   All roof mounted earth stations shall be screened from
view from adjacent streets and properties in the same manner as is required of
all other roof mounted equipment in this Code. Said station shall not
significantly change the architectural character of the structure. (Ord. 18-26,
10-17-2018)
13.11.200: SOLAR EQUIPMENT:
These regulations shall apply to all solar heating developments, private or
public, to the extent that design review is not preempted by State or Federal
law.
   A.   Review And Standards: All applications for building permits for
structures with solar installations shall be forwarded to the Community
Development Department for review and approval. The proposed installation will
be reviewed to assure compliance with the following standards:
      1.   Reflection Of Sunlight: Collectors shall not reflect sunlight into
neighboring windows.
      2.   Height: The installation shall extend no higher than roof ridgeline,
or on a flat roof, a parapet wall.
      3.   Installation:
         a.   Residential installation shall stand no more than two feet (2')
above the surface of the roof.
         b.   Commercial installation shall stand no more than five feet (5')
above the surface of the roof and must be properly screened.
      4.   Color: The color of collector frames shall be compatible with the
roof.
      5.   Piping: The piping shall blend with the surface to which it is
attached.
      6.   Measures To Conceal Visibility: The ends of the panel arrays shall
be covered and mounting brackets shall blend with the roof and not be visible
from the front yard.
   B.   Administrative Review: The applicant shall provide the following
documentation for building permit review:
      1.   Site plan.
      2.   Drawings showing existing building elevations.
      3.   Landscaping and screening plans.
      4.   The kind, color, and texture of materials to be used.
      5.   Any other pertinent information determined to be necessary by the
Director. (Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.11.210: WIND CONVERSION:
Wind energy conversion systems shall meet the following standards:
   A.   Minimum tower setback from any property line shall equal the height of
the tower.
   B.   Towers shall meet main dwelling setbacks for the particular zone in
which the tower is located.
   C.   There shall be sufficient safety measures to prevent the tower from
becoming a climbing hazard.
   D.   Roof mounted units shall extend no more than six feet (6') above the
main roofline.
   E.   The tower shall not be located in a utility easement or right- of-way.
   F.   In the case of joint ownership of a tower, the structure may be located
on any lot(s) as approved by the chief building official, provided the tower
meets setback requirements mentioned above in respect to all perimeter
properties.
   G.   The owner shall obtain a building permit and certification by a
registered engineer as to the safety of equipment and installation. (Ord. 12-
15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.11.220: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to address planning issues
brought on by the rapid growth in demand for low power wireless
telecommunications services. This section establishes provisions that deal with
issues of demand, visual mitigation, engineering, residential impacts, health,
safety, and facility siting.
   B.   Application: The requirements of this section apply to commercial and
private wireless telecommunication facilities. For the purpose of this section
and application wireless telecommunication facilities or telecommunication
facilities shall include but not be limited to small wireless facilities,
monopoles, whip antennas, utility pole antennas, and roof and wall mounted
equipment. All telecommunication facilities shall comply with the following
regulations and all other ordinances of the City and any pertinent regulations
of the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Aviation
Administration. (Ord. 18-17, 8-1-2018; amd. Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
   C.   Franchise Agreement; Bond:
      1.   Franchise Agreement: A wireless telecommunication facility provider
shall enter into a Franchise Agreement with the City prior to installation of
facilities if the facility will be: a) located within the public right-of-way;
b) collocated on public infrastructure; or c) collocated upon another
franchisee's infrastructure. This agreement may not be assigned to any third
party, contractor, or subsidiary under any circumstances without the written
consent of the City.
         a.   As part of the Franchise Agreement, a wireless telecommunication
facility provider will be required to provide sufficient documentation to prove
that it has the financial solvency to complete its proposed facilities
installation and to operate and maintain its facilities. The City, at the
City's sole discretion, will make a final determination as to whether provided
documentation is sufficient to prove such financial solvency. Financial
solvency may be proved by: 1) providing financial statements for the wireless
telecommunication facility provider; 2) providing an opinion letter from a
certified public accountant or other financial advisor attesting to the
wireless telecommunication facility provider's financial solvency; or 3)
providing any other documentation in accordance to generally accepted practices
of the local industry to prove financial solvency.
         b.   As part of the Franchise Agreement, a wireless telecommunication
facility provider will be required to provide a list of provider-approved,
licensed contractors and sub- contractors the wireless telecommunication
facility provider intends to use to install, operate and maintain its wireless
telecommunication facilities. The wireless telecommunication facility provider
shall have a continuing obligation to keep an updated list of contractors and
subcontractors on file with the City at all times. The City shall not issue any
permit to an applicant who is not listed on the approved contractor and sub-
contractor list.
      2.   Bond: The City shall require a wireless telecommunications facility
provider to post a bond in accordance with applicable State and local law. The
bond and applicable documentation must be submitted prior to issuance of
permits.
   D.   Telecommunication Facility Master Plan Required: A Master Plan shall be
submitted for each type of telecommunication facility proposed by the applicant
and shall include the entire above and below ground network. The network could
consist of but is not limited to fiber, cable, conduits, vaults, boxes,
pedestals, H-frames, poles, nodes, and wireless telecommunication facilities as
well as supporting electrical and other utility connections. The Master Plan
shall show proposed locations of future telecommunication facilities for the
next five (5) years. The Master Plan shall include the rationale for each
potential facility. Maps shall be utilized to graphically illustrate the
coverage radius of each potential telecommunication facility. The Master Plan
shall be submitted, along with a complete application, to the Community
Development Department for preliminary review. The Development Review Committee
shall make a recommendation regarding the Master Plan to the Community
Development Director. Permits will not be granted without approval of the
entire Master Plan network. (Ord. 19-03, 4-3-2019)
   E.   Telecommunication Facility Master Plan Requirements: A
telecommunication facility Master Plan shall be completed for each type of
telecommunication facility. The Master Plan shall include:
      1.   Rationale: The rationale for the selection of the proposed
telecommunication facility and a review of any feasible alternative sites for
the proposed facilities. The Master Plan shall include: a) technical reasons
for the design of each proposed wireless telecommunication facility and efforts
made to minimize impacts on the surrounding land uses, b) a listing of other
telecommunication facilities within the search ring which were evaluated, and
c) a statement of reasons why the final location for each wireless
telecommunication facility was chosen. Staff may request the search ring and
propagation information for the proposed telecommunication facilities. The
applicant shall justify that the telecommunication facilities comply with the
City's general plan, as well as applicable Design Standards.
      2.   Collocation: The Master Plan shall also examine the potential for
collocation at an existing or the proposed telecommunication facility. If
collocation is not possible at an existing telecommunication facility or if the
proposed new telecommunication facility is not available for collocation, then
the applicant shall include a written explanation why collocation is not
possible.
      3.   Height: The height of the antennas and antenna support structures
shall be justified through a detailed written analysis that explains in
nontechnical terms the reasons why service cannot be effectively provided
unless at the requested height. If the proposed telecommunication facility is a
roof mount or wall mount, the City may request that the study verify that the
existing or proposed screening will screen from view all telecommunication
facilities.
      4.   Equipment Facilities: The Master Plan must include a detailed
written explanation and analysis, not limited to fiscal reasons alone, of the
potential for the equipment facilities to be either:
         a.   Located in an existing building; or
         b.   Designed using stealth design technology or other visual
screening is utilized that readily conceals the appearance of the equipment
facilities.
      5.   Visual Analysis: The applicant shall submit a visual analysis which
may include photo simulation, field mock up, or other techniques which identify
the potential for visual impacts of the proposed telecommunications facility.
The analysis shall consider views from public areas (streets, parks, etc.) and
from private residences. The analysis shall assess the cumulative impacts of
the proposed telecommunications facility and other existing or approved
telecommunications facilities in the areas as provided by City staff and shall
identify all mitigation measures consistent with the technical aspects and
requirements of the proposed telecommunications facility. Proposed color and
design shall be included in the analysis including pole attachments, wiring,
conduit, pedestals and any other structures associated with the proposed
telecommunication. All costs associated with this requirement are to be borne
by the applicant.
      6.   Independent Review: The City may, if it deems necessary, cause each
telecommunications facility to be reviewed by a qualified radio frequency
engineer. The purpose of the review is to determine if other locations are
available to achieve an equivalent signal distribution and not significantly
affect the operation of the telecommunications facility. Such a review may be
required when an applicant indicates that no other acceptable location exists.
The costs of any such review shall be borne by the applicant.
   F.   Application Process: A complete application shall include an accurately
scaled site plan showing the right-of-way; easements; authorization from
property owners or applicable reviewing agencies; elevations including height
justification; design and color; structural calculations; photo simulations;
and other documents as deemed necessary by the City to assess compliance with
this title. The applicant shall be required to sign an affidavit acknowledging
that the approval of the wireless telecommunication facility is valid for one
year and that the equipment shall be installed within one year from when the
building permit was issued. If the applicant fails to install equipment within
one year the applicant will need to re-apply to the City per the requirements
set forth in this section.
   G.   Permitted Uses: The following telecommunications facilities are
classified as permitted uses. Any request for telecommunications facilities
differing from the standards as allowed in this section shall require a
technical necessity exception from the Planning Commission. All
telecommunications facilities must comply with the City's general plan as well
as the Design Standards. All permitted use equipment facilities listed in this
section shall be located in an existing building, shall be designed using
stealth technology, or shall utilize visual concealment measures to screen the
appearance of the wireless telecommunication facility.
      1.   City Property: Telecommunications facilities located on City owned
property are allowed as a permitted use provided the facilities meet the
standards as specified for each type of facility as contained in this section,
are compliant with the Design Standards, and the facility owner has entered
into a Franchise Agreement with the City.
      2.   Wall Mounted Antenna: Wall mounted antennas which comply with the
following standards are allowed as a permitted use:
         a.   Locations: Located on a structure in a Commercial, Industrial, or
Professional Office District.
         b.   Mounting Method: Wall mounted antennas shall not extend above the
wall line of the building or extend more than four feet (4') horizontally from
the face of the building.
         c.   Stealth Design: Antennas, equipment facilities, and the antenna
support structure shall be constructed with stealth design to match the color
of the building or structure and to be architecturally compatible with the
building or to match the color of the background against which they are most
commonly seen.
      3.   Roof Mounted Antenna: Roof mounted antennas which comply with the
following standards are permitted uses:
         a.   Locations: Located on a structure in a Commercial, Industrial, or
Professional Office District.
         b.   Mounting Location:
            (1)   Roof mounted antennas may be located on top of existing
penthouses or mechanical equipment rooms provided the telecommunications
facilities are enclosed by a structure that creates a visual screen. The
screening structure and telecommunications facilities shall not extend more
than eight feet (8') above the existing roofline of the penthouse or mechanical
equipment room.
            (2)   For roof mounted antennas not mounted on a penthouse or
mechanical equipment room, the telecommunications facilities shall be mounted
at least five feet (5') from the exterior wall of a building. For antennas
mounted between five feet (5') and ten feet (10') from the exterior wall, the
maximum height of a roof mounted antenna is directly proportional to the
distance the antenna is set back from the exterior wall up to a maximum height
of ten feet (10') above the roofline of the building to which the antenna is
attached.
            (3)   Telecommunications facilities shall be mounted at least five
feet (5') behind any parapet wall. For antennas mounted between five feet (5')
and ten feet (10') behind a parapet wall, the maximum height of the antenna is
directly proportional to the distance the antenna is set back from the wall up
to a maximum of ten feet (10') as measured from the top of the parapet wall.
         c.   Screening: Roof mounted telecommunications facilities shall be
located only on a flat roof and shall be screened, constructed, and/or colored
to match the structure to which they are attached. Roof mounted
telecommunications facilities for pitched roofs must receive a technical
necessity exception.
         d.   Area Limitations For Wall And Roof Mounted Antennas: A
combination of both roof and wall mounted antennas are allowed on a building.
The total area for all wall and roof mounted antennas and antenna support
structures combined shall not exceed forty (40) square feet for each exterior
wall of the building or a total of one hundred sixty (160) square feet per
building per carrier. A maximum of four (4) walls shall be occupied by
antennas. The total area is the sum of the area of each individual antenna
face, the visible portion of the antenna support structure, and the equipment
facility as viewed when looking directly at the face of the building. The total
area for a roof mounted antenna shall apply to the closest exterior wall. Up to
three (3) carriers may utilize each building side for a maximum of four (4)
sides as a permitted use.
         e.   Stealth Design: Antennas, equipment facilities, and the antenna
support structure shall be constructed with stealth design to match the color
of the building or structure and to be architecturally compatible with the
building or to match the color of the background against which they are most
commonly seen.
      4.   Collocation: Collocation of wireless telecommunication facilities is
a permitted use provided the equipment does not extend more than twelve inches
(12") from the existing structure and meets all the provisions as stated in the
Design Standards.
      5.   Stealth Design: Telecommunications facilities that incorporate
stealth design technology and are located on a parcel in a Commercial,
Industrial, or Professional Office District are a permitted use.
      6.   Conversion: Conversion of existing flagpoles, light standards,
athletic field lights, or other similar structures provided the structure's
height is not increased more than ten feet (10') or unless approved by the
Community Development Director as provided for in modified site plan review as
described in this title are a permitted use.
      7.   Agreement: All wireless telecommunication facility providers shall
be required to enter into a Franchise Agreement prior to installing a
telecommunication or small wireless facility in the City's rights-of-way. The
Community Development Director shall review the provider's Master Plan prior to
execution of any such franchise agreement.
      8.   Utility Pole Antennas: Utility pole antennas which comply with the
following standards are permitted uses. Equipment shall be designed and
installed by the provider according to City Design Standards and the utility
pole owner's specifications. Equipment may be located on existing utility poles
within the right-of-way, provided prior written authorization from the utility
pole owner has been provided. Mounted equipment shall have wiring contained
within the pole or conduit. Concealment measures such as color, material or
design shall be used to minimize visual impact.
      9.   New Small Wireless Facilities: Small wireless facilities which
comply with the following standards are permitted uses:
         a.   Location: New nodes may be located within the public right-of-
way provided the nodes comply with the Design Standards and Design District and
Historic Resources Overlay Zone requirements.
   H.   Technical Necessity Exception: If an applicant cannot meet the
standards for telecommunications facilities as provided for in subsection G,
"Permitted Uses", of this section for technical reasons, an applicant may
request a technical necessity exception from the Planning Commission. If an
applicant cannot or will not meet those standards for reasons other than
technical reasons, the use is not allowed. The burden of proof for obtaining a
technical necessity exception shall be placed upon the applicant.
Telecommunications facilities which meet the following standards as determined
by the Planning Commission may be granted a technical necessity exception:
      1.   General Plan And Ordinance Compliance: Comply with the general plan,
Design Standards and Design District and Historic Resources Overlay Zone
requirements, if applicable.
      2.   Antennas In Multi-Family Zones: Wall mount antennas, roof mount
antennas, and stealth applications on structures containing ten (10) or more
dwelling units and conversions shall require a technical necessity exception.
Antennas on structures containing less than ten (10) units are not allowed. The
antennas and their related antenna support structures and equipment facilities
must meet the design standards for each respective telecommunications facility
as referenced in subsection G, "Permitted Uses", of this section.
      3.   Monopoles: Monopoles are not allowed in any zone within the City
without a technical necessity exception being granted by the Planning
Commission. Following are the minimum standards for a monopole to qualify for a
technical necessity exception. The Planning Commission may impose additional
requirements pursuant to the review standards in this title.
         a.   Independent Review: All applications requesting a monopole under
the technical necessity exception provision shall complete an independent radio
frequency engineering review of the proposed monopole telecommunications
facility in relation to the requested height, alternative locations, other
proposed telecommunications facilities, and existing telecommunications
facilities. The cost of the independent review shall be borne by the applicant.
         b.   Antenna Sizing: The maximum visible width of antennas and antenna
support structures on a monopole shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height or
three feet (3') in width as viewed looking directly at the monopole at the same
elevation as the antennas and antenna support structure. Top hat design is not
permitted.
         c.   Location And Minimum Setbacks: Monopoles shall be allowed only in
the rear yard area of any commercial or industrial lot which contains a
commercial or industrial use or on City property. These structures shall not be
located in a required landscaped area, buffer area or required parking area. No
such antenna shall be located within one hundred sixty five feet (165') of a
residential property line. However, the Planning Commission may reduce the
required setback from a residential property line if practical difficulties are
demonstrated by the applicant, (e.g., City park location, public buildings,
etc.).
         d.   Height Limit: Monopoles shall not project higher than ten feet
(10') above the average building height to a maximum of eighty feet (80') or,
if there are no buildings within three hundred feet (300'), these monopoles
shall not project higher than ten feet (10') above the average tree canopy
height to a maximum of eighty feet (80'), measured from ground level.
         e.   Landscaping, Fencing, And Safety: Monopoles shall, at minimum, be
landscaped as per the requirements of the zoning district in which they are
located. If there are no buildings immediately adjacent to the monopole and
equipment facilities, all monopoles and equipment facilities shall be
surrounded by dense tree growth to screen view of the facility in all
directions. The Planning Commission may require additional landscaping or
fencing as part of the site plan approval. The climbing pegs shall be removed
from the lower twenty feet (20') of the monopole.
         f.   Exception: Monopoles may be allowed in PUD zones without
requiring a technical necessity exception if the following conditions are met:
            (1)   The PUD consists of at least one hundred (100) acres.
            (2)   The monopole and equipment facility are placed in an open
space or common area within the PUD.
            (3)   The location must be in a mature landscape area to provide a
screen and buffer. Alternatively, new landscaping must be provided around the
proposed monopole or other types of screening that may be approved by the
Community Development Director.
            (4)   Any proposed location, including all leased area for the
wireless facility, will no longer be considered open space. Therefore, any
proposed location must not reduce the open space below the minimum acreage for
the development.
            (5)   The monopole and equipment facility must utilize stealth
technology.
            (6)   The monopole shall not project higher than ten feet (10')
above the average building height or average tree canopy up to a maximum of
forty five feet (45'). The Community Development Director may increase the
height beyond ten feet (10') above the tree canopy if it is determined that
this will aid on compliance with stealth requirements. To provide for
additional carriers, clustering of multiple poles of varying heights is
encouraged.
            (7)   No antenna shall be located within one hundred sixty five
feet (165') of a residential property line or residence. However, the Community
Development Director may reduce the required setback from a residential
property line or residence if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed
facility would follow the City's standards for stealth applications more
closely or if they can demonstrate other practical difficulties.
            (8)   The applicant must demonstrate a technical need (explained in
simple terms) for the proposed monopole.
      4.   Wireless Telecommunication Facilities On Private Property: A
technical necessity exception review by the Planning Commission may be required
for wireless telecommunication facilities located on private property.
      5.   Additional Information: Information concerning the following shall
be submitted by the applicant and considered by the Planning Commission for all
technical necessity exception requests:
         a.   Compatibility of the proposed telecommunications facilities with
the height, color and mass of existing buildings and utility structures.
         b.   Whether it is possible to locate the antenna on other existing
structures with less aesthetic impact in the same vicinity such as other
monopoles, small wireless facilities, buildings, utility poles, athletic field
lights, parking lot lights, etc., without significantly impacting transmission
or reception.
         c.   The location of the telecommunications facilities in relation to
existing vegetation, topography, and buildings to obtain the best visual
screening.
         d.   Whether the spacing between the proposed and existing
telecommunications facilities creates detrimental impacts to adjoining
properties or streetscapes.
         e.   Substantial existing or proposed landscaping, including tree
cover, to reduce visibility of telecommunications facilities.
         f.   Whether the telecommunications facility complies with the City's
general plan and the Design Standards.
   I.   Equipment Facilities: All equipment facilities shall be located in an
existing building or designed whereby the incorporation of stealth design
technology or other screening is utilized that readily conceals the appearance
of the equipment facility. Small wireless facility H-frame pedestals are not
considered equipment facilities. All power lines on the lot leading to the
telecommunication facility shall be underground. If the Community Development
Director does not require the applicant to place the equipment facility
underground or utilize stealth design technology, then the telecommunications
facility shall be fenced with a six foot (6') vinyl coated chainlink fence or
other fencing and landscaping as approved or required by the Planning
Commission.
   J.   Design Districts And Historic Resources Overlay Zone: Any
telecommunications facility proposed within a Design District or Historic
Resources Overlay Zone must meet the requirements of the overlay zone and the
Design Standards. Telecommunication facilities proposed in these districts must
be reviewed by the Director.
   K.   Prohibited: The following telecommunications facilities are not allowed
in any zone district:
      1.   Lattice towers.
      2.   Whip antennas on wall mounted support structures.
      3.   Any telecommunications facility not specifically listed in the
permitted use subsection or not in compliance with the requirements for a
technical necessity exception.
   L.   Nonmaintained Or Abandoned Facilities: The Community Development
Director may require each nonmaintained or abandoned telecommunications
facility to be removed when such a telecommunications facility has not been
repaired or put into use by the owner, person having control, or person
receiving benefit of such structure within thirty (30) calendar days after
notice of nonmaintenance or abandonment is given to the owner, person having
control, or person receiving the benefit of such structure.
If the structure upon which an antenna is placed, including, but not limited
to, a utility pole, water tank, light pole, or building is no longer used or is
proposed by the owner or operator of that structure to be removed or replaced,
the antenna must be removed within ninety (90) calendar days after notice from
the City. Any replacement telecommunications facility, if necessary, is
required to comply with the requirements herein or any subsequent amendment
hereto.
   M.   Provider Requirements: It shall be the provider's sole responsibility
to remove, relocate and maintain wireless telecommunication facilities. The
following shall be included in this provision:
      1.   The provider shall, at its own expense, remove a wireless
telecommunication facility and associated equipment that is no longer needed by
the provider.
      2.   If the provider abandons a wireless telecommunication facility or
damages the right-of-way the provider shall, at its own expense, restore the
right-of-way to reasonable standards as determined by the City.
      3.   The provider shall, at its own expense, be responsible for the
removal and relocation of equipment in areas that interfere with a City
improvement project. The City shall provide written notice including a
reasonable timeframe to remove or relocate the equipment.
      4.   The City shall provide written notice to the provider regarding
removal, relocation, maintenance, damage or repair of a wireless
telecommunication facility; if the provider fails to take the required action
within the time frame stated on the written notice the City shall take the
required action. The City shall provide documentation to the provider for the
cost of the required action, and it shall be the responsibility of the provider
to pay for costs associated with the required action.
   N.   Building Permits: Prior to the construction of any telecommunications
facility, the applicant shall obtain building permits, road cut permits, and
other permits as required by the City.
   O.   Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Illustrations: The following
illustrations are referred to in this section. They are meant to demonstrate
graphically the intent of this section.
   FIGURE 6
   WALL MOUNTED ANTENNAS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3758.png]
   FIGURE 7
   ROOF MOUNTED ANTENNAS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3760.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3762.png]
   FIGURE 8
   MONOPOLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3764.png]
(Ord. 18-17, 8-1-2018; amd. Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.11.230: TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS:
   A.   Tobacco specialty business licenses shall not be issued if it is
located within:
      1.   One thousand feet (1,000') of a community location;
      2.   Six hundred feet (600') of another retail tobacco specialty
business; or
      3.   Six hundred feet (600') from property used or zoned for:
         a.   Agriculture.
         b.   Residential.
For purposes of this section, the proximity requirements shall be measured in a
straight line from the nearest entrance of the tobacco specialty business to
the nearest property boundary of the community location, or agricultural or
residential use or zone, without regard to intervening structures, roadways,
City boundaries, or zoning districts.
As used in this section "community location" means: a public or private
kindergarten, elementary, middle, junior high, or high school; a licensed
childcare facility or preschool; a trade or technical school; a church; a
public library; a public playground; a public park; a youth center or other
space used primarily for youth oriented activities; a public recreation
facility; or a public arcade.
   B.   Tobacco specialty businesses shall conform to the architectural design
standards as described in chapter 13.37, "Design Standards", of this title.
      1.   In addition to these guidelines, the following will also be
required: The color of the building shall be restricted to earth tones or shall
match the design theme of the center in which it is a part.
      2.   At least twenty five percent (25%) of the first floor facade that
faces a public street or sidewalk shall be windows or doors of clear or lightly
tinted glass that allows views into and out of the building at eye level.
      3.   The use of bars, chains, or similar security devices that are
visible from a public street or sidewalk shall be prohibited.
      4.   The use of neon lighting shall be prohibited on the building
exterior exclusive of building signage.
   C.   Tobacco specialty businesses shall conform to the sign regulations as
described in this Code.
   D.   Tobacco specialty businesses shall be limited to one specialty tobacco
business per ten thousand (10,000) in population to include all residents in
the City. The total population figures shall be based on the U.S. Census
Bureau's annual estimates. For the purposes of this section, population
estimates shall be rounded down to the nearest ten thousand (10,000). (Ord. 12-
27, 10-17-2012; amd. Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.11.240: PUBLIC UTILITY STATION STRUCTURES:
   A.   Applicability: When it is desired to create a new lot or parcel of
property and its primary use is to be a public utility station structure or
structures, these standards shall apply.
   B.   Subdivision Of Property:
      1.   Lot Size And Dimensions: Upon review and approval by the Planning
Commission, the minimum size and dimensions of a lot or parcel shall be
sufficient to meet the needs of the public utility station structure.
      2.   Frontage: Lots and parcels are not required to have street frontage
if there is a recorded perpetual access easement across adjoining property
connecting to a dedicated and improved street right-of-way that is sufficient
width to meet the needs of the public utility, as determined by the Planning
Commission at the time of approval and that satisfies the requirements of
public safety agencies.
      3.   Creation Of Lot Or Parcel: Unless otherwise prohibited by Utah State
Code, lots or parcels may be created as a lot or parcel within a recorded
subdivision plat, or created by a recorded deed that describes the property by
metes and bounds legal description.
   C.   Development Standards: The following development standards shall apply
to all lots or parcels created for public utility stations:
      1.   Location: A public utility station shall be located no closer than
thirty feet (30') from any existing habitable structure or street. The station
may not be located in the path of any planned street, as illustrated on the
Taylorsville City master street plan.
      2.   Building Setbacks:
         a.   For buildings fifteen feet (15') high and under:
            (1)   From property line:
               (A)   Thirty feet (30') from street right-of-way.
               (B)   Ten feet (10') for landlocked properties and all other
property lines.
         b.   For buildings greater than fifteen feet (15') high: The Planning
Commission shall determine appropriate setbacks at the time of approval
necessary to mitigate any detrimental impacts on surrounding residential use.
      3.   Maximum Building Height: As permitted by the underlying zone height
requirements.
      4.   Fencing:
         a.   For lots or parcels with street frontage, a minimum eight foot
(8') decorative, nonclimbable wall shall be constructed a minimum of twenty
five feet (25') from a public street, and along all property lines. Access
gates shall be sight obscuring. Additionally, the requirements of section
13.23.070 of this title shall apply.
         b.   For lots or parcels without street frontage, a minimum six foot
(6') opaque and nonclimbable screening fence and gate(s) shall be constructed
along all property lines. Additionally, the requirements of section
13.23.070 of this title shall apply.
      5.   Architectural Standards: Public utility stations shall be painted or
constructed of materials with earth tone colors and shall be architecturally
compatible with surrounding structures.
      6.   Landscaping: All areas within public view are required to provide
landscaping under the standards of the respective zone in which they are
located. Properties with street frontage shall provide a minimum six foot (6')
deep landscaped planting bed in front of any fencing parallel to the street.
Areas within enclosed fencing are not required to be landscaped, but all open
areas shall be maintained clear of all weeds and debris.
      7.   Enclosure: All unenclosed elements of the facility that are not
housed in a building, and isolated minor elements such as pad mounted
transformers, telephone pedestals, metering stations, and other equipment vital
to the operation of the public utility station shall be contained within the
screened portion of the lot or parcel.
   D.   Other Uses: Other uses of the site, and accessory uses, including the
storage of materials outside of an enclosed building, are prohibited. (Ord. 17-
07, 4-12-2017; amd. Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
CHAPTER 13.12
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
13.12.010: Purpose
13.12.020: Procedures
13.12.030: Uses Allowed
13.12.040: Density
13.12.050: Lot And Building Placement/Design Requirements
13.12.060: Architectural Design And Materials
13.12.070: Open Space
13.12.080: Landscaping
13.12.090: Outdoor Lighting
13.12.100: Streets And Pedestrianways
13.12.110: Other Forms Of Transportation
13.12.120: Environmental Concerns
13.12.130: Special Requirements Applicable To The TND Overlay District
13.12.140: Utilities In TND Developments
13.12.150: General Maintenance Of TND Developments
13.12.010: PURPOSE:
The traditional neighborhood development overlay zone is established to provide
a floating zone to be used in appropriate locations within the city in
conjunction with underlying residential zones and to provide subdivision design
incorporating traditional neighborhood standards. The traditional neighborhood
development (TND) zone represents a departure from typical zoning to the extent
that it requires physical design that promotes human scale pedestrian activity
(walkability) through the incorporation of specific development guidelines.
These guidelines include controlling architectural elements, driveways,
walkways, open space, landscaping, street design, and other pedestrian
elements.
The overall desired effect of this zone is to provide a quality living
environment that encourages contact between neighbors, provides quality housing
for families in various states of the life cycle, discourages crime (through
natural surveillance design), reduces overall vehicle trips, and improves air
quality. Proposed developments with increased land intensity and housing
density, but without the above walkable elements, are unacceptable in the
overlay zone.
The overlay zone is intended to create efficient usage of land by controlling
the intensity of land use, providing sufficient size, and design features to
create a walkable neighborhood. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.12.020: PROCEDURES:
   A.   All submissions shall be made in advance of planned construction for
proper coordination and feedback and shall be reviewed by the city development
committee and/or respective architectural review body before submittal to the
planning commission.
   B.   Prior to the planning commission taking action, plans must be submitted
in accordance with the subdivision procedure.
   C.   The planning commission will review all TND proposals. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012)
13.12.030: USES ALLOWED:
   A.   Location Restrictions: Traditional neighborhood developments may be
located at infill locations where walkable components, e.g., housing choices,
convenience commercial, employment, community facilities, transportation
linkages, parks or other open spaces, school, and churches, are already present
or planned. As a guiding principle, walkable components should be within a ten
(10) minute (or 1/2 mile) walking distance.
   B.   Ancillary Uses: All permitted and conditional land uses within the TND
zone are specifically defined within the definitions section of the development
code provided such use is not regulated by other sections or is listed as a
nonpermitted use in the underlying zone district.
   C.   Permitted And Conditional Uses: The traditional neighborhood
development (TND) zone is an overlay district, and as such, permitted and
conditional uses are governed by the requirements and standards of the specific
underlying residential zone. Traditional neighborhood development is a
conditional use in these zones, assuming that locational criteria, physical
design, and development guidelines for TNDs can be adhered to. The conditional
use permit shall also consider potential changes to traffic, parking,
pedestrian activity, and other impacts. Except as otherwise stipulated in the
TND zone, development proposals shall comply with the requirements of the
underlying zone. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.12.040: DENSITY:
Allowable dwelling units per acre are maximums based upon suitable design and
compliance with TND standards and guidelines. Density may be reduced as part of
the conditional use depending upon specific development circumstance and
acceptable individual site design. The TND zone may not be utilized for
properties within an R-1-15 zoning district or larger. The following density by
zone matrix shall apply to TND overlay zone subdivisions of residential
property that include ten (10) or more lots. Subdivisions of residential
property less than ten (10) lots will be required to meet minimum lot frontage
and square footage requirements as indicated within this chapter.
DENSITY BY ZONE
 
Zone Maximum Allowable Units Per Acre
   R-1-5.0
   R-1-6.0
   R-1-7.0
   R-1-7.5
   R-1-8.0
   R-2-8.0
   R-2-10.0
 
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.12.050: LOT AND BUILDING PLACEMENT/DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
The following standards are to be considered as applying specifically to
development in the TND zone in addition to general standards elsewhere in this
development code.
   A.   Traditional Neighborhood Development Plan: Regardless of the size and
ownership of individual parcels, a development plan must be submitted showing
both existing and reasonable projected development on adjoining properties,
determined through consultation with adjoining property owners. The intent is
to achieve an overall walkable traditional neighborhood development with
appropriate pedestrian connections, cross easements, common driveways,
consistent site standards, etc., even though properties may be individually
owned.
   B.   Parcel Size: Parcels shall be of sufficient size to assure compliance
with building setbacks, landscaping, access, off street parking requirements,
and walkability standards based upon the following minimum standards (side yard
setbacks include a minimum and both combined):
   MINIMUM PARCEL SIZE AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
 
                                           Side Yard Setback Rear Yard Setbacks
Zone Allowable Lot Lot Frontage Front Yard -                 -
     Size                       Setback2   Between           Foundation
                                           Foundation Walls1 To Property Line
                            10 ft. to porch
R-1-10 8,000 sq. ft. 65 ft. 15 ft. to living area 7 ft./14 ft. 20 ft.
                            18 ft. to garage
                            10 ft. to porch
R-1-8  6,000 sq. ft. 55 ft. 15 ft. to living area 6 ft./12 ft. 15 ft.
                            18 ft. to garage
                            10 ft. to porch
R-1-7  5,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 15 ft. to living area 6 ft./12 ft. 15 ft.
                            18 ft. to garage
                            10 ft. to porch
R-1-6  4,500 sq. ft. 50 ft. 15 ft. to living area 5 ft./10 ft. 15 ft.
                            18 ft. to garage
                            10 ft. to porch
R-1-5  4,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 15 ft. to living area 5 ft./10 ft. 15 ft.
                            18 ft. to garage
                            10 ft. to porch
R-2-10 4,000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 15 ft. to living area 5 ft./10 ft. 15 ft.
                            18 ft. to garage
                            10 ft. to porch
R-2-8  3,500 sq. ft. 50 ft. 15 ft. to living area 5 ft./10 ft. 15 ft.
                            18 ft. to garage
 
Notes:
    1.    The side yard setbacks as shown is the minimum for 1 side and a total
for both sides.
    2.    See graphic.
In addition to meeting the minimum lot size, each TND development must also be
within the maximum allowed dwelling units per acre. However, lot sizes and lot
frontages may be modified by the planning commission for townhome buildings not
exceeding four (4) units or twin homes as long as the maximum density
requirement is not exceeded. Lot sizes may be required to be larger than the
minimum stated above based upon specific development circumstances and
acceptable individual site design.
   C.   Housing Types: A blend of housing types such as single-family, twin
home, and townhomes may be determined by the planning commission depending upon
the existing adjacent neighborhood, size, scale, and location of the property.
   D.   Building Placement:
      1.   Setbacks: Setback regulations shall conform to the requirements of
the underlying zone except as may be approved by the planning commission based
upon the size, scale, design, location, topography, or other natural features
associated with the property.
   FIGURE 1
   RESIDENTIAL SETBACKS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3766.png]
         a.   Front setbacks shall range between twenty five (25) and thirty
five feet (35'), measured from the inside edge of the curb to the living area.
The minimum setback from the inside edge of the sidewalk to the porch shall be
ten feet (10'). Front loaded garages shall be subservient to the dwelling space
and shall have a minimum setback of eighteen feet (18') measured from the
inside edge of the sidewalk. If a third car garage bay is desired, it shall be
set back an additional two feet (2') from the main garage.
         b.   Side yard and rear yard setbacks shall be determined based upon
subdivision layout and design as indicated in the table in this section.
         c.   Zero lot line or common wall construction for townhomes and twin
homes may be considered based upon subdivision layout and design.
      2.   Building Orientation: The entrances of all dwellings shall front
onto public streets or open space with entrance sidewalks directly accessing
the street sidewalk. On a case by case basis, a limited number of dwelling
units, attached or unattached, fronting onto a private driveway may be approved
as an auto court, as deemed appropriate by the planning commission, depending
on the size, scale, design, location, topography, or other natural features
associated with the property.
      3.   Building Height: Dwelling structures shall comply with the height
requirements of the underlying residential district.
   E.   CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design): Where
practically possible, CPTED principles shall be used in the design and layout
of buildings, streets, accesses, landscaping, and open space areas.
      1.   Design shall promote natural surveillance, access control,
territorial reinforcement, sense of ownership, and maintenance. CPTED
landscaping guidelines shall be used including planting shrubs with a maximum
height of two (2) to three feet (3') at full maturity, and trees with a ground
clearance of eight feet (8') at full maturity above walkways and sidewalks, and
fourteen feet (14') at full maturity above vehicular travel and parking lanes.
      2.   In order to encourage public safety through natural surveillance,
natural access control and territorial reinforcement, blank walls are not
permitted adjacent to streets, pedestrian areas, and open space amenities.
Developments shall have street side dwelling elevations with extensive windows
with balconies, decks, or landscape terraces being encouraged. Symbolic
barriers such as low lying fences/walls and landscaping shall be used to
discourage crime and promote safety.
      3.   Fences or walls, if desired by the applicant, must be reviewed for
their effectiveness in protecting private space while not creating isolated
uses or dead space void of natural surveillance. Approved fences or walls shall
be compatible in color, texture, and design in relationship to building
materials. Landscape buffers are preferred over fences and walls where
separation is desirable. A visually open look shall be encouraged. Landscape
buffers which create "outdoor rooms" are often more important than a physical
separation.
   FIGURE 2
   NATURAL SURVEILLANCE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3768.png]
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.12.060: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN AND MATERIALS:
The treatment of buildings, materials, and exterior appurtenances shall create
an aesthetically pleasing dwelling and site that is in character with the
proportions of other surrounding structures, and yet provides diversity in
design. An architectural balance of building materials, colors, design
features, and textures which create "random compatibility" shall be sought.
Requirements applicable to all dwellings are stated below:
   A.   The planning commission shall review and approve building elevations
and materials for all projects within a TND overlay zone, particularly where
exposed to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic.
   B.   Building materials for residential construction shall use well
proportioned integrated materials of: brick, stone, masonry, stucco, and
composite siding, using well planned architectural design. Vinyl/aluminum
siding is allowed only on eaves and trim.
   C.   Buildings shall be designed to relate to grade conditions with a
minimum of grading and exposed foundation walls, creating easy pedestrian
access from sidewalks, parking areas, etc.
   FIGURE 3
   ENCOURAGED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3770.png]
   FIGURE 4
   DISCOURAGED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3772.png]
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.12.070: OPEN SPACE:
As a tradeoff for increased density and building mass, usable open space shall
be required within the TND, including, but not limited to: commons, pocket
parks, plazas, courtyards, landscape features, water fountains and features,
greenbelts, and trail connections. Usable open space shall comprise no less
than fifteen percent (15%) of the project. The design of the open space
provided shall be determined by the planning commission based upon the size,
scale, topography, and market niche of the proposed development. Design shall
encourage comfortable and safe pedestrian use including landscaping, seating
areas, and lighting, as appropriate.
Areas of environmental concern or interest may be required to be preserved in
accordance with the sensitive area overlay zone, e.g., drainages, steep slopes,
trail systems, and water features, etc. Unless otherwise specified through
special agreement or understanding with the city, all open space areas shall be
maintained by property owners or homeowners' associations. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012)
13.12.080: LANDSCAPING:
Yards, open space, and other common areas may be required to be landscaped by
the developer. Guidelines for required landscaping are established to improve
and then maintain site qualities while minimizing alteration, removal, or
degradation of approved and installed landscaping. Landscaping shall follow
CPTED principles and the water efficient landscaping section of this code.
   A.   Plan: When landscaping is required, no plans for any building,
structure, or other improvements shall be approved unless a satisfactory
landscape and streetscape plan has also been submitted and approved.
   B.   Installation: Landscaping in accordance with the approved plans must be
installed within thirty (30) days following the occupancy of the site or as
otherwise approved by the city as seasonal conditions may suggest.
   C.   Unoccupied Land: The land area not occupied by buildings, structures,
hard surfacing, vehicular driveways, or pedestrian walkways shall be kept clear
of weeds or landscaped.
   D.   Guarantee: The developer shall submit a guarantee for such landscape
improvements to ensure that installations are completed as submitted and
approved. Such guarantee for landscape improvements shall be the same as
required by the city for street improvements.
   E.   Plant Materials: The developer shall install the following:
      1.   On Site Trees: Approximately sixty percent (60%) shall be medium
size trees in a combination of deciduous trees with a caliper from two (2) to
three inches (3") measured six inches (6") above grade and evergreen trees with
a height from five (5) to eight feet (8'). Approximately forty percent (40%)
shall be small size trees and shrubs in a combination of deciduous trees with a
caliper of one and one-half (11/2) to two inches (2") measured six inches (6")
above grade and evergreen trees with a minimum height of four feet (4'). Where
possible, a 50/50 mix of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs shall be used
for on site landscaping.
      2.   Street Trees: A minimum two inch (2") caliper street trees as
measured six inches (6") above grade shall be installed by the developer/
builder located between the curb and sidewalk along all rights of way. In order
to facilitate the planting of street trees, an eight foot (8') park strip and
five foot (5') sidewalk is the standard requirement. The species type,
location, and spacing of trees shall be shown on the approved landscape plan
and be in compliance with designated streets within the city's streetscape
plan. For streets not specified in the streetscape plan, the following trees
may be used as part of an approved landscape plan, depending upon space
requirements as recommended by the planning division:
   APPROVED STREET TREE SPECIES TYPES
 
Common Name Specific Species
Bur oak            Quercus macrocarpa
Eastern redbud     Cercis canadensis
Flowering pear     Pyrus calleryana "redspire"
                  Pyrus calleryana "aristocrat"
Hedge maple        Acer campestre
Little leaf linden Tilia cordata "greenspire"
                  Tilia cordata "rancho"
London plane       Platanus acerifolia "bloodgood"
Norway maple       Acer platanoides "Cleveland"
                  Acer platanoides "columnare"
                  Acer platanoides "emerald queen"
                  Acer platanoides "schwedleri"
                  Acer platanoides "Deborah" (improved schwedleri)
Red maple          Acer rubrum "October glory"
                  Acer rubrum "red sunset"
Red oak            Quercus rubrum
Redmond linden     Tilia euchlora "Redmond"
Sycamore maple     Acer pseudoplatanus
 
For planted medians and accent trees both on site and at intersections, the
following trees may be used:
   APPROVED PLANTED MEDIAN TREE AND ACCENT STREET TREE SPECIES TYPES
 
Common Name Specific Species
Bechtel crab        Malus ioensis "Klehms improved"
Crimson king maple  Acer platanoides "crimson king"
                   Acer platanoides "royal red"
Eastern redbud      Cercis canadensis
Flowering pear      Pyrus calleryana "redspire"
                   Pyrus calleryana "aristocrat"
Kwansan cherry      Prunus serrulata "Kwanzan"
Washington hawthorn Crataegus phaenopyrum
 
      3.   Installation: It shall be the responsibility of the developer/
builder to grade, place topsoil, seed, sod, install sprinkler irrigation
systems, and properly plant trees, shrubs, and other approved plant materials.
      4.   Maintenance: It shall be the responsibility of the developer,
property owner, and/or property association to properly maintain landscaped
areas including watering, mowing, pruning, fertilizing, and the removal and
replacement of dead plant materials in a timely manner. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.12.090: OUTDOOR LIGHTING:
The lighting of streets, pedestrian areas, parking lots, and open space is
required. Exterior wall mounted floodlights must be directed downward to avoid
light spill on adjacent property. Indirect lighting, bollard lighting, and
landscape lighting is encouraged.
The amount and type of lighting will be evaluated on how adequately it meets
its intended purpose. Design and location of standards and fixtures shall be
specified on the site development drawings. Intensities shall be controlled so
that safety lighting is provided while neighboring areas are protected from
glare or excessive direct light. Streetlight design fixtures shall be installed
as required by the street lighting policy. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.12.100: STREETS AND PEDESTRIANWAYS:
   A.   Streets: All access within a TND shall have connectivity with existing
and future street patterns. A grid street pattern or modified grid pattern is
required where practically possible. Cul-de-sac streets will not be approved
unless it can be demonstrated that no other practical way exists to provide
connectivity. In order to uphold and enhance TND principles, private streets
are highly discouraged and gated communities are prohibited.
   FIGURE 5
   DISCONNECTED STREET SYSTEM - DISCOURAGED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3774.png]
   FIGURE 6
   CONNECTED MODIFIED GRID SYSTEM - ENCOURAGED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3776.png]
   B.   Widths: Street widths shall be determined during site plan review as
may be recommended by the city engineer and approved by the planning
commission. A minimum fifty foot (50') right of way is required. Streets shall
be designed to meet the level of travel and service while incorporating
principles of traffic calming and pedestrian compatibility, e.g., tree lined
streets with pedestrianways and linkages, decreasing the need for pavement
width by spreading traffic through a grid, or modified street hierarchy system.
   C.   Sidewalks, Walkways, And Park Strips: The design of pedestrianways may
include a solitary meandering pathway or trail or other possible designs as may
be approved by the planning commission. Choice of appropriate pedestrian access
will be made based upon the scale and type of the TND project being proposed.
In order to facilitate the planting of street trees, an eight foot (8') park
strip and five foot (5') sidewalk is the standard requirement. Reduced park
strip and sidewalk width may be approved based upon size, scale, and nature of
the project and the type of existing improvements on adjacent properties.
However, a ten foot (10') cross section (5 foot park strip, 5 foot sidewalk) is
the minimum and may necessitate tree planting behind the sidewalk.
   D.   Pedestrian Connections: Crosswalks shall be incorporated within the
project, at intersections, within parking lots, or other needed pedestrian
connections as approved by the city engineer. Crosswalks shall be so configured
to be a design feature of the development, e.g., heavy painted lines, pavers,
edges, and other methods of emphasizing pedestrian use. Bulb outs and other
pedestrian designs may be used to shorten walking distances across open
pavement. Medians may be used in appropriate areas to encourage walking and to
act as a refuge for crossing pedestrians. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.12.110: OTHER FORMS OF TRANSPORTATION:
All forms of transportation shall be considered within and without the TND with
the intent to improve convenience and reduce vehicle trips. All forms of
transportation should be encouraged including bus, bicycle, and pedestrian.
Access connections may be required when deemed essential to provide circulation
or access to churches, schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation,
and other community facilities. This is subject to review and recommendation by
city staff including parks and recreation, planning, and police departments,
and the city engineer. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.12.120: ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS:
   A.   Building, landscape, and solar design should be adjusted, where
possible, to be compatible with the local climate. Such design should include,
but may not be limited to, window placement, building recesses, overhangs,
trellises, awnings, porches, and landscape placement planned in such a way to
enhance livability and reduce energy costs.
   B.   The use of lighter colored building materials for rooftops and fence/
walls, and extensive deciduous and evergreen tree cover shall be incorporated
into developments in order to reduce the urban heat island effect. Where
possible, streets, driveways, parking areas, etc., should use concrete or other
materials that absorb less sunlight. Parking area landscaping shall be provided
at the ratio of at least one tree per six (6) parking stalls.
   C.   Where possible, drought resistant ground covers, shrubs, and trees
shall be incorporated into the landscape to reduce water usage and storm
runoff. Extensive areas of grass or other high water use plants are
discouraged. Compliance with the water efficient landscaping ordinance is
required.
   D.   When alleys, extended private driveways, or other private access means
are utilized to access back loaded properties or subservient garages are used,
permeable pavement surfaces shall be required. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.12.130: SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO THE TND OVERLAY DISTRICT:
   A.   Required Design Elements: The following TND design elements shall be
required:
      1.   Depending on the size and scale of the project, a mix of housing
types shall be employed, e.g., single-family detached, twin homes, townhomes,
etc.
      2.   Where practical, the same land uses and housing types shall front
each other or shall front open space.
      3.   Roofs with a five to twelve (5/12) pitch or greater.
      4.   Dwelling and garage gables facing streets and alleys.
      5.   Covered and open front porches comprising at least fifty percent
(50%) of the front elevation (not including the garage), in no case being less
than fifteen feet (15') in length.
      6.   Entry (porch) sidewalks that connect directly to street sidewalks.
   B.   Strongly Encouraged Design Elements: The following TND design elements
are strongly encouraged:
      1.   The number of bedrooms per dwelling unit and other housing design
options may be varied to assist in providing suitable housing for a market
range of household incomes, family sizes, and life cycles.
      2.   Two-story dwellings.
      3.   House dormers and/or shutters and other window treatments.
      4.   Street side balconies/decks.
      5.   Subservient garages, e.g., back loaded detached with alley access,
front loaded detached, attached (see graphic illustration), side entry
attached, or a combination of the above.
      6.   Wraparound porches, particularly on corner lots.
      7.   Streets which deemphasize the need and speed of automobiles.
      8.   Other pedestrian oriented design.
   FIGURE 7
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL - PLAN VIEW
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3778.png]
   FIGURE 8
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL - ELEVATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3778.png]
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.12.140: UTILITIES IN TND DEVELOPMENTS:
All utility lines shall be underground in designated easements. No pipe,
conduit, cable, line for water, gas, sewage, drainage, steam, electricity, or
any other energy or service shall be installed or maintained upon any lot
(outside of any building) above the surface of the ground except for hoses,
movable pipes used for irrigation or other purpose during construction.
   A.   Transformers shall be grouped with other utility meters where possible
and screened with vegetation or other appropriate method. Placement of
transformers in front setback locations, particularly on corners, is to be
avoided.
   B.   Each contractor and owner/developer shall be responsible to know the
location of all underground utilities. Protection of such utilities shall also
be their responsibility. Prior to construction, contact must be made with Blue
Stakes to identify underground utility lines.
   C.   Actual tree spacing during site plan review may be adjusted as
necessary to match existing streetscape or to adopt unique on site conditions
that would justify such, e.g., topography, streetlights, power lines and poles,
and other utilities. In some cases, street trees may need to be relocated in
order to accommodate on site conditions. Park strips on arterial and collector
streets should accommodate street trees, streetlights, and other needed
utilities. Street trees should be placed such that the street lighting system
functions properly and achieves the desired result. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.12.150: GENERAL MAINTENANCE OF TND DEVELOPMENTS:
An overall maintenance schedule shall be implemented by property owners and/or
property associations in maintaining all common buildings, common open spaces,
courtyards, landscaping, fences, walls, drives, etc. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.13
HOSPITAL (H) DISTRICT
SECTION:
13.13.010: Hospital (H) District Purpose, Uses, And Standards
13.13.010: HOSPITAL (H) DISTRICT PURPOSE, USES, AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: The hospital zone is established to provide an area for a
hospital and related uses such as medical office and other health service or
related facilities. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   B.   Uses Allowed:
      1.   Permitted uses:
Business and professional office.
Convalescent home.
Hospital.
Medical and health services offices.
      2.   Conditional uses:
General acute hospital (emergency medical center).
Public facilities. (Ord. 14-09, 6-4-2014)
   C.   Development Standards: Planning commission review is required according
to standards outlined in the development review process. The following
standards are to be considered as applying specifically to development in a
hospital (H) district in addition to general standards provided in development,
site, and subdivision standards and landscaping standards:
      1.   Area Requirements: Two (2) acres.
      2.   Frontage Requirements: One hundred feet (100').
      3.   Building Height Requirements: Not to exceed one hundred feet (100')
for the main hospital building, and not to exceed thirty five feet (35') for
any other building except that any other building may exceed a height of thirty
five feet (35') but no more than one hundred feet (100') when it can be found
by the planning commission that the additional height is not obtrusive to
surrounding areas.
      4.   Sign Standards: All signs shall comply with the signage and outdoor
advertising chapter of this code.
      5.   Parking Standards: Parking shall comply with off street parking
standards contained in this code.
      6.   Landscaping: All developments shall follow the landscape
requirements of the landscaping standards chapter, except that a minimum of
fifteen feet (15') of landscaping shall be placed between parking areas and
side and rear property lines, and minimum setback areas between building, and
side and rear property lines shall also be landscaped.
      7.   Lighting: Reflectors, spotlights, floodlights, and other sources of
illumination may be used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, signs, parking,
and loading areas provided they are equipped with proper devices concentrating
the illumination upon the above and preventing any bright, direct illumination
upon adjacent property or any public right of way.
      8.   Residential Compatibility: Developments adjacent to residential
districts shall have a residential look to enhance compatibility with the
adjacent neighborhood. Building materials shall be reviewed for compatibility
with adjoining residential properties and shall use quality building material,
predominantly brick, stone, and masonry. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.14
RESERVED
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.15
SENSITIVE AREA OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
13.15.010: Purpose
13.15.020: Scope And Application
13.15.030: Review And Approval Procedure
13.15.040: Development Standards For Sensitive Areas
13.15.050: Exceptions
13.15.060: Construction, Grading, Contour Map And Issuance Of Building Permits
13.15.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter shall provide standards, guidelines, and criteria having the
effect of minimizing flooding, erosions, and other environmental hazards and
protecting the natural scenic character of the sensitive areas and ensuring the
efficient expenditure of public funds.
The standards, guidelines, and criteria established by this chapter shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
   A.   The protection of the public from the natural hazards of stormwater
runoff and erosion by requiring drainage facilities and the minimal removal of
natural vegetation.
   B.   The minimization of the threat of consequential damages of fire by
establishing fire protection measures.
   C.   The preservation of natural features, wildlife habitat, and open space.
   D.   The retention of natural features such as drainage channels, streams,
hillside areas, ridgelines, rock outcroppings, vistas, trees, and other natural
plan formations.
   E.   The preservation and enhancement of visual and environmental quality by
use of natural vegetation and the minimization of grading in hillside areas.
   F.   The assurance of an adequate transportation system for the sensitive
area to include consideration of the city's approved transportation plan. This
system design will consider densities and topography with minimal cuts, fills,
or other visible scars.
   G.   The establishment of on site and off site traffic facilities that
ensure ingress and egress for vehicles including emergency vehicles into all
developed areas at any time.
   H.   The encouragement of a variety of development designs and concepts that
are compatible with the natural terrain of the sensitive areas and preserve
open space and natural landscape.
   I.   The establishment of land use management criteria that will encourage
protection of natural elements while allowing a harmonious and satisfying
residential environment.
   J.   The encouragement of location, design, and development of building
sites to provide maximum safety and human enjoyment while adapting the
development to the best use of the natural terrain.
   K.   The encouragement of the use of creative design teams composed of
professional landscape, architects, engineers, and others.
   L.   The encouragement of a regard for the view of the hillsides as well as
a view from the hillsides. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.15.020: SCOPE AND APPLICATION:
   A.   Application Of The Sensitive Area Overlay Zone: The sensitive area
overlay zone includes areas of thirty percent (30%) or greater slope;
floodplain, streams, lakes, ponds, and wetland areas; and areas with a high or
moderate potential of damage from natural hazards such as surface rupture
during an earthquake, liquefaction, or debris flow, and other similar
environmental conditions. Such areas are designated on the map entitled the
city of Taylorsville sensitive area overlay zone map. A copy of the map is
available for review in the community development department. Regulations of
this chapter may apply to an area outside of the mapped sensitive area overlay
zone if the director determines that the environmental conditions of the
subject area qualify it as a sensitive area, and the map shall thereafter be
amended to include such area in the sensitive area overlay zone.
   B.   Effect Of Provisions: This chapter makes provisions in addition to
those set forth elsewhere in this code. In the event of conflict between such
other provisions and the provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive
provisions shall apply.
   C.   Special Regulation:
      1.   Chapter 19.75 of the ordinances adopted and printed by Salt Lake
County are hereby adopted by this reference. Copies of said printed ordinances
are on file with the city for information and inspection by the public.
   SPECIAL STUDY AREA REPORT REQUIREMENTS
   BASED ON SPECIAL STUDY AREA MAPS
 
Is A Site Specific Geologic Hazards Report Required Prior To Approval?
                                 Liquefaction Potential Landslide,
Land Use           Surface       High And Low And       Debris Flow  Avalanche
(Type Of Facility) Fault Rupture Moderate Very Low      And Rockfall
Critical and essential facilities as defined in section    Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
19.75.020
Industrial and commercial bldgs. (1 story and <5,000 sq.   Yes No1 No  Yes Yes
ft.)
Industrial and commercial bldgs. (>5,000 sq. ft.)          Yes Yes No  Yes Yes
Residential single lots/single- family homes               Yes No1 No  Yes Yes
Residential subdivisions (>9 lots), and residential multi- Yes Yes No  Yes Yes
family dwellings (4 or more units per acre)
Residential subdivisions (<9 lots), and residential multi- Yes No1 No  Yes Yes
family dwellings (<4 units per acre)
 
   Note:
      1.    Although a site specific investigation is not required, the owner
is required to file a disclosure notice prior to land use approval.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.15.030: REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Development Review: To help expedite review of a development proposal,
prior to submitting an application for development in a sensitive area, persons
interested in undertaking development may meet informally with a member(s) of
the community development department to become acquainted with the substantive
and procedural requirements of this code.
If requested by staff, they shall attend a meeting where representatives from
various departments involved in review of developments are generally present.
This meeting is sometimes referred to as the development review meeting.
At the meeting, the various departments will initially assess the development
proposal and information submitted and make suggestions to the prospective
developer with respect to the proposal's compliance with the provisions of the
appropriate regulations of this code, the applicable building codes, and any
other applicable ordinances or codes of the city and provide information
concerning the city's review requirements and procedures.
   B.   Application: Prior to any development activity taking place within a
sensitive area, an application for development must be submitted to the
community development department and must contain the information and be in the
format required by the applicable chapter(s) of this code (subdivision, site
plan review, planned unit development, etc.). All reports shall be prepared by
a qualified person licensed in the state of Utah to practice their specialty.
If a license is not required, the person shall have demonstrated expertise in
the field of practice. In addition to the application requirements set forth in
other chapters of the code, applications for development in sensitive areas
shall include the following as determined by the city engineer:
      1.   General development application form.
      2.   A topographic contour map, tied to a land based survey with
coloration, shading or hatching indicating areas within the development site
with slopes of less than ten percent (10%), areas between ten (10) and twenty
percent (20%), areas between twenty (20) and thirty percent (30%), and areas of
thirty percent (30%) or greater, with contour lines spaced no less than two
feet (2') apart vertically.
      3.   Location of the proposed project in relation to abutting public
streets.
      4.   The total acreage, number of lots, and proposed density for proposed
residential developments.
      5.   The total acreage, number of lots, and proposed density for proposed
commercial developments.
      6.   Location and approximate size, in square feet, of the proposed lots
including sensitive areas of thirty percent (30%) or greater slope and the
usable land for each lot.
      7.   Location of known hazards, e.g., faults, natural drainage channels,
debris flow, etc., and the boundaries of the 100-year floodplain, as
applicable.
      8.   Location of other environmentally sensitive areas, including
wildlife corridors.
      9.   Proposed location of structures in relationship to all
environmentally sensitive areas.
      10.   A general geotechnical/geological report shall include the
following components unless the city engineer determines a specific component
is not applicable to the proposal:
         a.   A soil characteristics component shall include data regarding the
nature, distribution, and strength of soils within the project area as well as:
            (1)   Unified classification of all soils with liquid limit,
shrink-swell potential and general suitability for development.
            (2)   Estimate of the normal highest elevation of the water table.
            (3)   Flood history and potential, proximity to known floodplain
area and drainage channels, springs, and other hydrological features.
         b.   A vegetation component shall include a slope stabilization and a
revegetation report which shall comply with the water efficient landscaping
ordinance and include:
            (1)   Location and identification of existing vegetation.
            (2)   The vegetation to be removed and the method of disposal.
            (3)   The vegetation to be planted.
            (4)   Slope stabilization measures to be installed.
            (5)   Analysis of the environmental effect of development including
effects on slope stability, soil erosion, water quality, fish and wildlife, and
fire hazard.
            (6)   Topsoil stockpile areas.
         c.   A geologic conditions component shall be site specific and shall
identify all known, suspected, and potential faults and other geologic hazards.
Hazards may originate on or off site. They may have been previously mapped or
unmapped. This component shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
            (1)   Location of active and historical faults and a recommendation
for a setback of proposed structures from the fault(s).
            (2)   Characteristics of the geological material and identification
of anomalies of the terrain.
            (3)   Depth and geological evaluation of bedrock.
            (4)   Map of hazards or any features of interest.
            (5)   Boring and test pit logs and trench reports.
            (6)   Slope stability analysis, including the angle of repose.
         d.   A debris flow hazard component shall be site specific and shall
identify all known, suspected and potential hazards caused by the flow of rock,
soil, organic material, and water in any combination of the above. The report
will include, but is not limited to, the following:
            (1)   Boring, test pit, and trench logs.
            (2)   Estimates of the number and frequency of past events and
their thickness and volume.
            (3)   Estimates of the recurrence, depth, and impact forces of
future events.
            (4)   Canal or waterway bank stability analysis.
         e.   A grading and drainage plan shall include a stormwater management
and erosion grading plan on the methods by which surface water, natural
drainages, flooding, erosion, and sedimentation loss will be accommodated
during and after construction. The plan shall include the following
information:
            (1)   The grading plan shall show existing and proposed elevation
contours, tied to a land based survey and shall include elevations, lines, and
grades including the location and depth of all proposed cuts and fills of the
finished earth surfaces using a contour interval of two feet (2') or less.
Access or haul road location, treatment, maintenance requirements, and limits
of disturbance shall be included.
            (2)   The proposed area to be graded shall be clearly delineated on
the plan, and the area amount stated in square feet.
            (3)   All calculations and any required details used for design and
construction of debris basins, impoundments, diversions, dikes, waterways,
drains, culverts, and other water management or soil erosion control measures
shall be shown. Calculations shall employ predictions of soil loss from sheet
erosion using the universal soil loss equation or appropriate equivalent.
Equations should include factors of:
               (A)   Rainfall intensity and energy.
               (B)   Soil erodibility.
               (C)   Land slope and length of slope or topography.
               (D)   Condition of the soil surface and land management
practices in use.
               (E)   Surface cover, e.g., grass, woodland, crop, pavement, etc.
      11.   The city engineer may require trenching, boring, and test pits
along with additional information for developments in the sensitive area
overlay zone.
      12.   All reports shall identify any potential impacts or hazards
resulting from construction or disturbance by the development and include
written recommendations for construction of proposed improvements and other
measures to mitigate potential impacts and hazards.
      13.   The city may require proposed lots, streets, and structures to be
staked for field inspection.
      14.   All engineering calculations performed and acquired pursuant to the
provisions of the ordinances of the city shall be made available to the city
engineer, as a part of the review and approval process, so that the city
engineer can better advise the planning commission.
   C.   Preliminary Review: Upon submittal of an application and all supporting
information and attendance at a development review meeting, if necessary, the
application for the development proposal shall be forwarded to the reviewing
departments and agencies. They will review it preliminarily to determine if the
application and plan, together with all supporting information, is complete and
complies with all the requirements of this code, including the sensitive area
development standards as set forth hereafter, and other applicable city and
agencies' standards.
If the departments' and agencies' reviews determine that all required,
necessary, and requested information has not been submitted, or that some of
the specifics of the plan or information do not comply with the requirements of
this code, the applicant will be notified in writing and/or on the plans of any
deficiencies, comments, corrections, and requirements (including additional
information and/or studies) to be addressed. The revised application, plan and
all required, necessary and requested supporting information must be
resubmitted after the appropriate additions and/or corrections are made in
order to complete the application.
Upon resubmittal, the development proposal will again be forwarded to the
reviewing departments and agencies. The applicant shall be required to resubmit
the application for the development proposal and supporting documents to the
city until all departments and agencies determine it is complete and complies
with the requirements of this code and other applicable city and agencies'
standards. Failure to submit complete information will result in written
notification to the applicant that the application is incomplete, and the
review cannot proceed further until all required, necessary, and requested
information is submitted.
When the application is determined to be complete, all development proposals in
sensitive areas will be submitted to the planning commission for preliminary
review. The planning commission will review the development proposal, including
staff analysis of all supporting information and all requested supplemental
information, to determine if all appropriate impacts have been addressed and to
receive public input, when required, concerning impacts and mitigation. The
planning commission may require additional studies/analyses to enable it to
determine what impacts should be addressed and may establish additional
requirements to address those anticipated impacts.
After all requested information has been received and reviewed by the planning
commission, the planning commission will determine if preliminary review is
complete and impose development requirements.
   D.   Final Approval: After the planning commission determines that
preliminary review is complete and imposes development requirements, the
applicant shall submit to the department a final development plan together with
all supporting documents which comply with all requirements, corrections,
additions, etc., required by the departments, agencies, and planning
commission.
The department, together with the other reviewing departments and agencies,
shall review the final development plan to determine compliance with all
requirements, corrections, additions, etc. When the final development plan has
been determined to be complete and in compliance with all requirements, all
fees paid and guarantees posted, the plan shall be approved and signed by the
appropriate city departments and officials.
   E.   Appeal: Any person adversely affected by a decision administering or
interpreting the provisions of this chapter may, within ten (10) days, appeal
that decision to the appeal authority by alleging that there is error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made in the administration or
interpretation of the provisions of this chapter.
   F.   Panel Of Experts For Appeals Of Geologic Hazard Or Sensitive Areas: An
applicant who has appealed a decision with respect to this chapter may request
the city to assemble a panel of qualified experts to serve as the appeal
authority for purposes of determining the technical aspects of the appeal. If
the applicant makes a request for a panel of qualified experts, the city shall
assemble the panel which shall consist of, unless otherwise agreed by the
applicant and the city:
      1.   One expert designated by the city;
      2.   One expert designated by the applicant; and
      3.   One expert chosen jointly by the city designated expert and the
applicant's designated expert.
A member of this expert panel assembled by the city may not be associated with
the application that is the subject of appeal. The decision concerning the item
under appeal shall be determined by a majority vote of the panel. The appellant
shall pay one-half (1/2) of the cost of the panel. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.15.040: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SENSITIVE AREAS:
   A.   Standards For Sensitive Areas Containing Thirty Percent Or Greater
Slopes:
      1.   Usable Land:
         a.   Single-family structures shall be located only upon areas
constituting usable land, which area shall be fully contiguous, be at least
five thousand (5,000) square feet in size, and have a minimum dimension, both
length and width, of fifty feet (50').
         b.   All other structures, including clustered single-family, multi-
family, commercial, industrial, institutional, and accessory structures, shall
be located upon usable land as may be determined through site plan review of
the impacts of development and proposed mitigation measures to address those
impacts including aesthetic concerns.
      2.   Setback Requirements:
         a.   No dwellings or accessory structures shall be constructed within
an average of twenty feet (20') (no point being closer than 10 feet) of a
continuous hillside slope (upslope or downslope) of thirty percent (30%) or
greater. The city engineer may require greater setbacks from the slopes based
on geotechnical information.
         b.   All other structures which require a building permit, including
commercial, industrial, institutional, and structures accessory thereto, shall
be set back as may be determined through site plan review of the impacts of
development and proposed mitigation measures to address those impacts including
aesthetic concerns.
         c.   Structures requiring a building permit shall be set back no
farther than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a public or private street
unless otherwise approved by the UFA.
      3.   Trails: A trail may be constructed to access upper/lower portions of
residential/commercial property subject to the following conditions:
         a.   No cut or fill of the hillside may be in excess of two feet (2').
All cuts or fills shall be properly retained.
         b.   The trail should follow a meandering course and not use a direct
line pathway to the desired location. Where possible, the trail should follow
the natural contours of the hillside.
         c.   The trail shall be screened with native landscape materials.
         d.   The trail plan shall be submitted to the director and city
engineer for review and must be approved prior to any construction and/or
hillside cuts.
      4.   Fencing: All fences located on slopes of thirty percent (30%) or
greater shall be dark brown, dark green, or black wrought iron, aluminum, or
vinyl coated chainlink to blend in with the native landscaping. In no case
shall the following types of fences be allowed: uncoated chainlink, masonry,
block, wood, or other site obscuring material.
   B.   Development Standards For All Sensitive Areas:
      1.   Maximum Impervious Material Coverage:
         a.   Upon which structures are located shall be fifty percent (50%)
for those in residential zoning districts of R-1-15 or below and forty percent
(40%) for those in zoning districts of R-1-20 or above of the total lot area
(excluding pad lots and clustered subdivisions) including dwelling units,
accessory buildings, patios, decks, and driveways, etc., provided, however,
that the maximum impervious material coverage may exceed the allowable
percentage upon review and approval of an exception by the director. The
director shall use the following criteria when making a decision to increase
lot coverage:
            (1)   The home is of comparable size to other homes in the general
vicinity;
            (2)   The increase is needed to create a safe drive access for the
home; and
            (3)   The increase is the minimum required to meet subsections B1a
(1) and B1a(2) of this section.
         b.   Upon which multi-family dwellings, commercial, industrial,
institutional, pad lots, clustered subdivisions, and accessory structures are
proposed shall be determined during site plan review and approved by the
planning commission. The planning commission will base their decision on
information received from the developer in relation to mitigation measures
which can be imposed to handle excess runoff.
      2.   Drainage And Erosion:
         a.   Lots shall be arranged so as to ensure adequate setbacks from
drainage channels as determined by the city engineer after review of the
submitted reports. No structures intended for human occupancy or as otherwise
determined by applicable building code shall be allowed in the 100-year
floodplain.
         b.   Facilities for the collection of stormwater runoff shall be
required to be constructed on development sites and according to the following
requirements:
            (1)   Such facilities shall be the first improvement or facilities
constructed on the development site with the exception of sewer and water
lines.
            (2)   Such facilities shall be designed to detain safely and
adequately the maximum expected stormwater runoff for a 100-year storm
(together with the stormwater discharge from the site not to exceed 0.2 cubic
feet per second per acre or at a rate not higher than the flow rate before
development of the site, whichever is less) on the development site for a
sufficient length of time to prevent flooding and erosion during stormwater
runoff flow periods.
            (3)   Such facilities shall be designed to divert surface water
away from cut or fill surfaces.
            (4)   As much as possible, the existing natural drainage system
shall be utilized in its unimproved state.
            (5)   Where drainage channels are required, wide shallow swales,
lined with appropriate vegetation, shall be used instead of cutting narrow,
deep drainage ditches.
            (6)   Flow retarding devices, such as detention/retention ponds and
recharge berms, shall be used, where practical, to minimize increases in runoff
volume and peak flow discharge rate due to development. Areas which have
shallow or perched groundwater or areas that are unstable shall be given
additional consideration, and additional requirements may be imposed.
         c.   Construction on the development site shall be of a nature that
will minimize the disturbance of vegetation cover, especially between December
1 and April 15 of the following year.
         d.   Erosion control measures on the development site shall be
implemented to minimize the increased solids loading in runoff from such areas.
An erosion control plan (the detailed design system to control stormwater
erosion during and after construction) shall be included in the grading and
drainage plan(s) described in this chapter.
         e.   The area of the watershed shall be used to determine the amount
of stormwater runoff generated before and after construction as follows:
The rational method or other method as approved by the city engineer shall be
used in computing runoff. The basic formula for the rational method is:
Q = CIA in which:
 
Q = Runoff in cubic feet per second (cfs)
C = Coefficient of runoff
    Average rainfall intensity during time of concentration for a 100-year
I = return period in inches per hour. The time of concentration shall be
    defined as the time required for water to flow from the most remote point
    of the section under consideration to the point of collection or discharge
A = Drainage area in acres
 
The following ranges for C value are typical examples. The actual C value used
shall be approved by the city engineer.
   TABLE OF RUNOFF COEFFICIENTS
 
Type Of Development       Runoff Coefficient
Industrial and commercial 0.80 - 0.90
Residential               0.30 - 0.40
Parks                     0.15 - 0.24
Agricultural              0.10 - 0.20
 
      3.   Vegetation And Revegetation:
         a.   Vegetation shall be removed only when absolutely necessary for
the construction of buildings, roads, and filled areas.
         b.   All areas on development sites cleared of natural vegetation in
the course of construction of off site improvements shall be replanted with
vegetation which has good erosion control characteristics.
         c.   New plantings shall be protected with a mulch material and
fertilized in conjunction with the planting and watering schedule described in
subsection B3e of this section.
         d.   The use of persons or firms having expertise in the practice of
revegetation, e.g., licensed landscape architects or certified nurserymen,
shall supervise the planting and installation of revegetation cover.
         e.   After the completion of off site improvements, vegetation should
be planted in all disturbed areas during the following time periods only:
            (1)   March 15 through May 15; and September 15 through October 31.
            (2)   If irrigated, planting may be done during summer months.
         f.   Generally, no vegetation shall be removed on a continuous
hillside, crest (upslope or downslope), with a slope thirty percent (30%) or
greater. However, for uses such as trails and open space improvements, the city
engineer may approve designated areas of vegetation that can be removed or
disturbed in conjunction with a revegetation or slope stabilization plan.
         g.   Topsoil removed during site construction shall be reserved for
later use on areas requiring vegetation or landscaping such as cut and fill
slopes.
         h.   All disturbed soil surfaces shall be stabilized or covered prior
to November 1. If the planned impervious surfaces, e.g., roads, driveways,
etc., cannot be established prior to November 1, a temporary treatment adequate
to prevent erosion shall be installed on those surfaces.
         i.   The property owner and/or developer shall be fully responsible
for any destruction or damage of native or applied vegetation identified as
necessary for soil retention and shall be responsible to replace such destroyed
vegetation. They shall carry the responsibility both for employees and
subcontractors from the first day of construction until the final acceptance of
improvements. The property owner and developer shall replace all destroyed
vegetation with varieties of vegetation approved by the director.
      4.   Geology:
         a.   Dwellings and commercial buildings shall be set back from any
active faults as required by the city engineer.
         b.   No dwellings, commercial buildings, or off site improvements
shall be allowed on any area considered to be susceptible to landslide, debris
flow, or problems associated with perched or shallow groundwater, except as
approved by the city engineer. Special requirements to mitigate the potential
effects of such hazards may be imposed by the city engineer prior to approval
of the project or issuance of building permits.
      5.   Fire Protection:
         a.   Areas without a recognized water supply shall meet special
requirements as established by the city, upon recommendation of the UFA.
         b.   Each development site and building permit for lots, flag lots,
and lots where the front setback is greater than fifty feet (50') shall be
reviewed by the UFA to see that it complies with applicable fire codes
regarding access roadways for fire apparatus.
         c.   Spark arresters shall be installed in every fireplace constructed
for indoor or outdoor use as regulated by applicable fire codes.
         d.   Development adjacent to public lands shall provide access to
these lands for fire protection vehicles and equipment.
      6.   Grading, Cuts, And Fill:
         a.   Exposed unstable surfaces of a cut or fill shall not be steeper
than one vertical to two horizontal (1:2).
         b.   All permanent fill shall be stabilized and finished to reduce
risk associated with settling, sliding or erosion.
         c.   The top and bottom edges of slopes caused by an excavation or
fill up to ten (10) vertical feet shall be at a minimum of three (3) horizontal
feet from the property line or public right of way lines.
         d.   The maximum vertical height of all cuts or fills shall be ten
feet (10'). Under exceptional circumstances, the director may approve cuts or
fills in excess of ten feet (10') with a recommendation from the city engineer.
Cuts or fills shall be measured from natural grade to finished grade. The
burden of demonstrating exceptional circumstances shall be on the developer of
the property, but may include:
            (1)   Cutting or filling of areas designated as anomalies.
            (2)   Cutting to allow for required sight triangles.
            (3)   Areas previously modified, altered, or disturbed.
            (4)   Cuts or fills as required by the city engineer to mitigate
any unsafe condition such as slopes exceeding fifty percent (50%).
            (5)   Unusual topographic features such as bowls or rises that do
not exceed slope limitations but may inhibit sound construction.
            (6)   Other conditions as approved by the director.
         e.   All structures, except retaining walls or soil stabilization
improvements, shall have a setback from the crest of the fill or base of the
cut of a minimum distance equal to the depth of the fill or the height of the
cut, unless a structurally sound retaining wall is built for the cut or fill
slope.
         f.   No grading, cuts, fills, or terracing will be allowed on a
continuous hillside of thirty percent (30%) or greater slope, crest (upslope or
downslope) unless otherwise determined by the director upon recommendation of
the city engineer.
      7.   Streets And Ways: Streets, roadways, and private accessways shall
follow as nearly as possible the natural terrain. The following additional
standards shall apply:
         a.   At least two (2) points of ingress/egress shall be provided for
each subdivision or PUD project unless the project has one or more of the
following:
            (1)   A single cul-de-sac, hammerhead, or other approved turnaround
approved by the UFA and the city engineer that complies with all development
standards herein.
            (2)   An emergency access approved by the planning commission.
            (3)   The future extension of a stub street that will provide
additional access, including a temporary turnaround approved by the UFA and
city engineer.
         b.   Points of access shall be provided to all adjoining developed and
nondeveloped areas for emergency and firefighting equipment. Driveways located
upon each lot extending from a public or private street shall have sufficient
width and design to admit and accommodate firefighting equipment in compliance
with all city engineering and fire standards.
         c.   Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed six hundred feet (600') in length
and shall have a turnaround with a back of curb line radius of at least forty
six feet (46').
         d.   Stub streets that are longer than one hundred fifty feet (150')
shall have a temporary turnaround.
         e.   Centerline curvatures should not be less than a one hundred foot
(100') radius on any curved street pattern unless otherwise approved by the
city engineer.
         f.   Variations of the street design standards developed to solve
special visual aesthetics and functional problems may be presented to the
planning commission upon recommendation from the city engineer for
consideration and approval. Examples of such variations may be the use of split
roadways to avoid deep cuts, one-way streets, modifications of surface drainage
treatments, sidewalk design, or the extension of a cul-de-sac.
         g.   Development sites which are adjacent to trails shall provide
access to those trails. Parking areas at trailheads may be required by the
planning commission.
         h.   The maximum amount of impervious surface for streets and roadways
shall be twenty percent (20%) of the entire development site.
         i.   All streets or rights of way for vehicular traffic shall be
subject to the following limitations:
            (1)   The maximum grade of such streets or rights of way shall be
ten percent (10%) except that the City Engineer may grant approval for the
construction of such streets or rights-of-way having a grade exceeding ten
percent (10%), but the grade of such streets shall not, in any event, exceed
twelve percent (12%).
            (2)   Roads shall be designed and constructed pursuant to City
standards.
      8.   Architectural Design:
         a.   Buildings proposed for construction in the Jordan River corridor
areas shall be designed to be visually compatible with the natural setting of
the Jordan River corridor. The use of building materials in colors that will
blend harmoniously with the natural settings are encouraged. Such materials as
wood or composite materials such as hardiplank, brick (earth colors) and stone,
with architectural grade asphalt shingle or tile, are considered to be most
appropriate.
         b.   The Director shall review the design and specified exterior
materials and colors for all structures other than single-family dwellings. The
design and materials shall comply with the City architectural design standards.
Building permits for such structures shall not be granted until building
materials and colors have been approved by the Director.
      9.   Developer/Property Owner Responsibility: The developer/property
owner shall be jointly and severally responsible for making all improvements in
accordance with the development site approval.
      10.   Guarantee For Improvements: In addition to the provisions requiring
the posting of a guarantee as set forth elsewhere in the ordinances of the
City, the property owner may be required by the Director and City Engineer to
guarantee the completion of revegetation projects, the stabilization of grading
sites, cuts and fill, and construction of stormwater runoff facilities.
   C.   Jordan River Regulations: In addition to those requirements
specifically outlined in chapter 17.10 of the Salt Lake County Code, the Jordan
River Basin has been identified and mapped by Salt Lake County as having a
"high liquefaction potential". Because of this special characteristic of this
area, a site specific natural hazards study for residential subdivisions,
single-family structures, multi-family residential structures, industrial, and
commercial buildings must be completed and accepted by the City Engineer before
approval for required permits, licenses, and other approvals are issued. The
study shall address the soil conditions of the property to be developed, the
natural hazards that exist, and proposed mitigation measures to mitigate, if
possible, the natural hazards. If the natural hazard cannot be mitigated in a
satisfactory manner, no approval shall be given by the City Engineer. (Ord. 12-
15, 7-11-2012)
13.15.050: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Previously Platted Lots: If a lot which contains or is adjacent to
thirty percent (30%) or greater slopes was platted, approved, and recorded
prior to the adoption of sensitive area (or similar) regulations either in Salt
Lake County or the City and such lot does not comply with the City's current
Sensitive Area Overlay Zone, a property owner may request a special exception
from the Director to allow construction on the property at reduced or no
setback from the thirty percent (30%) or greater slope. If it is determined
that this exception applies, the lot will not be required to proceed through
Sensitive Area Overlay Zone review though special requirements to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the lot owner and residents of the City will be
imposed before the issuance of a building permit. A property owner may request
this exception only if the lot complies with the following:
      1.   Qualifications: Property which qualifies for the exception is
limited to the following:
         a.   Subdivision lots approved and recorded prior to the enactment of
sensitive overlay (or similar) regulations which were applicable to the
property, or subdivision lots approved and recorded under different regulations
than currently apply to the property; and
         b.   The lot contains or is adjacent to thirty percent (30%) or
greater slope and cannot be built upon in compliance with the setbacks required
by the Sensitive Area Overlay Zone in effect at the time the request is made;
and
         c.   The lot does not have the amount of usable land area required by
the Sensitive Area Overlay Zone in effect at the time the request is made; and
         d.   The slope is stable and suitable for construction as determined
by the City Engineer; and
         e.   Measures can be imposed which mitigate or eliminate hazards
created by construction near the slope; and
         f.   The development shall comply with all other requirements of the
Code including driveway slopes and cuts and fills unless the Hearing Officer
approves a variance. (Ord. 18-09, 2-28-2018)
      2.   Required Information: The following information shall be submitted
for review and recommendation of the Director and City Engineer prior to
approval of a building permit:
         a.   Evidence that the lot was platted prior to the imposition of
sensitive area overlay (or similar) regulations or in compliance with previous
regulations.
            (1)   Evidence shall include copies of the subdivision plat
approval and recordation and copies of the regulations which governed the
subdivision at the time it was approved and recorded.
            (2)   If it is claimed that no regulations were in effect at the
time the subdivision plat was approved and recorded, a statement from the
appropriate governmental entity that a search of their records was conducted
and that no regulations were in effect.
         b.   A geotechnical report from a licensed civil engineer that
identifies the following:
            (1)   The depth of undisturbed soil below grade.
            (2)   Soil compaction and stability.
            (3)   Rockfall and debris flow potential.
            (4)   Angle of repose.
            (5)   Conditions on or near the property which, if disturbed by
construction, may create hazards to the property or adjacent property.
            (6)   Recommendations for construction and siting to assure safety
of the development and adjoining properties from these hazards.
         c.   Before the construction of a structure, e.g., single-family
dwelling, multi-family dwelling, commercial building, accessory structure,
pool, etc., shall be allowed, an engineered plot plan stamped and signed by a
licensed civil engineer, licensed surveyor, or licensed architect shall be
submitted and include the following information:
            (1)   Location of all existing and proposed structures.
            (2)   Existing and proposed contour lines at two foot (2')
intervals.
            (3)   Retaining walls or other measures to address the safety of
the subject and adjoining properties if determined necessary by the city
engineer.
            (4)   Existing and proposed vegetation types and locations.
      3.   Building Permit Requirements: The city engineer and director may
impose requirements on the building permit as follows:
         a.   To mitigate or eliminate anticipated impacts from development.
         b.   For guarantees which are established specifically to ensure the
completion and maintenance of the special exception requirements. The guarantee
shall be established for a period of time to be determined by the director and
the city engineer to assure that the mitigation measures are effective and
remain in place and functional.
         c.   That a notice be recorded on the property with the county
recorder that indicates the nature of the special exception, that mitigating
measures have been imposed, and that those measures cannot be removed or
altered without the prior review and approval of the city engineer and
director.
      4.   Variance: If a property owner is requesting to build on the thirty
percent (30%) or greater slope, an application for a variance from the board of
adjustment shall be submitted.
   B.   Previously Disturbed Or Developed Slopes: A property owner whose
property contains or is adjacent to thirty percent (30%) or greater slope(s)
may request a special exception to allow construction at reduced setbacks or no
setback from the slope or on the slope. A property owner may request the
exception during the preliminary review or, upon individual lots, after final
development approval.
      1.   Qualifications: Property which qualifies for the exception is
limited to the following:
         a.   The property contains or is adjacent to areas of thirty percent
(30%) or greater slope; and
         b.   The slope was previously disturbed or altered; and
         c.   The disturbance or alteration was conducted legally either prior
to the imposition of any sensitive area regulations on the property or was
consistent with the sensitive area regulations in effect at the time the
disturbance or alteration was conducted; and
         d.   The slope is stable and suitable for construction as determined
by the city engineer; and
         e.   Measures can be imposed which mitigate or eliminate hazards
created by construction near to or additional disturbance or alteration of the
slope; and
         f.   All development on the property complies with all other
requirements of the current development code, such as driveway slopes and cuts
and fills, maximum impervious coverage, etc.
         g.   No other exceptions or any variances are requested or necessary.
      2.   Required Information: The property owner shall submit the following
for review and recommendation of the director and city engineer to the planning
commission:
         a.   All submittals required for preliminary and final review of
property within a sensitive area overlay zone.
         b.   Evidence that the disturbance or alteration occurred legally
prior to the imposition of sensitive area overlay (or similar) regulations or
consistent with sensitive area overlay (or similar) regulations in effect at
the time the disturbance or alteration occurred.
            (1)   Evidence shall include copies of permits from the
governmental entity that had authority to issue such permits at the time the
alteration/disturbance took place accompanied by copies of any sensitive area
(or similar) regulations in effect at the time of the disturbance or
alteration.
            (2)   If copies of permits are not available, the following may be
acceptable: credible evidence in the form of documents (including photographs)
or sworn affidavits from an individual(s) with first hand knowledge documenting
when the work was done, by whom, and whether it was legal or not, together with
written statements from the appropriate governmental entity that a search of
their records was conducted and that either no permit was found, no permit was
required, and/or no regulations were in effect, and that the work was
consistent with all regulations in effect at the time it was performed.
         c.   A study and report from a licensed civil engineer which
specifically addresses the slopes upon which the applicant is requesting
reduced setbacks including geologic conditions, soils, vegetation, impacts of
development (including aesthetics), and recommended mitigation measures for
those impacts. (This information may be contained in the geologic report
submitted with the application.)
      3.   Planning Commission Determination: The planning commission may grant
the special exception and establish a reduced setback from the thirty percent
(30%) or greater slope, determine that no setback from the slope is required,
or allow building on the slope if it finds that the property complies with all
the qualifications for the exception listed above.
      4.   Requirements Imposed: The planning commission shall impose
requirements:
         a.   To mitigate or eliminate anticipated impacts from development.
         b.   For guarantees which are established specifically to ensure the
completion and maintenance of the special exception requirements. The guarantee
shall be established for a period of time to be determined by the director and
city engineer to assure that the mitigation measures are effective and remain
in place and functional.
         c.   That a notice be recorded on the property that indicates the
nature of the special exception, that mitigating measures have been imposed,
and that those measures cannot be removed or altered without the prior review
and approval of the city engineer and director.
   C.   Determination Of Anomalies For Thirty Percent Or Greater Slopes: The
city engineer shall review all requests for development on thirty percent (30%)
or greater slopes to determine if anomalies exist. If an anomaly is determined
to exist, the city engineer shall forward to the planning commission a
recommendation regarding development of the area affected by the anomaly. This
recommendation will be made as part of the preliminary review of the project.
The city engineer shall consult the public works department policy prior to
making a recommendation. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.15.060: CONSTRUCTION, GRADING, CONTOUR MAP AND ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS:
   A.   There shall be no construction, development, or grading upon the
development site located in the Jordan River corridor and wetlands if the slope
is fifteen percent (15%) or greater until final approval has been granted.
   B.   Before construction of a structure upon a lot(s) shall be allowed, an
engineered plot plan stamped, dated, and signed by a licensed civil engineer,
licensed surveyor, or licensed architect, shall be submitted. The plot plan
shall be drawn to a standard scale (at least 1 inch = 10 feet or other scale
approved by the city engineer) and shall be submitted to the director or
designated staff representative. The plot plan shall show lot lines, existing
and proposed contours at two foot (2') intervals, location of proposed
structures, walks, easements, decks, driveways, patio areas, etc. The plot plan
shall also include vegetation, drainage, erosion controls, and location of
limits of disturbance fencing (required) and be attached to the building
permit. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.16
FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
13.16.010: Findings
13.16.020: Statement Of Purpose
13.16.030: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
13.16.040: Definitions
13.16.050: General Provisions
13.16.060: Administration
13.16.070: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
13.16.080: Penalties For Noncompliance
13.16.010: FINDINGS:
   A.   The flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation which results
in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce
and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety,
and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.16.020: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains; electric, telephone, and sewer lines; streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.16.030: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.16.040: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30,
VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building: a) built, in the case of a building
in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the
elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers),
or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and b) adequately anchored so
as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up
to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by
means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
In the case of zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a
building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building", even though
the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls
met the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community and all
subsequent amendments and revisions thereto.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Land use ordinances, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance,
grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of
police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior, or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: For the purposes of this chapter, means a structure
transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis
and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter
when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this chapter. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the national flood
insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.16.050: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the city.
   B.   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood
Insurance Study For The City Of Taylorsville", dated September 25, 2009, and
all subsequent amendments and/or revisions thereto, with accompanying flood
insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any
revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this chapter.
   C.   A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   D.   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its
use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
   E.   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict
or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   F.   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   G.   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 12-15,
7-11-2012)
13.16.060: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Floodplain Administrator Appointed: The director is hereby appointed
the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this
chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance
program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
   B.   Duties And Responsibilities Of Floodplain Administrator: Duties and
responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
      1.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building
site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding.
      3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
      4.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
      5.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
      6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency which is NFIP coordinator, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
federal emergency management agency.
      7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      8.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with subsection
13.16.050B of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of this section.
      9.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
      10.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'), provided
that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision).
   C.   Development Permit Application: Application for a development permit
shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/
her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape
alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of
special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      3.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of subsection
13.16.070B of this chapter;
      4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      5.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection B of this section.
   D.   Development Permit Approval Or Denial: Approval or denial of a
development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the
provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
   E.   Variance Procedures:
      1.   Appeal Authority: The appeal authority as established by the
community shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
      2.   Alleged Error: The appeal authority shall hear and render judgment
on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
      3.   Decision Of Appeal Authority May Be Appealed: Any person or persons
aggrieved by the decision of the appeal authority may appeal such decision in
the courts of competent jurisdiction.
      4.   Records: The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all
actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency
management agency upon request.
      5.   Exception: Variances may be issued for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the national register of
historic places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
      6.   Lot Surrounded By Structures Below Base Flood Level: Variances may
be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a
lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots
with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the
relevant factors in subsection D of this section have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      7.   Conditions: Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the
intent of this chapter, the appeal authority may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of this chapter.
      8.   Designated Floodway: Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
      9.   Historic Structures: Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
      10.   Prerequisites For Granting Variances:
         a.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
Variances shall only be issued upon:
            (1)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
            (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
            (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice
that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
      11.   Considerations: Variances may be issued by a community for new
construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary
for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
         a.   The criteria outlined in subsections D1 through D9 of this
section are met, and
         b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.16.070: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   New Construction And Substantial Improvements: In all areas of special
flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction
and substantial improvements:
      1.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
      2.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      3.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      4.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
      5.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
      6.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
      7.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   B.   Floodproofing Requirements: In all areas of special flood hazards where
base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in: 1) subsection
13.16.050B of this chapter, 2) subsection
13.16.060B8 of this chapter, or 3) subsection C3 of this section, the following
provisions are required:
      1.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as
proposed in subsection
13.16.060C of this chapter is satisfied.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
      3.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      4.   Manufactured Homes:
         a.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on
a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
         b.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 1)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 2) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, 3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or 4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         c.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within
zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the
provisions of this subsection B4 be elevated so that either:
            (1)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevation, or
            (2)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
      5.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days,
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection
13.16.060C of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection B4 of this section. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions.
   C.   Standards For Subdivision Proposals:
      1.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with subsections A and B of
this section.
      2.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development
permit requirements of subsections
13.16.050C and 13.16.060C of this chapter; and the provisions of this section.
      3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots
or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to
subsection
13.16.060B of this chapter or subsection B of this section.
      4.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
      5.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage.
   D.   Areas Of Shallow Flooding: Located within the areas of special flood
hazard established in subsection
13.16.060B of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. These
areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to
three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following
provisions apply:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified).
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures:
         a.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
         b.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads or effects of buoyancy.
      3.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in subsection
13.16.060C of this chapter, are satisfied.
      4.   Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
   E.   Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
subsection
13.16.050B of this chapter, are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters
which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
      1.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      2.   If subsection E1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
      3.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter I, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base
flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.16.080: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than six
(6) months, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs
and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.17
DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE
SECTION:
13.17.010: Title, Applicability, And Authority
13.17.020: Purpose And Intent
13.17.030: Extent And Designation Of Recharge Areas And Protection Zones
13.17.040: Permitted Uses, Public Utilities Approval, And Not Permitted Within
Recharge Areas And Protection Zones
13.17.050: Management Strategies And Performance Standards
13.17.060: Table - Land Use Matrix For Potential Contamination Sources
13.17.070: Exclusions And Exemptions
13.17.080: Enforcement, Violation, And Penalties
13.17.090: Other
13.17.100: Liability
13.17.110: Administration
13.17.120: Exhibit 1, Generic Regulated Substance List
13.17.010: TITLE, APPLICABILITY, AND AUTHORITY:
   A.   Title: This chapter shall be known as the DRINKING WATER SOURCE
PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE. The provisions of this zone shall be effective within
the city and shall set prohibitions and restrictions to prevent contamination
of the public drinking water supply in the city as a result of hazardous and
toxic substances entering the groundwater, including wells not owned by the
city. This zone shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes set forth
herein.
   B.   Applicability: It shall be the responsibility of any person owning real
property and/or owning or operating a business within the city boundaries to
conform and comply with the applicable provisions contained in this zone.
Ignorance of this provision shall not excuse any violations of the provisions
of this zone.
   C.   Authority: The city has the authority to adopt this zone to facilitate
compliance and management with drinking water source protection regulations
pursuant to the land use and development act of the Utah Code Annotated, the
Utah administrative code, and other such authorities and provisions as in the
statutory and common law of the state of Utah. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.17.020: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this zone is to protect, preserve, and maintain existing and
potential public drinking water sources in order to safeguard the public
health, safety, and welfare of city residents and visitors. The intent of this
zone is to establish and designate drinking water source protection zones and
groundwater recharge areas for all sources of public drinking water within city
boundaries. This zone establishes criteria for regulating the storage,
handling, use, or production of hazardous or toxic substances within identified
areas where groundwater is or could be affected by the potential contaminant
source. This shall be accomplished by the designation and regulation of
property uses and conditions that may be maintained within such zones or areas.
Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of this zone apply to new
development/redevelopment and/or handling, movement, and storage of potentially
hazardous materials.
The degree of protection afforded by this zone is considered adequate for
regulatory purposes. This zone does not ensure that public drinking water
sources will not be subject to accidental or intentional contamination, nor
does it create liability on the part of the city, any officer, or employee
thereof for any damages to the public water supplies from reliance on this zone
nor any administrative order lawfully made thereunder.
A notice to cease or an exemption issued under this zone shall not relieve the
owner of the obligation to comply with any other applicable federal, state,
regional, or local regulations, rules, ordinances, or requirements, nor shall
said notice or exception relieve any owner of any liability for violation of
such regulations, rules, ordinances, or requirements. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.17.030: EXTENT AND DESIGNATION OF RECHARGE AREAS AND PROTECTION ZONES:
   A.   Drinking Water Source Protection Zone Map: The extent of the recharge
areas and the protection zones may be seen on the most current drinking water
source protection zone map (DWSPZ map) on file in the city. The recharge area
boundary lines have been located along streets and/or section lines for
convenience of assessing which prohibition and restrictions apply to a specific
property. This map shall be maintained by the applicable public utility
providers, whose groundwater resources lay within the city boundaries and
jurisdiction.
   B.   Designation Of Recharge Areas And Protection Zones: The following
recharge areas and protection zones are hereby designated within the city:
      1.   Primary recharge area: As determined by the USGS (see DWSPZ map).
      2.   Secondary recharge: As determined by the USGS (see DWSPZ map).
      3.   Protection zone 1: Area within a one hundred foot (100') radius from
a well.
      4.   Protection zone 2: Area within a two hundred fifty (250) day
groundwater time of travel (TOT) to a well. The margin of the collection area,
the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source,
or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer (see DWSPZ map).
      5.   Protection zone 3: Area within a three (3) year TOT to a well. The
margin of the collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies
water to the groundwater source, or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer
(see DWSPZ map).
      6.   Protection zone 4: Area within a fifteen (15) year TOT to a well.
The margin of the collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which
supplies water to the groundwater source, or the groundwater divide, whichever
is closer (see DWSPZ map).
   C.   Determination Of Location Of Properties: In determining the location of
properties and facilities within the areas and zones depicted on the DWSPZ map,
the following rules shall apply:
      1.   Property located wholly or partially in a recharge area or a
protection zone on the DWSPZ map shall be governed by the restrictions
applicable to that recharge area or protection zone.
      2.   Property located within more than one recharge area or protection
zone as shown on the DWSPZ map shall be governed by the restrictions applicable
to the most restrictive protection zone.
   D.   Review Of DWSPZ Map: The DWSPZ map shall be reviewed as deemed
necessary. The basis for updating the map may include, but is not limited to,
the following:
      1.   Changes in technical or scientific knowledge in the areas of
geohydrology, hydraulics, and geology.
      2.   Changes in well field configuration.
      3.   Changes in pumping rates for the well field.
      4.   Development of new wells, well fields, and/or springs.
      5.   Changes in water quality. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.17.040: PERMITTED USES, PUBLIC UTILITIES APPROVAL, AND NOT PERMITTED WITHIN
RECHARGE AREAS AND PROTECTION ZONES:
   A.   Releases: No person shall discharge or permit the discharge of any
regulated substances or petroleum products, whether treated or untreated, into
soils, air, groundwater, or surface water in any recharge area or protection
zone that may have a deleterious effect upon the groundwater in the city unless
the release is in compliance with federal, state, and local regulations.
   B.   Not Permitted And Restrictions: The table in section
13.17.060 of this chapter is a summary matrix of potential contamination
sources and their not permitted, permitted, or if permitted, city approval in
the protection zones referenced in this chapter.
   C.   Review Of Development Plans: All development plans that lie within the
primary recharge area shall be reviewed by a registered geologist who has
demonstrated expertise in the assessment of recharge rates. Any development
that will result in a loss of the beneficial use of groundwater or that may
have an adverse or negative effect upon local groundwater quality shall be
rejected. Plans that are rejected may be revised by the developer and
resubmitted to the city for subsequent review by a registered geologist. (Ord.
12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.17.050: MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Toxic, Hazardous, And Other Materials Handling Regulations: The general
classes of substances to be regulated under this zone shall be those set forth
in the generic regulated substances list which is presented in section
13.17.120 of this chapter, exhibit 1. The regulated identification and listing
of hazardous materials (40 CFR part 261, subpart D) and list of extremely
hazardous substances (40 code of federal regulations CFR part 355, appendices A
and B) and which are in a form that they are, all or in part, capable of
entering the groundwater. The use and storage of regulated substances in
designated protection zones and recharge areas shall be allowed provided that
the quantities of these substances do not exceed the reportable quantity for
each regulated substance as designated in 40 CFR 302 (pursuant to section 311
of the clean water act). An applicant may be exempted from the provisions of
this section provided that he demonstrates to the city and to the Utah division
of drinking water quality that the regulated substances pose no hazard to
groundwater.
   B.   Storage Containers: All regulated substances shall be stored in
suitable containers to reduce the chance for the substances to be accidentally
introduced into the environment. These storage containers shall be product
tight and, except where provided elsewhere in the zone, shall be provided with
a means to control spillage (primary containment) and to contain or drain off
spillage and fire protection water discharged in the storage area (secondary
containment).
Storage containers which are stored outside must be covered or mounted to
prevent the accumulation of rain or other water on the top of the container, or
the degradation of the top, sides, or bottom of the container, in a manner that
would lead to the reduction of the integrity of the container. Defective
storage containers shall be removed from service for repair or disposal in
accordance with local, state, and federal standards.
   C.   Secondary Containment: Where secondary containment is required, it
shall be constructed of a material of sufficient structural integrity and
composition to contain the required capacity of liquids and not be structurally
weakened as a result of contact with the discharge of the regulated substance
to be contained. The material shall be free of cracks, joints, gaps, or other
imperfections which would allow leakage through the containment material.
The secondary containment system shall have sufficient capacity to contain ten
percent (10%) of the volume of all containers and one hundred percent (100%) of
the volume of the largest single container, whichever is greater, plus the
design flow rate of the automatic fire extinguishing system (for 20 minutes)
for the area or room in which the storage is located. If the storage area and/
or containment area are open to rainfall, the secondary containment system must
also accommodate the volume of a 24-hour rainfall as determined by a 25-year
storm frequency. Liquid that accumulates in the secondary containment system
shall be removed in as timely a manner as necessary to prevent overflow of the
system. Nonhazardous liquids may be drained in accordance with applicable local
regulations. If the collected material is a hazardous waste under title 40 part
261 of the code of federal regulations, it must be managed as a hazardous waste
in accordance with all applicable requirements of parts 262 through 266 of that
regulation.
Vacuum suction devices, absorbent scavenger materials, or other devices
approved by the applicable public utility providers shall be present on site or
available to facilitate the removal or further containment of spilled regulated
substances. Devices or materials shall be available in sufficient magnitude so
as to at least control and collect the total quantity of regulated substances
that the containment system is designed to contain. Emergency containers shall
be present and of such capacity to hold the total quantity of regulated
substances plus absorbent material.
   D.   Regulated Substances Emergency Management Plan: An emergency plan shall
be prepared and filed with the city indicating the procedures that will be
followed in the event of the release of a regulated substance so as to control
and collect all such spilled material in such a manner to prevent it from
discharging into any storm or sanitary drains or the ground. Facilities which
have had, or appear to have had, unauthorized discharges to soil or groundwater
shall be required by the city to submit a regulated substances management plan
for the facility. The written plan will be used to demonstrate to the city that
the facility owner or operator understands the procedures and has the proper
equipment to handle regulated substances within the guidelines of this zone.
The plan should not be implemented without the approval of the city.
   E.   Reporting Of Spills: Any spill of a regulated substance in excess of
the nonaggregate quantity thresholds established by the list of hazardous waste
(40 CFR part 261, subpart D), 40 CFR appendix VIII - hazardous constituents and
EPA designation reportable quantities and notification requirements for
hazardous substances under CERCLA (40 CFR 302, effective July 3, 1986), shall
be reported by telephone to the city and designated water utility within one
hour of discovery of the spill. Cleanup shall commence immediately upon
discovery of the spill. A full written report shall be submitted to the city
within fifteen (15) calendar days of discovery of the spill.
   F.   Best Management Practices: Under the provisions of this zone, all
potential contamination sources within the city shall incorporate and utilize
best management practices (BMPs) in their operations. BMPs that reduce the
potential for spills and leaks at a site to occur and enter groundwater shall
be construed within the context of this zone to include, but not be limited to,
structural and nonstructural practices, conservation practices, and operation
and maintenance procedures as specified by the Utah division of drinking water
quality and the U.S. environmental protection agency.
   G.   Underground Storage Tanks (USTs): Installation of any new underground
storage tanks used to store regulated substances for either residential or
nonresidential activities in recharge areas and protection zones designated
under this chapter shall require a secondary containment system for the tank
and associated underground piping and an automatic leak detection system.
A permit from the Utah department of environmental quality, environmental
remediation and response division shall be required for the removal or closure
of USTs. The permit shall require that leaking tanks be pumped dry and removed
from the ground by a state licensed company. If removal of the UST(s) is not
feasible, the lines shall be disconnected and capped, and the tank shall be
filled with an inert substance such as washed sand.
Best management practices implementation is required for all underground
storage tanks.
   H.   Septic Tank Systems: No person shall place, maintain, or operate on
site sewage disposal from a septic tank within the primary recharge area, zone
1, zone 2, or within three hundred feet (300') of any public street in which a
public sewer is laid. Septic systems in zones 3 and 4 shall comply with the
Utah state department of healthcare of waste disposal regulations, part IV and
part V.
Nonresidential activities which have septic tank systems shall have installed a
four inch (4") diameter vertical pipe with a locked cap or locked top in the
top of the septic tank. This monitoring pipe shall be located in a manner which
will permit ready access by city or its designee personnel to extract
representative samples to check for improper/unauthorized disposal of regulated
substances.
A septic holding tank that does not discharge into the soil would be preferred.
The contents of such a septic holding tank are removed and can be treated or
disposed of at an appropriate facility.
   I.   Sewage Collection, Transmission, And Disposal: No person shall
discharge treated or untreated sewage in any area not specifically designated
for that purpose by the applicable public utilities providers. The owner of
sanitary sewer, force main, gravity sewer, or lateral shall notify the city
within twenty four (24) hours of discovering a break that may or does result in
the leakage of sewage. Emergency telephone numbers will be prominently
displayed on all sewage lift stations within zones 1, 2, 3, and 4, and the
primary recharging area.
All leaking sewage collection and transmission pipes shall be repaired or
replaced. New sewage collection and transmission pipes shall be installed
according to acceptable construction standards and shall have routine
inspections during and after construction.
No person shall place, maintain, or operate a wastewater treatment plant within
zones 1 or 2.
   J.   General Stormwater Management: All future stormwater management systems
to be constructed and implemented for facilities within the protection zones
and recharge areas shall be permitted in accordance with applicable local,
state, and federal laws and regulations.
The discharge of stormwater into drainage wells, open sinkholes, or sumps shall
be prohibited without some form of treatment. This treatment shall be applied
to at least the first 0.5 inch of runoff from the area tributary to the well or
open sinkhole.
The clean water and stormwater regulations require municipalities and
industries to identify, monitor, and limit urban runoff that may enter rivers,
thus potentially affecting groundwater quality.
   K.   Deicing Salt Storage And Application: Deicing salt shall be stored on
an impermeable pad and shall be covered or comply with an approved storm drain
plan. Deicing salt application shall use best management practices and shall
evaluate substitute products and technologies.
   L.   Landfills: Expansion or creation of new landfills is prohibited in the
primary recharge area, zone 1, and zone 2. Existing landfills in the primary
recharge area or in zone 1 shall be required to comply with the provisions of
UAC R315-301-1 through 301-5. Landfills shall develop and implement a landfill
monitoring program. The monitoring shall include the vadose zone and
groundwater. If the monitoring detects contamination, the following corrective
measures may be required:
      1.   Cover the landfill with suitable low permeability materials and
minimize the application of supplemental water to reduce infiltration of
moisture.
      2.   Install groundwater containment and treatment actions, additional
monitoring, and erosion controls as required.
   M.   Environmental Quality Monitoring: Facilities which have had, or appear
to have had, unauthorized releases to soil or groundwater shall be required by
the city to monitor soil and groundwater in and adjacent to the facility. At
the request of the city or public utility provider, the facility will submit a
monitoring plan for review. The plan shall be implemented with the approval of
the city. Facilities that undergo closure may be required to monitor soil and
groundwater in and adjacent to the facility subject to closure. All costs
associated with the closing and monitoring of the site will be paid for by the
operator of the facility. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.17.060: TABLE - LAND USE MATRIX FOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINATION SOURCES:
The following table identifies uses which have varying potentials to
contaminate groundwater sources. These uses have been classified according to
the risk of contamination in each protection zone as follows:
   A.   Permitted uses (P): The risk of contamination is considered relatively
low in the specified zone if regulatory requirements and best management
practices are implemented and, therefore, the use is permitted.
   B.   Requires approval (R): The risk of contamination is moderate in the
specified zone. The use may be permitted only after review and approval by the
city engineer and applicable public utility providers. Approval is subject to
implementation of best management practices and compliance with other
reasonable conditions as may be established by the applicable public utility
providers. The Utah division of drinking water quality shall review all
requests before city approval is given.
   C.   Not permitted (N): The risk of contamination is very high in the
specified zone. The use is not permitted.
Stormwater:    R-317-8-3.8(1)(a)
         R-317-8-3.8(b)(c)+(d)
   Pretreatment:    Contact local wastewater plant
   LAND USE MATRIX FOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINATION SOURCES
 
Potential            Protection Zone                      Best Management
Contamination Source Primary  Secondary Zone Zone Zones 3 Practice(s)
                     Recharge Recharge  1    2    And 4
Abandoned wells                      N N N N N  
Agricultural pesticide, herbicide,
and fertilizer storage, use,         R R N R R BMP - department of agriculture
filling, and mixing areas
Airport maintenance and fueling      R R N R R  
sites
Appliance repair                     P P N P P  
Auto operations and fleet vehicle
maintenance facilities (commercial):
   Auto body
   Dealership maintenance
departments                          R R N R R BMP - SL Co. health
   Engine repair
   Oil and lube shops
   Rustproofing
   Tire
   Vehicle rental with maintenance
Beauty salons                        R P N R P  
Boat building and refinishing        R P N R R  
Car washes                           R R N R R Contact city
Cemeteries, golf courses, parks, and R R N R R  
plant nurseries
Chemical reclamation facilities      R R N R R  
Chemigation wells                    R R N R R  
Concrete, asphalt, and tar companies R R N R R  
Dairy farms and animal feed lots     R P N N P  
(more than 10 animal units)
Dry cleaners (with on site           R R N N P  
chemicals)
Dry cleaners (without on site        P P N P P  
chemicals)
Embalming services                   R R N R R  
Farm operations:                           
   Dump sites                     N R N R R  
   Maintenance garages            R R N R R  
   Manure piles (<20 cubic feet)  R R N R P  
Food processing, meatpacking, and    R R N N P  
slaughterhouses
Fuel, oil, and heating oil           N R N R R  
distribution and storage facilities
Furniture stripping, painting, and   R R N R R  
finishing businesses
Gasoline service stations (including R R N R R  
underground storage tanks)
Hospitals and medical, dental, and   R R N R R  
veterinary offices
Industrial manufactures of:
chemicals, pesticides, herbicides,
paper products, leather products,
textiles, rubber, plastic,           N R N R R  
fiberglass, silicone, glass,
pharmaceuticals, and electrical
equipment, etc.
Industrial waste disposal/           N R N R R  
impoundment areas
Junk and salvage yards               N R N R R SL Co. BMP
Landfills and transfer stations      N R N R P  
Laundromats                          R P N P P  
Machine shops, metal plating, heat
treating, smelting, annealing, and   N R N R R  
descaling facilities
Mining operations:                         
   Radiological                   R R N P P  
   Sand and gravel excavation and R P N P P  
processing
Municipal wastewater treatment       R R N N P  
plants
Photo processing and print shops     R R N R R  
RV waste disposal stations           R R N N P  
Railroad yards                       R P N P P  
Residential pesticide, herbicide,              Follow manufacturer's directions
and fertilizer storage, use,         R P N R R for use and storage
filling, and mixing areas
Residential underground storage      N R N R P  
tanks
Salt and salt-sand piles             R R N R R DEQ/UDOT BMP
Septic tank drainfield systems       N R N N R  
Stormwater detention basin and snow  R R N R P  
storage sites
Sumps                                R R N N R  
Toxic chemical storage and oil       N N N N N  
pipelines
Wood preservative treatment          N R N R R  
facilities
 
UAC:   Utah administrative code
UDDWQ: Utah division of drinking water quality
UDOGM: Utah division of oil, gas, and mining
UDSW:  Utah division of solid waste
RCRA:  Resource conservation and recovery act
 
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.17.070: EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
Exclusions and exemptions shall not pertain to zones 1 and 2 within one hundred
feet (100') from the well field in the recharge areas.
   A.   Exclusions: The following substances are not subject to the provisions
of this chapter provided that these substances are handled, stored, and
disposed of in a manner that does not result in an unauthorized release or
cause contamination of the groundwater.
      1.   Required substances stored at residences that do not exceed ten (10)
pounds or five (5) gallons and used for personal, family, or household
purposes.
      2.   Commercial products limited to use at the site solely for office or
janitorial purposes when stored in total quantities of less than twenty (20)
pounds or ten (10) gallons.
      3.   Prepackaged consumer products available through retail sale to
individuals for personal, family, or household use that are properly stored.
      4.   Water based latex paint.
      5.   Fertilizers and treated seed (except as noted in this section).
      6.   Pesticide products and materials intended for use in weed abatement,
pest control, erosion control, soil amendment, or similar applications when
applied in accordance with manufacturer's instructions, label directions, and
nationally recognized standards.
      7.   Compressed gases.
      8.   Substances or mixtures which may pose a hazard but are labeled
pursuant to the federal food, drug, and cosmetic act.
   B.   Continuous Transit: The transportation of any regulated substance(s)
through any protection zone or recharge area shall be allowed, provided that
the transporting vehicle is in continuous transit.
   C.   Vehicular And Low Maintenance Fuel And Lubricant Use: The use of any
petroleum product solely as an operational fuel in the vehicle or low
maintenance fuel tank or as a lubricant in such a vehicle shall be exempt from
the provisions of this section. These spent products shall be properly disposed
of in compliance with applicable federal, state, and local regulations. (Ord.
12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.17.080: ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION, AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Inspections: An authorized officer of the city or the Salt Lake Valley
health department has the right to conduct inspections of facilities to
determine compliance with this chapter. The authorized officer or the Salt Lake
Valley health department shall inform the city, applicable public utility
providers and other entities, as deemed appropriate, of the results of the
inspection and whether violations were noted. The authorized officer of the
city and/or the Salt Lake Valley health department shall enforce the provisions
of this chapter. Noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter is a
violation. If the facility is not complying with the requirements of this
chapter, penalties (e.g., citations of noncompliance, orders to cease
operations or administrative penalties) may be assessed. This chapter regulates
businesses within the protection zones and primary and secondary recharge areas
within the city.
   B.   Notice Of Violations: Whenever it is determined that there is a
violation of this chapter or the regulations promulgated pursuant hereto, the
notice of violation shall:
      1.   Be in writing.
      2.   Be dated and signed by the authorized city agent that made the
inspection or determined the violation.
      3.   Specify the violation(s).
      4.   Provide a specific date that the violation(s) will be corrected.
      5.   State that if the violation is not corrected by a specific date, a
hearing may be requested.
If a potential contaminant source (PCS) is out of compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, but does not pose an immediate threat to public
health, then a written warning of violation may be issued within thirty (30)
days. The person has the opportunity to show a good faith effort to correct an
unintentional violation within a reasonable amount of time. A cease and desist
order shall be issued by the city if the PCS is found not to employ BMPs, and
there is an immediate threat to public health and safety or if the violation is
not corrected within the time frame specified in a written warning previously
issued to the PCS. In the event the PCS fails to comply with a cease and desist
order within the specified time period, the city has the authority to pursue
legal action.
Any PCS or person found in violation of any provisions of this chapter will be
served with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing
a reasonable time frame for compliance. Violations of the provisions of this
chapter constitute a misdemeanor, punishable as provided by law. In the event
of a spill, leak, or discharge of a regulated substance and the city deems the
activity to pose a real and present danger of contaminating surface or ground
water which would normally enter the public water supply, the city has the
authority under this section to cause cessation of said activity or use of
regulated substance, require administrative controls to mitigate said danger
and/or cause the provision of pollution control and abatement activities. A
facility is in violation of this chapter if use of regulated substances in a
protection zone or a primary or secondary recharge area exceeds twenty (20)
gallons or one hundred sixty (160) pounds at any time. The total use of
regulated substances may not exceed fifty (50) gallons or four hundred (400)
pounds in any twelve (12) month period.
   C.   Appeals: Persons cited under the enforcement provisions of subsections
A and B of this section shall be afforded a process for appealing the ruling of
the city. If the appeal pertains to a written warning of violation requesting
the PCS to correct an unintentional violation in a reasonable amount of time,
the PCS can submit to the city a written statement demonstrating compliance or
explaining a process for coming into compliance. This written response is
required no later than thirty (30) days from the date of issuance of the
warning.
If the appeal pertains to a cease and desist order issued by the city, the PCS
can submit a written appeal response no later than ten (10) days from the date
of issuance of the order. The written appeal shall contain:
      1.   Documentation of compliance; or
      2.   Response to specific violations cited in the cease and desist order
and the remedial actions planned to bring the facility into compliance; and
      3.   Schedule for compliance.
Upon receipt of the written appeal, the city shall be required to review the
appeal within ten (10) days of its receipt and respond to the PCS. If the city
determines that the written response from the PCS is adequate and noncompliance
issues are addressed, the PCS will be notified by mail and no further action
will be required. If the city determines that the appeals response is
inadequate, the PCS may request a hearing pursuant to the process set forth in
chapter 13.34 of this title. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.17.090: OTHER:
   A.   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this chapter and other restrictions, including
land use codes or development regulations conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the most stringent restrictions, shall prevail.
   B.   Disputes: Disputes arising from the delineation of DWSP zones and
primary and secondary recharge areas shall be directed to the city engineer to
review specific detailed delineation maps showing the boundaries. The
boundaries have been defined for ease of implementation of this section,
according to major city streets. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.17.100: LIABILITY:
Any person subject to regulation under this chapter shall be liable with
respect to regulated substances emanating on or from the person's property for
all cost of removal or remedial action incurred by the city, Salt Lake Valley
health department, and/or applicable public utility providers and for damages
for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources, including the
reasonable cost of assessing such injury, destruction, or loss from the release
or threatened release of a regulated substance as defined by this chapter. Such
removal or remedial action by the city and/or Salt Lake Valley health
department and/or applicable public utility providers may include, but is not
limited to, the prevention of further contamination of groundwater, monitoring,
containment, and cleanup, or disposal of regulated substances resulting from
spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, or dumping of any regulated
substance or material which creates an emergency hazard or is expected to
create an emergency hazardous situation. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.17.110: ADMINISTRATION:
The policies and procedures for administration of any protection zone or
primary and secondary recharge area established under this chapter, including,
without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions,
enforcement, and penalties, shall be the same as provided in any existing
zoning ordinance in the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time
to time be amended. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.17.120: EXHIBIT 1, GENERIC REGULATED SUBSTANCE LIST:
Acid and basic cleaning solutions
Animal dips
Antifreeze and coolants
Arsenic and arsenic compounds
Battery acids
Bleaches and peroxide
Brake and transmission fluid
Brine solution
Casting and foundry chemicals
Caulking agents and sealants
Cleaning solvents
Corrosion and rust preventatives
Cutting fluids
Degreasing solvents
Disinfectants
Dyes
Electroplating solutions
Engraving and etching solutions
Explosives
Fertilizers
Fire extinguishing chemicals
Food processing waste
Formaldehyde
Fuels and additives
Glues, adhesives and resins
Greases
Hydraulic fluid
Indicators
Industrial and commercial janitorial supplies
Industrial sludges and still bottoms
Inks, printing, and photocopying chemicals
Laboratory chemicals
Liquid storage batteries
Medical, pharmaceutical, dental, veterinary, and hospital solutions
Mercury and mercury compounds
Metal finishing solutions
Oils
Painting solvents
Paints, primers, thinners, dyes, stains, wood preservatives, varnishing, and
cleaning compounds
Pesticides and herbicides
Photo development chemicals
Plastic resins, plasticizers, and catalysts
Poisons
Polishes
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
Pool chemicals
Processed dust and particulates
Radioactive sources
Refrigerants
Roofing chemicals and sealers
Sanitizers, disinfectants, bactericides, and algaecides
Soaps, detergents, and surfactants
Solders and fluxes
Stripping compounds
Tanning industry chemicals
Transformer and capacitor oils and fluids
Wastewater
Water and wastewater treatment chemicals (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.18
DESIGN DISTRICT AND HISTORIC RESOURCES OVERLAY ZONES
SECTION:
13.18.010: Purpose
13.18.020: Historic Resources Overlay Zone
13.18.030: Redwood Road Design District Overlay Zone
13.18.040: Mid-Valley Connector Design District Overlay Zone
13.18.050: City Center Design District Overlay Zone
13.18.060: Bennion Point Design District Overlay Zone
13.18.070: 5400 South/Bangerter Highway Commercial Design District Overlay Zone
13.18.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for those areas,
districts, sites, streetscapes and buildings in the City which have been
designated as having significant character, interest or value as part of the
City's effort to ensure that development is done in a manner that best
contributes to the economic well-being of the City of Taylorsville as well as
the welfare and quality of life of its citizens.
New development, alterations to structures, alterations to landscaping, site
improvements, or projects within the public right-of-way shall be harmoniously
related to their surroundings, the terrain, the scale, and the architecture of
existing buildings and streetscapes. Each design district established by City
Council shall have its own design regulations that reflect the character of
each district. (Ord. 18-16, 8-1-2018)
13.18.020: HISTORIC RESOURCES OVERLAY ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the Historic Resources Overlay Zone is to
provide regulations for those areas, districts, sites, and buildings in the
City which have been designated as having significant character, interest or
value as part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the
City, the State of Utah, or the Nation.
   B.   Duties Of Community Development Department And Historic Preservation
Committee:
      1.   Community Development Department: The Community Development
Department is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Taylorsville Historic Preservation Committee: The Taylorsville
Historic Preservation Committee, hereinafter Historic Committee, has been
established to recommend to the City and aid property owners in maintaining and
enhancing the worthwhile historical resources of the City. The duties of the
Historic Preservation Committee are as follows:
         a.   To make recommendations to the City Council concerning the
designation of historic areas, districts, landmark sites, and buildings of
historic significance.
         b.   To make recommendations to the City Council on matters pertaining
to historic resources.
         c.   To make recommendations to the City Council concerning guidelines
for rehabilitation and new construction pertaining to historic resources and
areas.
         d.   To aid property owners in maintaining and enhancing their
properties in a manner consistent with adopted or otherwise established
guidelines.
   C.   Designation Of Historic Areas, Districts, Landmark Sites, And Buildings
Of Historic Significance:
      1.   Qualifications For Designation: An area, neighborhood, or district
may be designated as a historic district. Any site, natural feature, structure,
or building may be designated as a landmark site or building of historic
significance if it has significant character, interest, or value as part of the
development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the City, the State of
Utah, or the Nation; and if it falls into one or more of the following
categories:
         a.   Historical Significance:
            (1)   It is the location of, or is associated in a significant way
with, a historic event which had a significant effect upon the community, City,
State, or Nation.
            (2)   It is associated in a significant way with the life of a
person important in the history of the community, City, State, or Nation.
            (3)   It is associated in a significant way with an important
aspect of the cultural, political, or economic heritage of the community, City,
State, or Nation.
         b.   Architectural Significance:
            (1)   It embodies the distinctive visible characteristics of an
architectural style, period, or a method of construction.
            (2)   It is an outstanding work of a designer or builder.
            (3)   It contains elements of extraordinary or unusual
architectural or structural design, detail, use of materials, or craftsmanship.
            (4)   It portrays the environment of a group of people in an era of
history characterized by a distinctive architectural style.
         c.   Historic Area Significance: Because of its prominent location,
contrasts of siting, age, or scale, it is an easily identifiable visual feature
of the City and contributed to the distinctive quality or identity of the City.
      2.   Procedure For Designation:
         a.   Any person, group, or association may nominate a prospective
area, district, site, or building for formal designation and inclusion in the
Taylorsville Historic Registry. Nominations shall be filed with the Community
Development Department.
         b.   The Historic Committee shall review all nominations and make
recommendations to the City Council.
         c.   Prior to an action by the City Council, a public meeting shall be
held and notice of the public meeting shall be given as requested by this
Development Code.
         d.   Following a determination of formal designation by the City
Council, notice of the determination shall be mailed to the owners of property
affected by the designation, together with a copy of this chapter and any
pertinent development guidelines. Such designation shall also be entered in the
Taylorsville Historic Registry.
      3.   Historic Taylorsville Registry: Contains a list of all districts,
sites, and buildings in the City area which have been designated as having
significant character, interest, or value as part of the development, heritage,
or cultural characteristics of the community, City, State, or Nation (see
figure 1, "Historic Taylorsville Registry", of this section).
   FIGURE 1
   HISTORIC TAYLORSVILLE REGISTRY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3782.png]
   D.   Designated Historic Resources:
      1.   Historic Districts: Historic districts are generally smaller and
more distinctive than historic areas. Historic districts will likely contain
several landmark sites and buildings of historic significance. Historic
districts generally:
         a.   Preserve buildings and related structures of historic and
architectural significance.
         b.   Allow improvements to existing structures or new construction to
be conducted without conflict and without eroding the scale and historic
character of the neighborhood.
         c.   Preserve and enhance entryways into the historic neighborhood(s)
through design and streetscape standards, where appropriate.
Those areas within the City which have been designated as historic districts
are as illustrated in figure 2 of this section.
   FIGURE 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3784.png]
      2.   Landmark Sites And Buildings: Landmark sites and buildings of
historic significance are distinctive individual sites. Designated sites and
buildings are as listed in the Taylorsville Historic Registry on file with the
Community Development Department.
   E.   Historic Development Guidelines:
      1.   Establishment Of Guidelines: Guidelines for exterior design criteria
shall be adopted by the Planning Commission upon the recommendation of the
Historic Committee to aid applicants in formulating plans for development or
redevelopment relating to designated historic resources.
      2.   Application Of Guidelines: The guidelines shall apply to all
modifications within any historic area, historic district, or landmark site of
a building of historic significance for any of the following:
         a.   Any rehabilitation, restoration, or reconstruction of, or
addition to, the exterior of any improvement.
         b.   A demolition or relocation of any improvement which is all or
part of a building.
         c.   New construction.
         d.   Any sign placed on any building.
         e.   Construction of any new fence, wall, or major landscaping
element.
         f.   Any alteration of an existing fence, wall, or major landscaping
element.
      3.   Compliance With Guidelines: Compliance with the adopted guidelines
by any property owner shall be voluntary except in the case where a contract of
compliance has been agreed to by the property owner of a building or site
within a designated historic district, of a landmark site, or of a building of
historic significance.
   F.   Demolition Of Designated Historic Resources:
      1.   Permit Processing Requirements: When any application is made for a
demolition permit for a building within a historic area or district, or a
building of historical significance, the Director may delay approval of the
demolition for a period of up to thirty (30) days in order to:
         a.   Make a historical record, both written (history, floor plans, and
elevations) and photographic, of the structure and site.
         b.   Review the condition of the building to determine the impact of
the demolition to the neighborhood and the technical feasibility of
preservation of the structure.
         c.   Allow the Historic Committee to consider and make recommendations
regarding the application.
         d.   Make the owner aware of economic incentives available to
rehabilitate historic resources.
         e.   Encourage the property owner not to demolish the building until
an attempt can be made to locate either suitable tenants to make the building
economically viable again or to find a purchaser who is willing to acquire and
rehabilitate the structure.
      2.   Permit Delays: Upon findings of fact by the Historic Preservation
Committee or other groups identified by the Director, that preservation of the
building is warranted and in the best interest of the City, the permit may be
delayed for an additional thirty (30) day period in order to find funding or
other means to compensate the applicant for purchase of the building for its
preservation.
      3.   City Council Action: If the additional thirty (30) day period
identified in subsection F2 of this section is not found to be adequate, a
final thirty (30) day delay may be instituted by the City Council. (Ord. 18-16,
8-1-2018)
13.18.030: REDWOOD ROAD DESIGN DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the Redwood Road Design District (RRDD) Overlay
Zone is to preserve the aesthetic quality of the Redwood Road corridor, to
protect the public and private investment of existing improvements, and to
ensure the continued viability of the Redwood Road corridor as a desirable
location for economic investment.
   B.   Administration And Enforcement: The Community Development Department is
hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this RRDD Overlay Zone. Applications for right-of-way work on streetscapes,
street furnishings, landscaping, and above ground utilities shall be consistent
with adopted design standards and shall be reviewed and approved by the
Community Development Department.
   C.   Area Designated: Areas designated in the RRDD Overlay Zone are
illustrated in figure 3 of this section:
   FIGURE 3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3786.png]
The RRDD Overlay Zone shall include only those areas within the public right-
of-way as illustrated in figure 3 of this section. At the discretion of the
City Council, based on a recommendation of the Planning Commission and
compliance with all statutes and ordinances pertaining to public notice and
public hearings, the boundaries of the RRDD Overlay Zone may expand beyond the
public right-of-way. (Ord. 18-16, 8-1-2018)
13.18.040: MID-VALLEY CONNECTOR DESIGN DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the Mid-Valley Connector Design District (MCDD)
Overlay Zone is to preserve the aesthetic quality of the Mid-Valley Connector
corridor, to protect the public and private investment of existing
improvements, and to ensure the continued viability of the corridor as a
desirable location for economic investment.
   B.   Administration And Enforcement: The Community Development Department is
hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this MCDD Overlay Zone. Applications for right-of-way work on streetscapes,
street furnishings, landscaping, and above ground utilities shall be consistent
with adopted design standards and shall be reviewed and approved by the
Community Development Department.
   C.   Area Designated: Areas designated in the Mid-Valley Connector Design
District Overlay Zone are illustrated in figure 4 of this section:
   FIGURE 4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3788.png]
The MCDD Overlay Zone shall include only those areas within the public right-
of-way as illustrated in figure 4 of this section. At the discretion of the
City Council, based on a recommendation of the Planning Commission and
compliance with all statutes and ordinances pertaining to public notice and
public hearings, the boundaries of the MCDD Overlay Zone may expand beyond the
public right-of-way. (Ord. 18-16, 8-1-2018)
13.18.050: CITY CENTER DESIGN DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the City Center Design District (CCDD) Overlay
Zone is to preserve the aesthetic quality of the City Center District, to
protect the public and private investment of existing improvements, and to
ensure the continued viability of the corridor as a desirable location for
economic investment.
   B.   Administration And Enforcement: The Community Development Department is
hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this CCDD Overlay Zone. Applications for right-of-way work on streetscapes,
street furnishings, landscaping, and above ground utilities shall be consistent
with adopted design standards and shall be reviewed and approved by the
Community Development Department.
   C.   Area Designated: Areas designated in the City Center Design District
Overlay Zone are illustrated in figure 5 of this section:
   FIGURE 5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3790.png]
The CCDD Overlay Zone shall include only those areas within the public right-
of-way as illustrated in figure 5 of this section. At the discretion of the
City Council, based on a recommendation of the Planning Commission and
compliance with all statutes and ordinances pertaining to public notice and
public hearings, the boundaries of the CCDD Overlay Zone may expand beyond the
public right-of-way. (Ord. 18-16, 8-1-2018)
13.18.060: BENNION POINT DESIGN DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the Bennion Point Design District (BPDD)
Overlay Zone is to preserve the aesthetic quality of the Bennion Point
District, to protect the public and private investment of existing
improvements, and to ensure the continued viability of the corridor as a
desirable location for residential and economic investment.
   B.   Administration And Enforcement: The Community Development Department is
hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this BPDD Overlay Zone. Applications for right-of-way work on streetscapes,
street furnishings, landscaping, and above ground utilities shall be consistent
with adopted design standards and shall be reviewed and approved by the
Community Development Department.
   C.   Area Designated: Areas designated in the Bennion Point Design District
Overlay Zone are illustrated in figure 6 of this section:
   FIGURE 6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3792.png]
The BPDD Overlay Zone shall include only those areas within the public right-
of-way as illustrated in figure 6 of this section. At the discretion of the
City Council, based on a recommendation of the Planning Commission and
compliance with all statutes and ordinances pertaining to public notice and
public hearings, the boundaries of the BPDD Overlay Zone may expand beyond the
public right-of-way. (Ord. 18-16, 8-1-2018)
13.18.070: 5400 SOUTH/BANGERTER HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DESIGN DISTRICT OVERLAY
ZONE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the 5400 South/Bangerter Highway Commercial
Design District Overlay Zone is to enhance the aesthetic quality of the
district, to protect the public and private investment of existing
improvements, and to ensure the continued viability of the corridor as a
desirable location for economic investment.
   B.   Administration And Enforcement: The Community Development Department is
hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this 5400 South/Bangerter Highway Commercial Design District Overlay Zone.
Applications for right-of-way work on streetscapes, street furnishings,
landscaping, and above ground utilities shall be consistent with adopted design
standards and shall be reviewed and approved by the Community Development
Department.
   C.   Area Designated: Areas designated in the 5400 South/Bangerter Highway
Commercial Design District Overlay Zone are illustrated in figure 7 of this
section:
   FIGURE 7
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3794.png]
The 5400 South/Bangerter Highway Commercial Design District Overlay Zone shall
include only those areas within the public right-of-way as illustrated in
figure 7 of this section. At the discretion of the City Council, based on a
recommendation of the Planning Commission and compliance with all statutes and
ordinances pertaining to public notice and public hearings, the boundaries of
the 5400 South/Bangerter Highway Commercial Design District Overlay Zone may
expand beyond the public right-of-way. (Ord. 18-16, 8-1-2018)
CHAPTER 13.19
SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT (SSD) DISTRICTS
SECTION:
13.19.010: Site Specific Development (SSD) District Regulations
13.19.010: SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT (SSD) DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The SSD Zone is created to establish the enabling legislation
and procedure for developing site specific development within the City. The SSD
District designation is provided in order to allow the most efficient and
creative development of lands that have unique or unusual characteristics. The
SSD District is intended to be used for development when it can be shown that
no other zone classification would be adequate or appropriate for reasonable
development. The SSD District is used when the uses on a specific parcel of
property are appropriate for the location, but may not be appropriate for a
community wide land use ordinance. The SSD Zone shall:
      1.   Develop uses and development standards as described in subsection F
of this section;
      2.   Clearly articulate rules for how an area will develop;
      3.   Build in flexibility beyond that allowed by the typical land use
ordinances;
      4.   Contain more precise linkages between density, land use and public
facility requirements;
      5.   Contain provisions that will respond to changing conditions without
the need for a zone change or amendment;
      6.   Contain regulations which apply to a particular area without
changing Citywide ordinances;
      7.   Be used as the basis for a development agreement; and
      8.   Contain comprehensive and cohesive integration of all aspects of
development and guidance that need to be administered for the development of
the site.
   B.   Qualification: For an applicant to qualify for SSD Zone classification,
the following conditions shall be present:
      1.   The property to be classified shall be at least two (2) acres in
size.
      2.   The applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning Commission and City
Council that development on the property would be substantially constrained by
unusual topographic or other natural features, and/or that the use or
combination of uses are appropriate for the site and are of a benefit to the
community in general, and/or that the site may be constrained by difficult
platting or ownership configuration, by an unusual or difficult impact from
public utility structures or other public structures or facilities or that a
similarly unusual hardship condition exists.
      3.   The entire site proposed for SSD District classification shall be
included in a development plan for review and Planning Commission approval.
   C.   Land Uses Allowed: Land uses allowed within an SSD District shall be
established by the review process as described in subsection E of this section.
   D.   District Designation: When the land uses to be allowed in a specific
SSD District are determined, a permanent suffix for the district shall be
established that shall be shown on the City zone district map. The suffix shall
describe the dominant land use characteristic of the district, as illustrated:
      1.   SSD-RD (research and development uses).
      2.   SSD-PO (professional office uses).
      3.   SSD-I (industrial uses).
      4.   SSD-C (commercial uses).
      5.   SSD-X (mixed residential and commercial uses).
      6.   SSD-R (residential uses).
      7.   SSD-IN (institutional).
   E.   Development Plan: A development plan shall be presented to the Director
for review and presentation to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
shall review the plan along with comments from the Director. The commission
shall recommend approval, recommend approval with conditions, or recommended
denial to the City Council. The development plan shall be a conceptual proposal
for general development of the entire site proposed for SSD classification and
shall include the following:
      1.   A legal description and a map drawn to scale showing site
boundaries, site orientation, major streets that serve the site and zoning
classification(s) and uses on abutting properties.
      2.   The general location of proposed land uses (including structures)
and land area to be devoted to each use.
      3.   Existing contours at two foot (2') intervals and a general estimate
of finished grades and contours.
      4.   Location and type of existing vegetation and identification of
existing materials to remain.
   F.   Specific Development Standards And Regulations: The Planning Commission
or the Director may prepare specific development standards and regulations for
the proposed site provided such standards and regulations are in conformity
with Planning Commission adopted policies, programs, and plans and all
applicable chapters of this Code. Such standards and regulations may include,
but are not limited to:
      1.   Permitted uses.
      2.   Conditional uses.
      3.   Accessory buildings.
      4.   Lot and yard regulations.
         a.   Lot size.
         b.   Frontage.
         c.   Front yard requirements.
         d.   Side yard requirements.
         e.   Rear yard requirements.
      5.   Density requirement(s).
      6.   The height, location, and bulk of buildings.
      7.   The location, arrangement, and configuration of open space and
building setbacks.
      8.   Building exteriors/building materials.
      9.   Driveway access and design.
      10.   The location and design of off street parking areas and shared off
street parking.
      11.   The number, size, and location of all signs.
      12.   Open space.
      13.   Landscaping.
      14.   Screening boundaries of residential districts/screening at district
boundaries.
      15.   Storage, trash, and mechanical equipment.
      16.   Lighting.
      17.   Streetscape requirements.
      18.   Maintenance of common facilities.
      19.   Pedestrian access.
      20.   Such other regulations and standards as may be necessary to
accomplish the purposes and intent of the SSD District.
Unless otherwise specified within the SSD District, all current development
standards shall apply.
   G.   Zone Change Process: A petition for an amendment to the City for an SSD
Zone classification shall conform to the process as described in the amendment
to zone district map and Land Development Code. Information for the petition
shall include the development plan approved by the Planning Commission.
   H.   Reversion: There will be an annual review of SSD Zones. If substantial
construction is not initiated within a year of the zone approval, the
classification may be reverted to the previous classification or that of an
abutting district. (Ord. 18-11, 4-18-2018; amd. Ord. 20-09, 2020)
CHAPTER 13.20
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
13.20.010: R-1 And R-2 Districts; Purpose
13.20.020: R-1 And R-2 Districts; Table Of Setbacks, Building Heights, Off
Street Parking
13.20.030: R-1 And R-2 Districts; Lot Size And Frontage Requirements
13.20.040: R-1 And R-2 Districts; Minimum Dwelling Size
13.20.050: Off Street Parking Requirements
13.20.055: Lighting Standards In Residential Developments
13.20.060: Site-Specific Development Zoning (SSD) District
13.20.070: Residential Multiple-Family (RM) District
13.20.080: Manufactured Home (MH) Residential District
13.20.010: R-1 AND R-2 DISTRICTS; PURPOSE:
   A.   R-1 Districts (Single-Family): R-1 districts are established to provide
residential environments within the City that strive to emphasize a minimum of
vehicular traffic and create quiet neighborhoods favorable for single-family
detached homes. These districts are further established with a focus toward the
preservation of natural vegetation and land features. The variety of medium to
low housing densities provide for a wide variety of housing opportunities from
large estate homes to smaller, entry level homes.
Agriculture (which does not include the keeping of farm animals) is allowed in
each R-1 subdistrict. Special regulations are provided for the allowance of
farm animals in R-1-20, R-1-30, and R-1-40 Districts.
   B.   R-2 Districts (Two-Family): R-2 districts are established to provide a
residential environment within the City that is characterized by slightly
higher densities than single-family districts, single-family housing
interspersed with two-family housing, a variety of housing sizes, a minimum of
vehicular traffic, and quiet residential neighborhoods favorable for family
life. (Ord. 13-24, 10-16-2013)
13.20.020: R-1 AND R-2 DISTRICTS; TABLE OF SETBACKS, BUILDING HEIGHTS, OFF
STREET PARKING:
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING SETBACKS, BUILDING HEIGHTS, REQUIRED OFF STREET PARKING
FOR R-1 AND R-2 ZONING DISTRICTS
 
 R-1-40 R-1-30 R-1-20 R-1-15 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-7 R-1-6 R-1-5 R-2-10 R-2-8
Building setbacks (in feet):                                    
Front to living area              30  30 30 30 30    30 30 25 25  30     30
Front to attached garage          25  25 25 25 25    25 25 20 20  25     25
Front - structures attached to
the main living area and open on  20  20 20 20 20    20 20 15 15  20     20
3 sides (covered porches or
entryways)
Front corner lot - side A1        30  30 30 30 30    30 30 30 30  30     30
Front corner lot - side B1        20  20 20 20 20    20 20 20 20  20     20
Front - lot on cul-de-sac         20  20 20 20 20    20 20 20 20  20     20
Front - lot on elbow              20  20 20 20 20    20 20 20 20  20     20
Side (minimum)                    9   9  7  7  5     5  5  5  34  5      5
Side (both combined - minimum)    20  20 18 18 16    16 12 12 104 16     16
Side - minimum for zero lot line  n/a 20 18 18 16    16 12 12 12  16     16
development
Rear - interior lot               30  30 30 30 20    20 20 20 20  20     20
Rear - structures attached to the
main structure and open on 3      30  30 30 10 5     5  5  5  5   5      5
sides (carports, covered patios,
etc.)
Rear - corner lot2                30  30 30 25 15/25 15 15 15 15  20     15
Building height (in feet):                                      
Maximum building height (measured 35  35 35 35 35    35 35 35 35  35     35
to the peak of the roof)3
Maximum accessory building height
(measured to the peak of the      30  30 30 30 25    25 25 20 20  25     25
roof)
Required off street parking
spaces (not including covered     2   2  2  2  2     2  2  2  2   2/unit 2/unit
stalls)
 
Notes:
    1.    Refer to figure 1 of this section.
    2.    First number in the R-1-10 District is the minimum, second number is
the average.
    3.    Exceptions for additional building height due to unusual
architectural roof designs may be granted by the Planning Commission at the
request of the Community Development Director.
    4.    Any structure located closer than 5 feet to any property line shall
meet all applicable building codes for fire rated walls. Eave projections shall
not encroach more than 6 inches into the setback area.
(Ord. 17-19, 10-18-2017; amd. Ord. 19-14, - -2019)
   FIGURE 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3796.png]
(Ord. 13-24, 10-16-2013)
13.20.030: R-1 AND R-2 DISTRICTS; LOT SIZE AND FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS:
 
          R-1- R-1-30 R-1-20 R-1-15 R-1-10 R-1-8 R-1-7 R-1-6 R-1-5 R-2-10 R-2-8
          40
Minimum
lot       110  100    90     85     80     70    65    55    40    801    752
width, in
feet
Minimum
lot size,
in        40   30     20     15     10     8     7     6     5     101    82
thousands
of square
feet
 
Notes:
    1.    Single-family lots must have at least 8,000 square feet and 75 feet
of width. Each side of twin home lots must have at least 5,000 square feet and
40 feet of width.
    2.    Single-family lots must have at least 8,000 square feet and 70 feet
of width. Each side of twin home lots must have at least 4,000 square feet and
37.5 feet of width.
(Ord. 13-24, 10-16-2013)
13.20.040: R-1 AND R-2 DISTRICTS; MINIMUM DWELLING SIZE:
 
Zone One-Story Split Level And Split Entry  Two-Story Total Both Levels (Square
     (Square Feet) Minimum                  Feet) Minimum
R-1-40 1,700 2,100
R-1-30 1,700 2,100
R-1-20 1,500 1,875
R-1-15 1,500 1,875
R-1-10 1,500 1,875
R-1-8  1,500 1,875
R-1-7  1,500 1,875
R-1-6  1,200 1,500
R-1-5  1,200 1,500
R-2-10 1,200 1,500
R-2-8  1,000 1,500
 
   A.   Allowable Square Footage: Determination of square footage does not
include garages, subterranean basements or similar spaces. (Ord. 13-24, 10-16-
2013)
13.20.050: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All homes in all R-1 and R-2 districts shall provide at least a two (2)
car garage for each family housing unit for the daily storage of personal
vehicles. Any detached garages shall comply with the requirements for detached
accessory structures as described elsewhere in this title.
   B.   In addition to the two (2) car garage, all single-family homes shall
provide at least two (2) paved off street parking spaces plus one space for
each domestic, e.g., maid, nanny, gardener, etc., or support staff person
employed on premises during the highest employment shift.
   C.   The maximum area of hard surface for the purpose of parking vehicles on
a residential lot shall be restricted to not more than twenty percent (20%) of
the front yard excluding the driveway providing access to the primary attached
or detached garage, thirty five percent (35%) of the rear yard, and one (1) of
the two (2) side yards associated with the lot. Exception: The maximum area of
hard surface allowed for residential lots with circular driveways shall be
determined on a case by case basis.
   D.   All structures attached to the dwelling for the purpose of protecting
or otherwise covering vehicles shall comply with applicable building codes for
the structure and with existing zoning regulations for minimum distance between
main dwelling structures and side property lines. Detached carports are
required to meet the minimum standards for an accessory structure and
applicable building codes. Where vehicle covers are used, covers shall be
approved manufactured covers. Earth tone colors are encouraged (beige or brown
tones) for vehicle covers. (Ord. 13-24, 10-16-2013)
13.20.055: LIGHTING STANDARDS IN RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Lighting Plan Required: A photometric lighting plan shall be required
for all areas within residential developments except for areas within the
ownership of single-family residential building lots. The lighting plan shall
address all other areas of the development, including, but not limited to, open
space, driveways, parking lots and facilities, walkways, sidewalks, streets,
clubhouses, pools, etc.
   B.   Lighting Plan Preparation: Lighting plans shall be prepared and stamped
by a recognized lighting engineer or lighting professional utilizing the
lighting recommendations of the latest edition of the Illuminating Engineering
Society (IES) Lighting Handbook.
   C.   Spotlights: Reflectors, spotlights, floodlights, and other sources of
illumination may be used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, signs, parking,
and loading areas provided they are equipped with proper lenses or other
devices concentrating the illumination upon the building, landscaping, signs,
parking, and loading areas.
   D.   Light Spill: No unshielded lights, reflectors, spotlights, strobe
lights, or searchlights shall be so located that they are pointed toward or are
directly visible from public rights-of-way. All lighting shall be shielded and
directed downward to avoid light spill beyond the property line. Unshielded,
exterior wall mounted floodlights (wall packs) are prohibited. Intensities
shall be controlled so that neighboring areas will not be adversely affected by
glare or excessive light. (Ord. 17-15, 6-14-2017)
13.20.060: SITE-SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT ZONING (SSD) DISTRICT:
This section calls for substantial compliance with the intent of the General
Plan and Land Development Code regulations and other provisions of the
Taylorsville Code related to the public health, safety, and general welfare,
but also offers the advantages of large scale planning for residential
development and efficient use of land.
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the site-specific development is:
      1.   To encourage a quality living environment through greater
flexibility of design than is possible solely through the typical application
of zoning regulations.
      2.   To encourage a more efficient use of the land and the preservation
of greater proportions of open space for recreation and visual use than is
otherwise provided for in this title.
      3.   To encourage good neighborhood and housing design by utilizing a
variety of dwelling types and site arrangement plans to give imagination and
variety in the physical pattern of the development.
   B.   Design Objectives For Site-Specific Developments: Every site-specific
development shall be designed to achieve the following design objectives:
      1.   Provide for a comprehensive and harmonious arrangement of buildings,
open spaces, circulationways, parking, and development amenities.
      2.   Be related to existing and proposed land use and circulation plans
of the community and not constitute a disrupting element in the neighborhood.
      3.   The internal street system and pedestrian connections should be
designed for the efficient and safe movement of vehicles without disrupting
pedestrian circulation, activities, functions of the common areas, and open
space.
      4.   Open space and recreation areas and facilities should be located
adjacent to dwelling units or be easily accessible therefrom.
      5.   Open space and recreational areas should be the focal point for the
overall design of the development.
   C.   Development Requirements: To be approved, a site-specific development
project must be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission as a
nonadministrative conditional use and must show a high commitment to
excellence, ensuring better quality of life for future tenants and be
compatible with adjacent residential areas. The following are required for all
site-specific development projects:
      1.   Ownership: The development shall be in single or corporate ownership
at the time of application or the subject of an application filed jointly by
all owners of the property.
      2.   Open Space: Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission,
common and private open space shall be provided and shall not cover less than
forty percent (40%) of the gross site area. The required open space shall be
land areas that are not occupied by buildings, structures, parking area,
streets, or alleys and shall be accessible by the residents. Said open space
shall be devoted to landscaping, preservation of natural features, patios, and
recreational areas. Private open space (that is provided for each dwelling unit
for personal use) shall be located immediately adjacent to, attached to, or
within the dwelling unit it is designed to serve, and shall be for the
exclusive use of the residents of the dwelling unit. Common open space may be
distributed throughout the site-specific development and need not be in a
single large area. Landscaped roof areas or decks attached to individual units
may not be calculated as part of required common open space. These areas may
include, but are not limited to: thirty percent (30%) or greater slope areas,
fault zones, floodplain, high water table, utility corridors, and wetlands.
These areas may only be included as open space when they have been designed as
an integral part of the project.
      3.    Interior Streets: The design of public and private streets within a
site-specific development shall follow City standards for width of right-of-way
and construction. Private streets shall be subject to the same inspections and
construction standards as required for public streets. The interior street
system in an entire site-specific development project shall be dedicated to the
City as a utility easement. All private
streets shall be conveyed to a private association. The original developer/
builder will also be required to establish a City approved Road Maintenance
Fund for all private streets. This provision will be required in the CC&Rs for
all projects with a private street system.
      4.   Parking: Required off street parking shall be provided for all
multi-family site-specific developments as follows:
         a.   Table Of Parking Ratios:
 
1 bedroom unit                          1.5 parking spaces per unit
2 bedroom unit                          2.0 parking spaces per unit
3 or more bedroom unit                  2.5 parking spaces per unit
Guest parking spaces                    0.25 parking spaces per unit
Storage parking spaces for recreational As determined necessary by the planning
vehicle storage                         commission
 
         b.   Landscape Buffer: All parking areas, covered or open, shall have
a landscaped buffer adjacent to any public right of way.
         c.   Covered Parking Spaces: There shall be no less than 1.5 covered
parking spaces (1.0 garage, 0.5 carport) per unit. The planning commission may
consider the following criteria in determining whether or not the number of
garages/carports should be increased or reduced.
            (1)   The topography of the proposed site.
            (2)   To enhance and protect local property values of adjacent
developments and neighborhoods.
            (3)   To improve the overall appearance of the development for the
density of units, e.g., attached garages and underground garages.
            (4)   Review the location of all garages and may require that they
be attached or underground for the multi-family units. All covered parking
shall be placed in locations adjacent and convenient to the buildings that they
are intended to serve.
            (5)   To assist the project in reaching affordable rent levels for
low and moderate income individuals as determined by the U.S. department of
housing and urban development.
            (6)   Garages' primary use shall be for vehicle parking.
            (7)   Tandem spaces shall be counted only as one space.
      5.   Building Materials: Building materials, roofing materials, and
building design shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission. High
quality exterior materials shall be used including brick, stone, synthetic
stucco, composite materials, or other materials of similar quality, durability,
and low maintenance.
      6.   Landscaping On Public Right Of Way: Where a site-specific
development is adjacent to a public right of way, a permanent open space at
least ten feet (10') in width shall be required along the property line(s).
This area shall be kept free of buildings and structures (except fences as
approved by the planning commission) and permanently maintained in street trees
and other landscaping as approved by the planning commission. The required open
space shall not be part of a required rear or side yard.
      7.   Exterior Fencing: Exterior fencing shall be provided as approved by
the planning commission. Acceptable fencing materials include architecturally
designed brick or block fences, wrought iron fences, post and rail fences,
vinyl fences, or precast concrete. Additional landscape buffers may also be
required with the width and landscaping specifications as determined by the
planning commission.
      8.   Streetlights: Appropriate street lighting is required. If the
streets are to be dedicated to the public, the lights shall comply with the
city's streetlight plan. If the streets are private, the light styles may be
altered but must be approved by the planning commission and meet minimum city
standards for light coverage. The applicant shall submit a plan which indicates
the type and location of streetlights in relation to the proposed site
landscaping.
   D.   Development Standards:
      1.   Required Elements: Residential developments shall be guided by a
total design plan in which the following development standards may be varied to
allow flexibility and creativity in site design, building design, and location.
The planning commission may require such arrangements of structures, open
spaces, landscaping, buffering, and access within the site development plan as
they determine appropriate. The commission may require specific setbacks and
height limitations. This criteria shall be used by the planning commission
principally to assure the design objectives in this section are met.
         a.   Minimum Area: A site-specific development shall be of sufficient
size, composition, and arrangement to enable its feasibility as a complete
development. With the exception of the RM-S classification, SSDs in all
residential zones shall have a minimum area of two (2) acres. The minimum area
of a SSD in an RM-S zone shall be one acre.
         b.   Density: The density allowed for a site-specific development in
all residential classifications shall be no greater than one hundred twenty
five percent (125%) of the underlying zone in which it is located except the
RM-S zone. SSD density for the RM-S zone shall be no more than forty (40) units
per acre.
         c.   Site Calculations: Specific calculations addressing the
percentage of open space (common or private), impervious versus pervious
coverage, and site improvements must be submitted with all project
applications.
         d.   Lot Requirements: No specific yard, setback, or lot size
requirement shall be imposed in the site-specific development. However, the
purpose and objectives of this chapter must be complied with in the final
development plan. The planning commission may require certain setbacks within
all or a portion of the site-specific development.
         e.   Traffic Circulation: Points of primary vehicular access to the
site- specific development shall be designed to provide smooth traffic flow
with controlled turning movements and minimum hazards to vehicular, pedestrian,
and bicycle traffic. Adequate emergency vehicle access shall be provided.
         f.   Driveways And Alleys: When consistent with this title, a private
driveway or alley may be provided for access to a maximum of two (2) lots for
private driveways and ten (10) lots for alleys. A private driveway or alley
must comply with all established standards in this title.
         g.   Privacy: Each site-specific development shall provide reasonable
visual and acoustical privacy for dwelling units. Fences, insulation, walks,
barriers, landscaping, and sound reducing construction techniques shall be used
as appropriate for the aesthetic enhancement of the property, the privacy of
its occupants, the screening of objectionable views or uses, and the reduction
of noise.
         h.   Noise Attenuation: When, in the opinion of the planning
commission, a proposed site-specific development may be situated in a noisy
environment which will adversely affect the peace, tranquility, and privacy of
its inhabitants or surrounding inhabitants, an acoustical analysis may be
required. Said analysis shall be conducted by a qualified     acoustical
engineer and include a description of the noise environment and the
construction or other methods necessary to attenuate the noise to the required
level according to the noise standards of applicable noise ordinances.
         i.   Security: The development shall be designed to support security
services, taking into account public safety recommendations from the police
department.
         j.   Pedestrian And Bicycle Paths: Where appropriate, the internal
circulation system shall provide pedestrian and bicycle paths which may be
physically separated from vehicular traffic to serve residential,
nonresidential, and recreational facilities in or adjacent to the development.
The planning commission may require connections to regional trail systems,
activity centers, pedestrian and/or bicycle overpasses, underpasses, or traffic
signalization in the vicinity of schools, playgrounds, parks, shopping areas,
or other uses that will receive considerable pedestrian and/or recreational
trails use from the development.
      2.   Desirable Amenities: The following are desirable amenities or design
options which may be required by the planning commission depending on the size,
scale, impacts, and nature of each individual site-specific development project
including site-specific development zoning districts, conditional uses in
residential districts, and overlay zones:
         a.   Increase in common or private open space above the forty percent
(40%) minimum, particularly when the project contains significant nonbuildable
open space.
         b.   Creation of significant recreation or site amenities, including,
but not limited to, clubhouse, pool, tennis courts, sports courts, playgrounds,
play fields, and nature areas.
         c.   Additional project landscaping and other open space amenities as
may be deemed appropriate under the nonadministrative conditional use permit.
   E.   Nonresidential Uses:
      1.   Noncommercial, nonresidential uses of a religious, educational, or
recreational nature shall be designed primarily for the use of the residents of
the proposed site- specific development. The applicant shall submit as part of
the preliminary development plan such evidence to substantiate the request for
such use as the director may require.
      2.   Commercial development within a site-specific development shall be
located so as to be accessible in a manner that does not create traffic
congestion or hazards to any street within or outside the site-specific
development. Location, off street parking, and loading requirements shall be
identified and recommended by the development review committee to the planning
commission as appropriate to the particular site-specific development.
Consideration shall be given to anticipated pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular
traffic adjacent to developments that may provide multiple use of off street
parking facilities and the types of commercial uses provided. Drive-through
services shall be prohibited.
      3.   Parking areas, service areas, buffers, entrances, exits, yards,
courts, landscaping, graphics, and lighting for both residential and
nonresidential development shall be designed as integrated portions of the
total site-specific development and shall project the residential character.
   F.   Maintenance Of Common Facilities:
      1.   A site-specific development shall be approved subject to the
submission and approval of legal instruments setting forth a plan or manner of
permanent care and maintenance of all common open space and other facilities
provided in the final development plan. No such instrument shall be acceptable
until approved by the city attorney as to legal form and effect, and the
planning commission as to suitability for the proposed use of the common open
space and subject facilities.
      2.   The common open space and other facilities provided may be conveyed
to a public agency or private association. The common open space, recreational
facilities, and private streets (including a road maintenance fund established
by the original developer/builder) conveyed to a private association shall
include, as part of the aforementioned instruments, a declaration of covenants
and restrictions that will govern the association and shall require maintenance
of any common facilities. The provisions shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
         a.   The private association must be established prior to the sale of
any unit(s).
         b.   Membership must be mandatory for the original buyer and any
successive buyers of a unit(s) in a site-specific development whether or not
the unit is owner occupied or rented.
         c.   The private association must be responsible for property and
liability insurance, local taxes (if any), the maintenance of common open space
and other facilities, rules, and regulations outlining the powers, enforcement
authority, and limitations of the association.
         d.   Each member of the association shall be assessed a pro rata share
of the costs incurred by the association, and the association shall have the
power to collect those costs.
      3.   The planning commission may also require dedication of scenic
easements to assure open space shall be maintained. In the event the common
open space and other facilities are not maintained in a manner consistent with
the approved final development plan, the city may, at its option, cause such
maintenance to be performed and assess the costs to the affected property
owners or responsible association.
   G.   Review Process:
      1.   Development Review: To help expedite review of a development
proposal, prior to submitting an application for site- specific development,
persons interested in undertaking development may meet informally with a member
(s) of the community development department and/or the development review
committee to become acquainted with the substantive and procedure requirements
of this code. If requested by staff, they shall attend a meeting at which
representatives from various departments involved in review of developments are
generally present.
At the meeting, the various departments will initially assess the development
proposal and information submitted and make suggestions to the prospective
developer with respect to the proposal's compliance with the provisions of the
appropriate regulations of this code, applicable building codes, and any other
applicable ordinances or codes of the city and provide information concerning
the city's review requirements and procedures.
Staff members may request that additional studies or information, such as
geotechnical studies, traffic impact analyses, market feasibility analyses, or
water needs analyses be submitted together with the application for site plan
review.
      2.   Application: An application for a site- specific development must be
submitted to the community development department and must contain the
information and, if the project is to be subdivided, be in the format required
by the subdivision review procedure available from the community development
department. The applicant must include the following:
         a.   Site-specific development application form.
         b.   Preliminary plat, if the property is to be subdivided, including
project size (acres), proposed lot lines, and plot designs.
         c.   A landscape plan, prepared under the direction of a licensed
landscape architect or other qualified professional, shall be required for all
open space required or provided in a site-specific development. Said
landscaping plan shall indicate the spacing, sizes, and specific types of
landscaping material. All open space provided shall be irrigated. The only
exception shall be where the planning commission determines an area because of
its natural beauty or uniqueness would be most beneficial to the project and
the community if left in its natural or existing condition. Existing mature
trees shall be preserved where appropriate. The location of trees must be
considered when planning common open space, location of buildings, underground
services, walls, paved areas, playgrounds, and parking areas.
         d.   The location and floor area size of all existing and proposed
buildings, structures, and other improvements including maximum heights, types
of dwelling units, density per types, nonresidential structures including
commercial facilities, preliminary elevations, and architectural renderings of
typical structures, and improvements.
         e.   The existing site conditions including contours at two foot (2')
intervals, watercourse, floodplains, unique natural features, and all existing
mature trees.
         f.   The existing and proposed utility systems, e.g., sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, and water, electric, gas, telephone lines, and cable.
         g.   Road plan and profiles.
         h.   The existing and proposed circulation system of arterial,
collector, and local streets including off street parking areas and other major
points of access to public rights of way to the development including
identification of jurisdictional control (including major points of ingress and
egress to the development). Notations of proposed ownership, public and
private, should be included where appropriate.
         i.   The existing and proposed pedestrian and bicycle circulation
system including its interrelationship with the motor vehicular circulation
system indicating proposed treatment of points of conflict.
         j.   Other studies and analyses requested by staff or planning
commission which may include geotechnical studies, traffic impact analysis,
market feasibility analysis, water needs analysis, etc.
         k.   Enough information on land areas adjacent to the proposed
development to indicate the relationships between the proposed development and
existing and proposed adjacent areas including land uses, zoning
classifications, densities, traffic, and pedestrian circulation systems, public
facilities, and unique natural features of the landscape.
         l.   The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the development
including materials and techniques used such as berming, landscaping, screens,
fences, and walls.
         m.   Property plat from the Salt Lake County recorder's office showing
the area to be developed.
         n.   Fee as established by the city council.
         o.   The following written documents shall be submitted with the
application:
            (1)   A legal description of the total site proposal for
development including a statement of present and proposed ownership and present
land use or phasing plan.
            (2)   A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the
site-specific development through the particular approach prepared by the
applicant. The statement should include a description of the character of the
proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made
by the applicant.
            (3)   Quantitative data for the following: total number and type of
dwelling units, parcel size, proposed lot coverage of buildings and structures,
approximate gross and net residential densities, total amount of open space
(including a separate figure for usable open space), total amount of
nonresidential construction including a separate figure for commercial, public,
quasi-public, or private facilities if applicable, fiscal impact studies where
necessary, environmental assessments where necessary, and other studies as
required by the director.
      3.   Preliminary Review:
         a.   If prior to submitting the application for review it is
determined that the applicant has not attended a development review meeting,
staff may request that the applicant do so in order to expedite the orderly
review of the proposal before proceeding to the subsequent stages of review.
         b.   Upon submittal of an application and supporting information and
attendance at a development review meeting, if necessary, the site plan and
subdivision plat shall be forwarded to the reviewing departments and agencies
who shall review it preliminarily to determine if the plan, together with all
supporting information, is complete and complies with all the requirements of
this code and other applicable city and agencies' standards.
If the departments and agencies reviews determine that all required, necessary,
and requested information has not been submitted, or that some of the specifics
of the plan or information do not comply with the requirements of this code,
the applicant shall be notified in writing and/or on the plans of any
deficiencies, comments, corrections, and requirements (including additional
information and/or studies) to be addressed. The revised plan and all required,
necessary, and requested supporting information must be resubmitted after the
appropriate additions and/or corrections are made in order to complete the
application.
Upon resubmittal, the site plan and subdivision plat will again be forwarded to
the reviewing departments and agencies, and to the planning commission, if
required. The applicant shall be required to resubmit the plan and supporting
documents to the city until all departments and agencies determine it is
complete and complies with the requirements of this code and other applicable
city and agencies' standards. Failure to submit complete information will
result in written notification to the applicant that the review cannot proceed
further until all required, necessary, and requested information is submitted.
   H.   Planning Commission Review: When preliminary review of the site plan
and subdivision plat has been determined to be complete and in compliance with
all requirements, the plan, together with all supporting information, will be
forwarded to the planning commission for review, if required. If the property
is to be subdivided, the subdivision review requirements shall be complied with
including notice and hearing requirements. The planning commission shall review
the plan, including all supporting information, to determine if all appropriate
impacts have been addressed and to receive public input, when required,
concerning impacts and mitigation. The planning commission may require
additional studies/analyses to enable it to determine what impacts should be
addressed and may establish additional requirements to address those
anticipated impacts.
   I.   Validity Of Preliminary Review:
      1.   Once the planning commission determines that preliminary review is
complete, the preliminary plat is valid for twelve (12) months. The planning
commission may grant a one (1) year extension of the preliminary plat provided
the plat still complies with all applicable ordinances. No person or entity
obtains a vested right to develop the property by reason of obtaining
preliminary plat approval.
      2.   If a final plat which covers only a portion of the approved
preliminary plat is recorded within the one (1) year time limit or extension
thereof, the validity of the unrecorded portion of the preliminary plat may be
extended by the planning commission for one (1) year from the date of recording
that final plat.
      3.   If the developer desires to change the grade or location of streets
within the subdivision, or desires to increase the number of lots in the
subdivision, or substantially alters the original subdivision design, the
developer must apply for an amendment of the originally approved preliminary
plat.
      4.   The director may, in his discretion, approve changes to the
preliminary plat to decrease the number of lots in the subdivision, to make
minor lot boundary changes, or to make other minor changes without requiring
that it be reviewed again by the planning commission.
   J.   Final Review: After review by the departments, agencies, and planning
commission, the applicant shall submit a final site plan and subdivision plat
together with all supporting documents which comply with all requirements,
corrections, additions, etc., required by the departments, agencies, and
planning commission to the community development department.
      1.   The community development department, along with the other reviewing
departments and agencies, shall review the site plan and subdivision plat and
supporting information to determine compliance with all requirements,
corrections, additions, etc.
      2.   After such determination, the item may be scheduled for review and
nonadministrative conditional use approved by the planning commission upon
referral by the director or upon the request of the planning commission. The
final development plan shall be reviewed to determine compliance of the final
development plan with the preliminary development plan requirements. Said
review shall also determine the final development plan's quality and compliance
with the purpose and design objectives of a site-specific development. The
final development plan shall include all of the information required in the
preliminary development plan in its finalized detailed form. In addition, any
new items not submitted with the preliminary development plan, any final plats,
any required dedication documents, and/or guarantee of improvements shall be
submitted at this time.
   K.   Amendments To The Final Development Plan: Minor changes in the
location, siting, or character of buildings and structures or the development
may be authorized by the director if required by engineering or other
circumstances not foreseen at the time the final development plan was approved.
No change authorized under this section may cause any of the following:
      1.   A change in the use and/or character of the development.
      2.   An increase in the overall density and/or intensity of use.
      3.   An increase in overall coverage of structures.
      4.   A reduction or change in character of approved open space.
      5.   A reduction of required off street parking.
      6.   A detrimental alteration to the pedestrian, vehicular, bicycle,
circulation, and utility networks.
      7.   A reduction in required street pavement widths.
      8.   Changes in storm drains, underdrains, and/or irrigation.
      9.   Any major changes in use or rearrangement of lots, blocks, building
tracts or groupings, or any changes in the provision of open space and
significant changes as noted above, must be made by the planning commission
after receipt of such recommendation by the planning staff. Such amendments may
be made only if they are shown to be required by changes in conditions that
have occurred since the final development plan was approved. Generally
speaking, any major changes must be recorded as amendments in accordance with
the procedure established for adopting the final development plan.
   L.   Failure To Begin Development: If no substantial construction has
occurred in the site-specific development pursuant to the final development
plan within twelve (12) months from final approval, the approved plan shall
become null and void, and a new development plan shall be required for any
development of the subject property. The planning commission, upon showing good
cause by the developer, may extend the time for beginning construction a
maximum period of twelve (12) months for one (1) time only.
   M.   Phased Planned Developments: If the sequence of construction of various
portions of the final development plan is to occur in stages, then the open
space and/or recreational facilities shall be developed in proportion to the
number of dwelling units intended to be developed during any given stage of
construction. A phasing plan, including size and order of phases, shall be
approved by the planning commission if individual phases of the site-specific
development exceed the overall density of the zone if the approved overall
phasing plan does not exceed the maximum density of the zone. Such phasing plan
shall have the written approval of all property owners.
   N.   Final Approval: Planning commission may delegate final review and
approval to the director. (Ord. 13-24, 10-16-2013; amd. Ord. 20-12, 4-15-2020)
13.20.070: RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE-FAMILY (RM) DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The RM district is established to provide a medium to high
density residential environment within the city characterized by group and
small multiple-unit housing and well planned site development.
   B.   Density: The minimum square footage per unit in the RM district shall
be established as shown in the table below. (Square footage is net square
footage after necessary improvements and dedication.) Property over five (5)
acres in size shall follow the site-specific development standards.
TABLE OF MAXIMUM DENSITY AND MINIMUM LAND AREA FOR DEVELOPMENT FOR RM
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
 
                        RM-4   RM-6    RM-8   RM-10    RM-12  RM-16  RM-S
Maximum density per     4 u/a  6 u/a   8 u/a  10 u/a   12 u/a 16 u/a 12 u/a
acre
Maximum density per
acre as a planned unit  5 u/a  7.5 u/a 10 u/a 12.5 u/a 15 u/a       40 u/a
development
Single-family dwelling  8,000  7,000   6,000  6,000    6,000        5,000
Duplex                  14,000 12,000  10,000 8,000    8,000        8,000
Maximum number of units 6      8       10     14       16           No maximum
per structure
 
Any development over 5 acres in an RM-6, RM-8, RM-10, or RM-12 zone shall be
developed as a site-specific development. Any development over 2 acres in an
RM-S zone shall be developed as a site-specific development.
   C.   Building Setbacks: Minimum front, rear, and side setback distances
shall be required as established below. It shall be within the authority of the
director to determine which lines are considered as front, rear, and side
property lines for the purpose of administering this code.
      1.   Front Yard: Any development in an RM district shall have a minimum
front setback of twenty feet (20'). A public street right of way shall be
considered as the front property line of a lot. Where a lot is bordered on two
(2) or more sides by a public street right of way, the area between the front
property line and the building lines shall be known as the front setback area
in all cases.
      2.   Side Yards:
         a.   If the side property line of a development does not abut a
single-family residential district, then all dwellings and other main buildings
shall be set back from the side property line a distance of at least eight feet
(8').
         b.   If the side property line of a development does abut a single-
family residential district, then all dwellings and main buildings must be set
back at least fifteen feet (15') from the side property line.
      3.   Rear Yard:
         a.   If the rear property line of a development does not abut a
single-family residential district, then all dwellings and main buildings shall
be set back from the rear property line a distance of at least fifteen feet
(15').
         b.   If the rear property line of a development does abut a single-
family residential district, then all dwellings and main buildings must be set
back at least twenty feet (20') from the rear property line.
   D.   Special Standards; RM Districts:
      1.   Landscaping: All landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and
orderly fashion. Landscaped areas shall consist of an effective combination of
trees, ground cover, and shrubbery. All unpaved areas not utilized for access
or parking shall be landscaped in a similar manner.
         a.   Front Setback Area: The entire area between the curb and the
building or parking setback line shall be landscaped except for any access
driveway or sidewalk in said area. In no case shall the front yard landscaping
go to a depth of less than twenty feet (20').
         b.   Other Setback Areas: A minimum five foot (5') landscape buffer
shall be placed along all property lines except where an accessory building may
be allowed up to three feet (3') of the property line.
      2.   Screening At District Boundaries: Except in the minimum front
setback area, an opaque screen shall be installed and maintained along all
district boundaries other than streets where an RM development abuts areas
zoned for single-family residential uses. Screening shall be to a height of six
feet (6'). A screen shall consist of any combination of the following types:
         a.   Walls: A wall shall consist of concrete, stone, brick, or similar
type of solid masonry material and shall conform to structural requirements of
the applicable building codes.
         b.   Berms: A berm shall be constructed of earthen materials and shall
be landscaped.
         c.   Solid Fences: A solid fence shall consist of vinyl, precast
concrete, masonry, or other similar materials forming an opaque screen and
shall conform to structural requirements of the applicable building codes.
         d.   Open Fences: An open weave or mesh type fence shall be combined
with plant materials to form an opaque screen as approved by the director.
         e.   Planting: Plant materials used for screening shall be of a type
or used in such a manner so as to provide an opaque screen having a minimum
width of two feet (2').
         f.   Signs On Screening: No signs or sign supports shall be permitted
on any required screening.
         g.   Elevation Differences: Notwithstanding the requirements listed
above where the finished elevation of the property is lower at the boundary
line (or within five feet (5') inside the boundary line) than an abutting
property elevation, such change in elevation may be used in lieu of, or in
combination with, additional screening to satisfy the screening requirements
for this district.
      3.   Refuse Collection Area: All outdoor refuse collection areas shall be
visually screened from access streets and adjacent properties by a completely
opaque screen.
      4.   Height Of Buildings: All buildings in an RM district shall be no
higher than thirty five feet (35'). No structure shall be less than twelve feet
(12') as measured from finished grade.
      5.   Zero Lot Line Conversion: Duplex dwellings that were in existence at
the date of the passage of this code may be converted to zero lot line (twin
home) use. For such conversion, minimum lot size regulations as provided in
this section shall be required. All appropriate state code and applicable
building codes for condominium conversion shall be required.
      6.   Standards For Business And Financial Services: Buildings intended to
house such uses in an RM district shall be designed to be compatible with a
residential environment in architectural concept, scale, site design, and
landscaping. Design will be approved at site plan review.
   E.   Special Standards; RM-S (Senior Districts):
      1.   Landscaping: All landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and
orderly fashion. Landscaped areas shall consist of an effective combination of
trees, ground cover, and shrubbery. All unpaved areas not utilized for access
or parking shall be landscaped in a similar manner.
         a.   Front Setback Area: The entire area between the curb and the
building or parking setback line shall be landscaped except for any access
driveway or sidewalk in said area. In no case shall the front yard landscaping
go to a depth of less than twenty feet (20').
         b.   Other Setback Areas: A minimum five foot (5') landscape buffer
shall be placed along all property lines except where an accessory building may
be allowed up to three feet (3') of the property line.
      2.   Screening At District Boundaries: Except in the minimum front
setback area, an opaque screen shall be installed and maintained along all
district boundaries other than streets where an RM-S development abuts areas
zoned for single-family residential uses. Screening shall be to a height of six
feet (6'). A screen shall consist of any combination of the following types:
         a.   Walls: A wall shall consist of concrete, stone, brick, or similar
type of solid masonry material and shall conform to structural requirements of
the applicable building codes.
         b.   Berms: A berm shall be constructed of earthen materials and shall
be landscaped.
         c.   Solid Fences: A solid fence shall consist of vinyl or other such
materials forming an opaque screen and shall conform to structural requirements
of the applicable building codes.
         d.   Open Fences: An open weave or mesh type fence shall be combined
with plant materials to form an opaque screen as approved by the director.
         e.   Planting: Plant materials used for screening shall be of a type
or used in such a manner so as to provide an opaque screen having a minimum
width of two feet (2').
         f.   Elevation Differences: Notwithstanding the requirements listed
above where the finished elevation of the property is lower at the boundary
line (or within five feet (5') inside the boundary line) than an abutting
property elevation, such change in elevation may be used in lieu of, or in
combination with, additional screening to satisfy the screening requirements
for this district.
      3.   Height Of Buildings: All buildings in an RM-S district shall be no
higher than thirty five feet (35'). No structure shall be less than twelve feet
(12') as measured from finished grade.
      4.   Zero Lot Line Conversion: Duplex dwellings that were in existence at
the date of the passage of this code may be converted to zero lot line (twin
home) use. For such conversion, minimum lot size regulations as provided in
this section shall be required. All appropriate state code and applicable
building codes for condominium conversion shall be required.
   F.   Special Standards; R-2 Districts:
      1.   Landscaping: All landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and
orderly fashion. Landscaped areas shall consist of an effective combination of
trees, ground cover, and shrubbery. All unpaved areas not utilized for access
or parking shall be landscaped in a similar manner.
         a.   Front Setback Area: The entire area between the curb and the
building or parking setback line shall be landscaped except for any access
driveway or sidewalk in said area. In no case shall the front yard landscaping
go to a depth of less than twenty feet (20').
         b.   Other Setback Areas: A minimum five foot (5') landscape buffer
shall be placed along all property lines except where an accessory building may
be allowed up to three feet (3') of the property line.
      2.   Screening At District Boundaries: Except in the minimum front
setback area, an opaque screen shall be installed and maintained along all
district boundaries other than streets where an R-2 development abuts areas
zoned for single-family residential uses. Screening shall be to a height of six
feet (6'). A screen shall consist of any combination of the following types:
         a.   Walls: A wall shall consist of concrete, stone, brick, tile, or
similar type of solid masonry material and shall conform to structural
requirements of the applicable building codes.
         b.   Berms: A berm shall be constructed of earthen materials and shall
be landscaped.
         c.   Solid Fences: A solid fence shall consist of vinyl or other such
materials forming an opaque screen and shall conform to structural requirements
of the applicable building codes.
         d.   Open Fences: An open weave or mesh type fence shall be combined
with plant materials to form an opaque screen as approved by the director.
         e.   Planting: Plant materials used for screening shall be of a type
or used in such a manner so as to provide an opaque screen having a minimum
width of two feet (2').
         f.   Elevation Differences: Notwithstanding the requirements listed
above where the finished elevation of the property is lower at the boundary
line (or within five feet (5') inside the boundary line) than an abutting
property elevation, such change in elevation may be used in lieu of, or in
combination with, additional screening to satisfy the screening requirements
for this district.
      3.   Height Of Buildings: All buildings in an R-2 district shall be no
higher than thirty five feet (35'). No structure shall be less than twelve feet
(12') as measured from finished grade.
      4.   Zero Lot Line Conversion: Duplex dwellings that were in existence at
the date of the passage of this code may be converted to zero lot line (twin
home) use. For such conversion, minimum lot size regulations as provided in
this section shall be required. All appropriate state code and applicable
building codes for condominium conversion shall be required. (Ord. 13-24, 10-
16-2013; amd. Ord. 20-12, 4-15-2020)
13.20.080: MANUFACTURED HOME (MH) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The manufactured home (MH) residential district is established
to provide a medium density residential environment within the city for
manufactured home homeowners that is characterized by a minimum of vehicular
traffic and quiet residential neighborhoods favorable for family life.
   B.   Area Requirement: Manufactured home subdivisions shall have a minimum
total development size of five (5) acres.
   C.   Lot Size: There shall be no minimum area per lot, provided the required
yards for each mobile home can be created and maintained.
   D.   Front Yard Requirements: Each mobile home may be placed no closer than
five feet (5') back from the sidewalk or roadway if there is no sidewalk; this
includes any attached appurtenances, including, but not limited to, stairs,
awnings, carports, etc. No structure shall encroach in the five foot (5')
setback area (the structure includes the roof overhang).
   E.   Side Yard Requirements: Except as provided in subsection
13.22.040A7 of this title all dwelling structures and other main buildings
shall be set back from each lot line a distance of at least seven feet six
inches (7'6"), and the total distance of the two (2) side setbacks shall be at
least fifteen feet (15'). The minimum side yards for a private garage and other
accessory buildings or awnings shall be three feet (3'). Side yard distances
are to be measured from a point beginning at the outer edges of any overhangs
or eaves. On corner lots, the side yard which faces on a street for both main
and accessory buildings shall not be less than ten feet (10').
   F.   Rear Yard Requirements: Except as provided in subsection
13.22.040A7 of this title all dwelling structures and other main buildings
shall maintain a minimum rear yard building separation of at least ten feet
(10'). Accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of three feet (3') from
the adjacent lot line. Said rear yard distances are to be measured from a point
beginning at the outer edges of any overhangs or eaves, provided that on corner
lots which rear upon the side yard of another lot, accessory buildings shall be
located not closer than three feet (3') to such side yard.
   G.   Height Of Buildings: No building shall be erected to a height greater
than twenty five feet (25'), and no dwelling shall be erected to a height
greater than twelve feet (12').
   H.   Manufactured Home Requirements: All manufactured homes permitted for
location in any mobile home subdivision shall conform to the laws,
specifications, and requirements of the state of Utah national manufactured
housing construction and safety standards act of 1974 and shall have attached
proper certification that the mobile home conforms to the same.
   I.   Process: A manufactured home residential district subdivision shall
follow the review and approval process as outlined in the city subdivision
regulations.
   J.   Interior Streets: Public streets shall meet the minimum city standards.
Private streets standards shall be determined by administrative conditional use
process.
   K.   Maintenance: Maintenance of all areas and improvements owned in common
by the lot owners, such as clubhouses, common landscaping areas, recreational
facilities, playgrounds, roads, sewer and water utilities, and electrical
systems shall be the responsibility of an owners' association created with
articles of association and bylaws approved by the city attorney.
   L.   Recoveries Restrictions: The front yard of any space within three feet
(3') of the side and rear lot lines, shall not be occupied and shall be open
and unobstructed to the sky. Lot coverage shall not exceed seventy five percent
(75%) of the lot. For purposes of this section, "occupied" means "covered by a
mobile home/manufactured home, garage, carport, cabana, awning, storage
building, or structure of any kind".
   M.   Lot Width: There is no minimum lot width in the manufactured home
residential district.
   N.   Street Signs: Street and directional signs for all private streets
shall meet city standards and shall be maintained and replaced as necessary to
ensure legibility. (Ord. 13-24, 10-16-2013)
CHAPTER 13.21
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
13.21.010: Purpose
13.21.020: Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks, And Drive Approaches
13.21.030: Residential Driveways
13.21.040: Culinary Water Systems
13.21.050: Fire Hydrants
13.21.060: Sanitary Sewer And Other Utility Systems
13.21.070: Drainage Systems
13.21.080: High Water Table Areas
13.21.090: Alteration Or Relocation Of Waterways
13.21.100: Streets
13.21.110: Private Streets/Lanes
13.21.120: Buffering Along Streets
13.21.130: Protection Strips
13.21.140: Block Length
13.21.150: Bridges, Culverts, Etc.
13.21.160: Walkways And Trails
13.21.170: Survey Monuments
13.21.180: Easements
13.21.190: Public Utilities
13.21.200: Street Lighting
13.21.210: Lots
13.21.220: Flag Lots
13.21.230: Seismic Areas
13.21.240: Exceptions
13.21.010: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this chapter are:
   A.   To promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of
the city.
   B.   To provide for the orderly development of the city, with adequate
provisions for traffic, light, air, recreation, transportation, water,
drainage, sewage, and other public requirements. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.020: CURBS, GUTTERS, SIDEWALKS, AND DRIVE APPROACHES:
Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be installed on all existing and proposed
streets and along the frontage of any lot within a subdivision in conformance
with the city standards, unless exempt by the city engineer. Inspections by the
city are required for the installation of all curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and
drive approaches. If the developer/builder fails to notify the city for
inspection prior to installation, the city engineer may require remedial
action, including, but not limited to, the removal and replacement of the
improvements in question. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.030: RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS:
   A.   Driveways shall be provided for all residential building lots. The
drive approach for the driveway shall be a minimum width of twelve feet (12')
and shall not exceed the maximum width of thirty five feet (35'). A secondary
drive approach may be permitted upon review and approval by the city engineer.
   B.   No downsloping driveways shall be permitted unless otherwise approved
by the city engineer due to unusual topographic constraints. The driveway must
maintain a positive slope away from the home as required by applicable building
codes.
   C.   The minimum grade at which a driveway shall be allowed to be built is
two percent (2%) slope, and the maximum grade at which a driveway shall be
allowed to be built is twelve percent (12%) slope.
   D.   Residential driveways shall be constructed with a minimum concrete
thickness of five inches (5") installed on a minimum of six inches (6") of
compacted untreated base course or six inches (6") clean, two inch (2") minus
sewer rock.
   E.   Residential driveway approaches shall be constructed with a minimum
concrete thickness of six inches (6") installed on a minimum of six inches (6")
of compacted untreated base course or six inches (6") clean, two inch (2")
minus sewer rock. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.040: CULINARY WATER SYSTEMS:
   A.   The developer shall extend culinary water systems to each lot within a
subdivision as required by the entity providing culinary water.
   B.   All trenches located outside of the city rights of way and located
beneath the driveway or within five feet (5') of any public improvement shall
be backfilled in twelve inch (12") maximum lifts and mechanically compacted.
Backfill and compaction operations shall be certified in writing to the city
engineer by the developer/builder through his licensed professional prior to
the city issuing a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.050: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Fire hydrants shall be installed by the developer in accordance with city
standards, applicable fire codes, and other local ordinances at locations
designated on the final plat and city approved construction drawings. (Ord. 12-
15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.060: SANITARY SEWER AND OTHER UTILITY SYSTEMS:
   A.   The developer shall extend sanitary sewer systems to each lot in a
subdivision as required by the entity providing sanitary sewer systems.
   B.   All trenches located outside of the city right of way located beneath
the driveway or within five feet (5') of any public improvement shall be
backfilled in twelve inch (12") maximum lifts and mechanically compacted.
Backfill and compaction operations shall be certified in writing to the city
engineer by the developer/builder through his licensed professional prior to
the city's issuing a certificate of occupancy. The developer shall locate and
mark at the property line the location of the ends of sanitary sewer laterals.
All new dwellings shall connect to sanitary sewer. This shall be reviewed as
part of the building permit process.
   C.   All trenches for utility installation within the city right of way
shall be compacted in conformance with city standards. All trenches located
outside of city right of way, beneath driveways, or within five feet (5') of
any public improvement shall be backfilled in twelve inch (12") maximum lifts
and be mechanically compacted. Backfill and compaction operations shall be
certified in writing to the city engineer by the developer/builder through his
licensed professional prior to the city issuing a certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.070: DRAINAGE SYSTEMS:
Surface water runoff drainage systems shall be designed to handle all runoff
generated within the subdivision by a 10-year, 3-hour storm and routing of
water generated by a 100-year, 72-hour storm. Such systems shall be designed
and installed by the developer according to city standards. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012)
13.21.080: HIGH WATER TABLE AREAS:
   A.   In areas with the potential of groundwater impacts, the city engineer
may require a groundwater investigation study to be done by a geotechnical
engineer and provided to the city for review with the application for final
plat approval to include the following:
      1.   Mitigation measures should be taken to assure that homes will be
protected from potential groundwater impacts, including a proposed method of
groundwater disposal to be reviewed and approved by the city engineer.
      2.   The developer shall provide groundwater information to each lot
purchaser/owner and disclose the information on the plat.
   B.   If required, groundwater drainage systems shall be designed and
installed in accordance with construction standards and specifications
determined by the city engineer.
   C.   All drainage systems shall be extended to the outermost boundaries of
the subdivision by the developer, or farther if necessary, to provide service.
   D.   The city may prohibit basements in high water table areas upon
recommendation from the city engineer.
   E.   If a public utility is outside the public right of way, the developer
and subsequent homeowner shall be responsible for maintenance. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012)
13.21.090: ALTERATION OR RELOCATION OF WATERWAYS:
   A.   A request for alteration or relocation of a waterway shall first be
submitted to the city engineer to ensure the following:
      1.   The flow capacity and velocity of the waterway will not change with
the proposed alteration or relocation.
      2.   The soils conditions in the proposed location will not increase
flooding potential.
      3.   The proposed waterway can be maintained.
   B.   After approval by the city engineer, alteration or relocation of any
waterway shall be submitted and approved by all applicable agencies. (Ord. 12-
15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.100: STREETS:
   A.   All roads and roadway features are required to meet minimum geometric
design standards established by the American Association Of State Highway And
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) and other applicable entities. All street and
right of way improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the city standards. All signs, pavement markings, and traffic control signals
must meet standards established by the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" (MUTCD) and other applicable agencies, and related roadway standards
established by state, federal, or local law. Exceptions to applicable standards
may be granted by the city engineer on a case by case basis and shall
demonstrate innovative superiority or other advantages over existing standards.
   B.   The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all
streets shall conform to the transportation master plan and shall be considered
in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions,
public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
   C.   Where the transportation master plan does not show proposed streets,
the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
      1.   Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing
principal streets in surrounding areas (providing for neighborhood connectivity
with the purpose of spreading traffic); or
      2.   Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the
director to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions
make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable.
   D.   At least two (2) points of ingress/egress shall be provided for each
subdivision or PUD project unless the project has one or more of the following:
      1.   A single cul-de-sac, hammerhead, or other approved turnaround
approved by the UFA and city engineer that complies with all development
standards herein.
      2.   An emergency access approved by the director.
      3.   The future extension of a stub street that will provide additional
access including a temporary turnaround approved by the UFA and city engineer.
   E.   Stub streets that are longer than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall
have a temporary turnaround.
   F.   The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for
the continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas and shall provide
access to unsubdivided adjoining areas insofar as such continuation or access
shall be deemed necessary by the planning commission. New streets must connect
with existing public streets.
   G.   Street right of way widths shall be as shown on the transportation
master plan, and where not shown therein, shall not be less than the following:
 
  Right Of Way Width
Street type:                    
 Major arterial               106+ feet
 Major collector              80 feet
 Minor collector              66 feet
 Local                        50 feet
 Local rebuild                42 feet
Private street/lane type:       
 Private street               50 feet (26 foot pavement width minimum)
 Private lane (2 lot maximum) 25 feet (20 foot pavement width minimum)
 
   H.   Half streets are prohibited.
   I.   A cul-de-sac is discouraged but may be permitted on local streets and
shall be terminated by a turnaround of not less than ninety two feet (92') in
diameter as measured from top back of curb to top back of curb. A cul-de-sac
shall not exceed four hundred feet (400') in length in a residential zone. A
cul-de-sac in the sensitive area overlay zone shall not exceed six hundred feet
(600') in length unless otherwise permitted by the planning commission upon
recommendation from the city engineer. A cul-de- sac length is measured from
its intersection with another street to the end of the cul-de-sac turnaround.
   J.   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles.
   K.   No street names shall be used which will duplicate the names of
existing streets. Street names are subject to the approval of the director and
Salt Lake County recorder's office.
   L.   Local streets shall be laid out to provide neighborhood connectivity so
that traffic is distributed out evenly.
   M.   Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way or
limited access highway right of way, the planning commission may require a
local access street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right of
way.
   N.   Where a subdivision abuts or contains existing double frontage lots or
a proposed arterial or collector street, the planning commission may require
local access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a
nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service
alleys, or other such treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties and to provide separation of through and local traffic.
   O.   Park strips shall be required on all streets unless otherwise
determined by the planning commission. They shall be designed and installed
according to the city standards.
   P.   The requirements of this section may be waived or modified by the
planning commission after considering a recommendation from the city engineer.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.110: PRIVATE STREETS/LANES:
Full width public street systems shall be installed for access to all
residential dwelling sites, unless exempted by the planning commission. A
private street/lane system may be approved where it can be shown, based upon
property width, connectivity (or the inability to connect to the existing
street patterns), topographical concerns, overall subdivision design, the
ability to provide service (which includes, but is not limited to, snowplowing,
street sweeping, trash collection, and overall street maintenance), that a full
width public street may not be the best solution for a new subdivision.
   A.   Private Street:
      1.   All roads and roadway features are required to meet minimum
geometric design standards established by the American Association Of State
Highway And Transportation Officials (AASHTO) and other applicable entities.
All street and right of way improvements shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the city standards. All signs, pavement markings, and traffic
control signals must meet standards established by the "Manual On Uniform
Traffic Control Devices" (MUTCD) and other applicable agencies, and related
roadway standards established by state, federal, or local law. Exceptions to
applicable standards may be granted by the city engineer on a case by case
basis and shall demonstrate innovative superiority or other advantages over
existing standards.
      2.   Approved private streets for access to residential dwelling
structures shall have a fifty foot (50') right of way and a twenty six foot
(26') minimum width paved surface. All private streets shall be constructed in
accordance with the latest edition of the city standards, this land development
code, and all other applicable city ordinances.
      3.   Private streets shall have appropriate turnaround(s) as determined
by the city engineer and UFA.
      4.   The city engineer and UFA shall have the authority to require more
than one access road based upon the potential for impairment of a single road
by vehicle congestion, condition of terrain, climatic conditions, or other
factors that could limit access.
      5.   Private streets shall not be obstructed in any manner including the
parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances shall be maintained at
all times.
      6.   If a private street is approved, a perpetual maintenance plan shall
be established for the homeowners' association so that the street is
continually maintained as designed.
      7.   Whenever a subdivision is approved with a private street, the final
subdivision plat shall include a statement that no city maintenance is provided
on the private street.
   B.   Private Lane:
      1.   Approved private lanes two (2) lot maximum for access to residential
dwelling structures shall have a twenty five foot (25') right of way and a
twenty foot (20') minimum width paved surface.
      2.   Private lanes cannot access more than two (2) residential dwellings.
      3.   The city engineer and UFA shall have the authority to require an
increase in the minimum access widths where they are inadequate for fire or
fire rescue operations.
      4.   The city engineer and UFA shall have the authority to require more
than one access road based upon the potential for impairment of a single road
by vehicle congestion, condition of terrain, climatic conditions, or other
factors that could limit access.
      5.   Private lanes shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the
parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances shall be maintained at
all times.
      6.   All private lanes shall be constructed to meet all applicable
requirements related to culinary water and storm drainage.
      7.   Whenever a subdivision is approved with a private lane, the final
subdivision plat shall include a statement that no city maintenance is provided
on the private lane. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.120: BUFFERING ALONG STREETS:
Residential developments shall not permit motor vehicle access directly onto an
arterial, major collector, or minor collector street or roadway from individual
residential lots. No new residential developments shall be permitted within the
city which abut an arterial without requiring improvements along the entire
length of the development as it abuts the arterial street. The following
standards shall apply:
   A.   The planning commission may require a barrier wall six feet (6') in
height (measured from the highest elevation on either side of the wall). Where
soil retention is required, walls may be up to eight feet (8') in height
(retaining wall and barrier wall combined). Wall design and coloration shall be
block, brick, or concrete. Concrete strips placed at the base of the fence
shall be required to eliminate gaps between walls and sidewalks.
   B.   Curb, gutter, and sidewalk shall be designed to specifications approved
by the city engineer.
   C.   A landscaped buffer between the sidewalk and street curb shall be
installed according to city standards. In order to facilitate the planting of
street trees, an eight foot (8') park strip and five foot (5') sidewalk is the
standard requirement. Reduced park strip and sidewalk width may be approved
based upon the size, scale, and nature of the project, and the type of existing
improvements on adjacent properties. However, a ten foot (10') cross section (5
foot park strip, 5 foot sidewalk) is a minimum and may necessitate tree
planting behind the sidewalk.
   D.   Sprinkling system sufficient to maintain landscaping in all buffer
areas shall be approved by the director.
   E.   An additional landscaped buffer, including sprinkling and water
connections, may be required by the planning commission between the sidewalk
and barrier wall where it is impractical for the barrier wall to abut the
sidewalk. The specific width of the buffer and landscaping specifications shall
be determined by the planning commission upon recommendation by the director at
the time of subdivision review.
   F.   Provisions or plans for perpetual maintenance shall be submitted with
the landscape design. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.130: PROTECTION STRIPS:
Reserve or protection strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.140: BLOCK LENGTH:
   A.   The lengths, width, and shapes of blocks shall be determined by the
following:
      1.   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated.
      2.   Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions.
      3.   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of
street traffic.
      4.   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   B.   Block lengths shall not exceed eight hundred feet (800').
   C.   Pedestrian crosswalks shall be required where deemed essential to
provide circulation or access to churches, schools, playgrounds, shopping
centers, transportation, and other community facilities in accordance with city
standards. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.150: BRIDGES, CULVERTS, ETC.:
The developer/subdivider shall pay all costs of designing, constructing or
installing any bridge, pipe, culvert, or other structure required by the city
to provide access to or cover any ditch, canal, jurisdictional wetlands, etc.,
within the subdivision or adjacent thereto.
Automotive bridges/culverts shall be designed to accommodate automotive and
safe pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.160: WALKWAYS AND TRAILS:
   A.   Determination: Walkways with a width of six (6) to ten feet (10') may
be required within a subdivision. This will be determined on a case by case
basis after review by city staff.
   B.   Dedicated Parcels: The developer may be required to dedicate a
sufficient amount of property to be used exclusively as a pedestrian access
walkway. Such parcels to be dedicated shall be located in a position within the
development as determined by the planning commission. The parcel shall also be
of a size large enough to allow for such a walkway, such size to be determined
by the planning commission.
   C.   Improvements: The developer may be required to install upon the walkway
such improvements as determined by the planning commission and the city
engineer. All such improvements shall be erected and constructed in accordance
with standards as may be established by the planning commission and city
engineer.
   D.   Pedestrian And Bicycle Paths: Where appropriate, the internal
circulation system shall provide pedestrian and bicycle paths which may be
physically separated from vehicular traffic to serve residential,
nonresidential, and recreational facilities in or adjacent to the development.
The planning commission may require connections to regional trail systems,
activity centers, pedestrian and/or bicycle overpasses, underpasses, or traffic
signalization in the vicinity of schools, playgrounds, parks, shopping areas,
or other uses that will receive considerable pedestrian and/or recreational
trails use from the development. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.170: SURVEY MONUMENTS:
Survey monuments shall be indicated on the final plat. A permit and approval
from the Salt Lake County surveyor's office for the installation of survey
monuments must be obtained prior to the setting of any survey monuments and
before any subdivision improvements are accepted. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.180: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Easements for utilities and drainage shall be provided where necessary
as determined by various public utility agencies, and the city engineer.
   B.   Easements for surface water runoff drainage, canals, irrigation
ditches, waterways, clear vision areas, and rights of way within the
subdivision and across adjoining property may be required by the city when
necessary to properly serve the subdivision or protect its citizens.
      1.   Open ditches shall not be allowed within or adjoining a subdivision.
The developer/subdivider shall work with ditch irrigation companies and the
city engineer as to:
         a.   Methods of covering, realigning, or eliminating ditches, pipes,
or canals within or adjoining the subdivision.
         b.   The size of pipe and culverts required.
         c.   The responsibility for the periodic inspection, cleaning, and
maintenance of such ditches, pipes, and culverts shall be reviewed by the city
engineer. In cases where ditches cross public roads or proposed public roads,
specifications and grades for pipe or culvert must be approved by the city
engineer in accordance with the city's specifications.
      2.   The developer/subdivider may be required to install a six foot (6'),
nonclimbable fence or its equivalent along all open ditches, canals, waterways,
open reservoirs or other bodies of water, railroad rights of way, and other
such features of a potentially hazardous nature, on or contiguous to the
property being subdivided as determined by the planning commission.
      3.   After installation and acceptance by the city, individual property
owners are responsible for maintenance of fences or portions of fences erected
upon their property and shall hold the city harmless for any and all defects of
workmanship, maintenance, repair, and liability arising from the erection or
intended use of said fence.
   C.   Easements for public trails shall be provided where necessary as
determined by applicable public agencies, including the Salt Lake County parks
and recreation department and the U.S. forest service. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.190: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   A.   The developer shall be responsible for the installation of service
lines prior to street paving.
   B.   All utilities which will serve the parcel being subdivided shall be
buried beneath the surface of the ground and shall be located within the
easements provided for such use or within the streets at a location to be
determined by the city.
   C.   All utility structures shall be included as part of the construction
drawings submitted with the final plat.
   D.   There shall be no aboveground utility structures placed in a right of
way but may be placed out of the public right of way in a public utility
easement as approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.200: STREET LIGHTING:
   A.   The developer shall follow all applicable requirements for the
installation of streetlights and all streetlights shall be placed as approved
by the director. Such items to be approved include appropriate distance,
alternating sides of street, location upon the property, streetlight type,
height, and illumination intensity as determined by the city's specifications.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.210: LOTS:
   A.   Every parcel of land created by a subdivision shall comply with the
minimum lot size requirements of this code and shall be platted as part of a
subdivision. No parcel of land shall be created or left unplatted which is
either undevelopable or serves merely as a nuisance or lot remnant.
   B.   Except as may be otherwise provided in this development code, all lots
shall have the required frontage upon a dedicated and improved street.
Exceptions may include the following:
      1.   Residential building lots that do not have frontage upon a public
street shall obtain an exception from the planning commission as part of the
preliminary review process.
      2.   Commercial building lots within a recorded subdivision are exempt
from this requirement. They may be developed without direct frontage upon a
public street.
   C.   Where a canal or exclusive utility easement abuts a subdivision, the
area or portion of the canal which is located in the lot(s) shall not be
included in the computation of total lot size nor side or rear yard setbacks
for purposes of determining compliance with the development code.
   D.   All lot corners, points of curvature, tangency, and bearing changes
shall be marked with permanent metal stakes approved by the city. The front
corners of the lot shall be marked as per the city standards.
   E.   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where
essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic
arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
   F.   Where possible, side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles
to street lines. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.220: FLAG LOTS:
In order to encourage the more efficient use of land, flag, or L-shaped lots
may be allowed as an exception (a permitted use within the sensitive area
overlay district) subject to the following conditions:
   A.   A flag or L-shaped lot shall be comprised of a staff portion contiguous
with the flag portion thereof.
   B.   The staff portion of said lot shall front on and be contiguous to a
dedicated public street or private street. The minimum width of the staff
portion of a flag lot shall be twenty feet (20'), and the maximum length shall
be two hundred twenty feet (220') unless otherwise approved by the planning
commission upon recommendation of the UFA.
   C.   A flag lot shall not gain access via an easement on an adjacent
property.
   D.   No building or construction, except for driveways, shall be allowed on
the staff portion of said lot unless the minimum width thereof is the same or
greater than the minimum width for a lot as allowed in the underlying zone
(excluding entrance features and streetlights).
   E.   The front side of the flag portion of said lots shall be deemed to be
that side nearest to the dedicated public street or private street upon which
the staff portion fronts, unless otherwise determined by staff on a case by
case basis.
   F.   The staff portion of said lots shall be deemed to end, and the flag
portion of said lots shall be deemed to commence at the extension of the front
lot line.
   G.   The square footage located in the flag portion of said lot, which shall
be exclusive of the square footage located in the staff portion of said lot,
shall be the same or greater than the minimum square footage as required in the
underlying zone, but in no instance shall be less than eight thousand (8,000)
square feet.
   H.   The front, side, and rear yard requirements of the flag portion of said
lots shall be the same as is required in the underlying zone.
   I.   No more than two (2) flag lots can be served by the staff portion.
   J.   All flag lots in the development shall be approved by the planning
commission.
   K.   The maximum number of flag lots in the subdivision shall be not more
than twenty percent (20%) of the total number of lots within the subdivision
unless otherwise approved by the planning commission.
   L.   The approved building envelope shall be illustrated upon the final
plat.
   M.   Below is an example of a flag lot and is included herein to illustrate
the concept of a flag or L-shaped lot.
   N.   A duplex, twin home, or any other multi-family dwelling shall not be
located on a flag lot.
   FIGURE 1
   FLAG LOT MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3798.png]
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.230: SEISMIC AREAS:
Any subdivision or lot on or adjacent to a seismic area shall comply with
provisions of the sensitive area overlay zone. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.21.240: EXCEPTIONS:
Any exception authorized by the planning commission as allowed in this chapter
shall be shown on the final plat, and the reasons for such exception shall be
entered in writing in the minutes of the planning commission meeting. (Ord. 12-
15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.22
MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
SECTION:
13.22.010: Purpose
13.22.020: Provisions Applying To Manufactured Homes And Manufactured Home
Parks
13.22.030: Application For Review And Approval Of A Manufactured Home Park
13.22.040: Standards And Requirements
13.22.050: Maintenance Of Premises; Manufactured Home Parks
13.22.060: Compliance With Other Regulations
13.22.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Permit variety and flexibility in land development for residential
purposes by allowing the use of manufactured homes in certain districts within
the city.
   B.   Assure that manufactured home development will be of such character as
to promote the objectives and purposes of this code, to protect the integrity
and characteristics of the zone districts contiguous to those in which
manufactured home parks are located, and protect other use values contiguous to
or near manufactured home parks.
   C.   Encourage manufactured home parks to be located adjacent to or in close
proximity to an arterial or collector street. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.22.020: PROVISIONS APPLYING TO MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME
PARKS:
   A.   Location And Use:
      1.   No manufactured home shall be located, placed, used, or occupied in
the city except within approved manufactured home subdivisions, manufactured
home parks, or manufactured homes sales lots.
      2.   No portion of a manufactured home park may be used as a recreational
vehicle park.
   B.   Storage In Sales Lots: Manufactured homes may be stored, displayed,
sold, and serviced in a sales lot as permitted in the land use matrix,
permissible uses and standards but shall not be used for living or office
purposes.
   C.   Storage In Manufactured Home Parks: Recreational vehicles may be stored
in an approved and licensed manufactured home park provided:
      1.   The recreational vehicle storage area is surrounded by a six foot
(6') opaque fence.
      2.   The recreational vehicle storage area shall have direct access from
within the manufactured home park. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.22.030: APPLICATION FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A MANUFACTURED HOME PARK:
   A.   Approval: Manufactured home parks may not be constructed unless first
approved by the planning commission. The proposed development will:
      1.   Be in keeping with the general character of the zone district within
which the proposed development will be located.
      2.   Be located on a parcel of land containing not less than ten (10)
acres, or on two (2) or more parcels separated by a street or alley only and
totaling at least ten (10) acres.
      3.   Have at least twenty five (25) spaces completed and ready for
occupancy before first occupancy is permitted.
      4.   Meet all the standards and requirements of this code and all other
requirements of applicable ordinances of the city.
      5.   Have written approval from all appropriate governmental entities and
utility companies.
   B.   Overall Plan Requirement: An overall plan for development of a
manufactured home park shall be submitted to the planning commission for site
plan review. The plan shall be drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch equals
thirty feet (1" = 30') and provide the following:
      1.   The proposed street and manufactured home space layout.
      2.   Site design of parks, playgrounds, and open spaces.
      3.   Tabulations showing percent of area to be devoted to open space,
amenities, manufactured home and/or recreational vehicle storage, and total
area to be developed.
      4.   Proposed location of parking spaces for residents, guests, and
recreational vehicle storage for both manufactured home parks.
      5.   Any other data that the planning commission or the director may
require.
      6.   When applicable, all subdivision review standards must be followed.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.22.040: STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Approval of a manufactured home park shall be subject to the following
conditions and regulations as well as any conditions imposed by the planning
commission:
      1.   The number of manufactured homes shall be limited to ten (10) units
per acre. The manufactured homes may be clustered provided the total number of
units does not exceed the number permitted on one acre multiplied by the number
of acres in the development. The remaining land not contained in individual
lots, roads, or parking shall be set aside and developed as parks, playgrounds,
and service areas for the common use and enjoyment of occupants of the
development and visitors.
      2.   Not less than eighteen percent (18%) of the manufactured home park
shall be landscaped.
      3.   No manufactured home (excluding awning or carport) shall be located
closer than ten feet (10') from the nearest part of any other manufactured
home. All manufactured home add ons shall be set back at least five feet (5')
from road curbs or walks. If the tongue of a manufactured home remains
attached, it shall be set back a minimum of five feet (5') from the road curbs
and/or walks.
      4.   All areas not covered by manufactured homes, hard surfacing, or
buildings shall be landscaped in a manner approved by the city, and such
landscaping shall be permanently maintained.
      5.   All off street parking spaces and driveways shall be hard surfaced
before the manufactured home spaces may be occupied.
      6.   Within forty five (45) days of occupancy, each manufactured home
shall be skirted. Shields may be used provided they are fire resistant,
weatherproofed, well painted, or otherwise preserved.
      7.   A strip of land at least ten feet (10') wide (within the property
limits of the park) surrounding the entire park shall be left unoccupied by
manufactured homes and shall be planted and maintained in lawn, shrubs, and
trees designed to afford privacy to the development. Where a manufactured home
park abuts a residential lot other than a manufactured home park, such strip
shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide.
      8.   All storage and solid waste receptacles outside the confines of any
manufactured home must be housed in an enclosed structure compatible in design
and construction to the manufactured home and to any service buildings within
the development. The service buildings shall be constructed to standard
commercial practice and kept in good repair as approved by the chief building
official.
      9.   No manufactured home space shall be rented for a period of less than
thirty (30) days.
      10.   There shall be at least two (2) off street parking spaces for each
mobile home pad and one space for visitor parking.
      11.   The roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated
traffic, but not less than the following unless modified by an approved planned
unit development plan:
         a.   For two-way traffic: Thirty feet (30') (lease line to lease
line).
         b.   Publicly dedicated streets shall meet city standards.
      12.   A manufactured home park shall have at least two (2) vehicle
accesses to public streets.
      13.   Storm drainage facilities shall be constructed to protect residents
of the development as well as adjacent property owners. Such facilities shall
be of sufficient capacity to ensure rapid drainage and prevent the accumulation
of stagnant pools of water in or adjacent to the development in accordance with
the "Standards And Specifications And Details For Municipal Construction"
(SSDMC).
      14.   A manufactured home park shall provide individual utility services
to every manufactured home pad or lot as required by city ordinances.
      15.   Street and regulatory signs must be properly installed and
maintained.
      16.   In addition to meeting the above requirements and conforming to the
other laws of the city, all manufactured home parks shall conform to
requirements adopted by the appropriate governmental entities and utility
companies. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.22.050: MAINTENANCE OF PREMISES; MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS:
   A.   General: The premises on which any mobile/manufactured home is located,
used, or occupied shall be maintained in a clean, orderly, and sanitary
condition. The accumulation of any rubbish, waste, weeds, or other unsightly
material shall constitute a nuisance and a violation of this code for which the
city may direct removal of the mobile/manufactured home or recreational vehicle
from the premises.
   B.   Maintenance Of Common Facilities: For manufactured home parks, adequate
and reasonable guarantees must be provided for permanent retention of open
space and for the maintenance of roadways, storage facilities, service
facilities, and landscaping resulting from the application of these
regulations. Guarantees shall be in the form as otherwise provided in this code
for bonding for improvements.
   C.   Park Manager: The developer/owner(s) shall establish and appoint a park
manager. The manager shall be locally available and authorized to receive,
process, and fully represent the interests of the owners with respect to
management and maintenance of the park.
   D.   Business License: A city business license shall be obtained prior to
the operations of any manufactured home park. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.22.060: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS:
All manufactured homes shall comply with and conform to all applicable federal,
state and local regulations. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.23
COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, HOSPITAL, INDUSTRIAL, TRANSIT CORRIDOR, AND MULTI-FAMILY
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
13.23.010: Purpose And Applicability
13.23.020: Ancillary Uses
13.23.030: General Commercial And Industrial Development Standards
13.23.040: Lot Size And Width
13.23.050: Public Improvements
13.23.060: Parking Lots And Loading Areas
13.23.070: Screening At Boundaries Of Residential Districts
13.23.080: Storage And Display Areas
13.23.090: Trash Enclosure Areas
13.23.100: Roof Mounted Mechanical Equipment
13.23.110: Lighting Standards In Commercial Developments
13.23.120: Utilities
13.23.130: General Maintenance
13.23.140: Grading And Drainage
13.23.150: Reciprocal Access
13.23.160: Alcoholic Beverages; Distance Requirements
13.23.170: Drive-Up/Drive-Through Windows (Food And Nonfood Uses)
13.23.180: Automotive Fuel Service Stations (Includes Stand Alone Gas Stations
And Convenience Stores With Gas Pumps)
13.23.190: Automotive Service And Repair Facilities
13.23.200: Extended Hours Within Two Hundred Fifty Feet Of A Residential
District
13.23.210: Industrial Uses Within Two Hundred Fifty Feet Of A Residential
District
13.23.220: Additional Specific Nonresidential Development Standards (Standards
Unique To Each Individual District)
13.23.230: Reserved
13.23.240: Planned Center Development Standards
13.23.250: Industrial Or Research Park Standards
13.23.260: Mixed Use Development Standards
13.23.010: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Purpose: The commercial, office, industrial districts, and transit
corridor development standards are intended to provide a set of standards
whereby developments can be designed into well planned commercial and
industrial centers using the latest industry ideas and techniques.
   B.   Scope: This chapter establishes performance and development standards
to encourage and facilitate orderly growth and well planned development within
the City. These standards are intended to ensure good building and overall site
design, good architectural design and visual appearance, street layout, parking
design, pedestrian design, appropriate fencing, buffering, and screening as
well as compliance with the district regulations and other provisions of this
Code relating to public health, safety, and general welfare of the overall
community. The standards set forth within this chapter shall be interpreted to
be the minimum standards within the district unless otherwise stated.
   C.   Applicability: Uses permitted and conditional shall conform to the
development standards provided in this Code and to the application procedures
for the development.
   D.   Applicability Of Other Code Chapters: Uses permitted and conditional
under this chapter shall also conform to the applicable development standards
provided elsewhere in this Code. Uses shall also conform to any overlay zone
requirements that are applicable. Uses permitted as an administrative
conditional use or nonadministrative conditional use shall also comply with the
requirements for conditional use permits. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.020: ANCILLARY USES:
All permitted, administrative conditional land uses, and nonadministrative
conditional land uses within each district may conduct ancillary uses provided
such use is not regulated by other sections or is listed as a prohibited land
use in the district. Certain ancillary uses may be allowed if determined to be
compatible with the primary use as determined by the Director. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012)
13.23.030: GENERAL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Development shall occur according to the following general standards and
requirements as well as the development requirements listed in the individual
districts. In all cases, the more restrictive development standards shall
govern.
   A.   Site Plan Review Required: Site plan review with City staff is required
of all new, modified, and expanded development projects. Additionally, the site
plan may be required to be reviewed by the Planning Commission as may be
specified within a zoning district or if the necessity is determined by the
Director.
   B.   Architectural Design Standards: All retail commercial, office,
industrial, institutional, and transit corridor developments shall follow all
applicable standards listed in the architectural design standards adopted by
the City.
   C.   CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design) Principles: The
developer is required to consider the basic principles of CPTED when designing
the site plan, landscape plan, and architectural design for a project. Use of
the CPTED principles is strongly encouraged in the interest of the future
security of the project from both the owner's as well as the customer's
standpoint. The concept of CPTED is based upon the theory that the proper
design and effective use of the built environment can lead to the reduction in
the incidence and fear of crime and be an improvement in the quality of life.
The following principles should be taken into account in the design of all
buildings and developments:
      1.   Natural Surveillance: Physical design that keeps potential intruders
under the perception of continual watch, using "eyes on the street", e.g., view
to streets, driveways, and parking lots, and visual permeability in
architecture, lighting, and landscaping.
      2.   Natural Access Control: Physical design that guides the mobility of
people and decreases crime opportunity and increases perception of risk to
potential offenders.
      3.   Territorial Reinforcement: Physical design that encourages users of
property to develop ownership over it, developing space with an easily
discernable purpose, using symbolic barriers such as low lying fences/walls,
landscaping and signage, eliminating ambiguous spaces, encouraging easy
maintenance, and discouraging crime.
      4.   Management And Maintenance: Responsibility for managing and
maintaining the property. Show that someone cares about seeing that the
property is in a presentable appearance and is secure for the customers that
use the facility.
      5.   CPTED Landscaping Standards: These should be used including planting
shrubs with a maximum height of two feet (2') to three feet (3') and trees with
proper ground clearance of seven feet (7') above walkways and sidewalks, and
fourteen feet (14') above vehicular travel and parking lanes. This shall be
accomplished through proper pruning practices, not by clear cutting, topping
trees, or other "pruning for exposure" techniques.
      6.   Public Safety: In order to encourage public safety through natural
surveillance, natural access control, and territorial reinforcement, solid
windowless walls are not permitted adjacent to streets, pedestrian areas, and
open space amenities.
         a.   Symbolic barriers such as low lying fences/walls, landscaping,
and signage shall be used to discourage crime and to promote safety.
         b.   Ground floor parking garages shall not be permitted immediately
adjacent to streets unless permitted by the Planning Commission.
         c.   Developments shall have street side building elevations with
extensive windows, balconies, decks, or landscape terraces being encouraged.
(Ord. 16-08, 6-1-2016)
   D.   General Building Locations And Setbacks: In addition to the specific
building setback requirements listed in each individual district, the following
general standards shall apply:
      1.   No building shall be closer than six feet (6') from any private
road, driveway, or parking spaces in order to allow areas adjacent to the
building for foundation landscaping and buffering of pedestrian walkways.
Exceptions may be made for any portion of the building that contains a drive-up
window.
      2.   The public right-of-way boundary shall be considered the front
property line of a lot. Where a lot is bordered on two (2) or more sides by a
public right-of-way boundary, all such sides shall be considered as front
property lines.
      3.   In all cases, the area between the front property line and the
building shall be known as the front yard.
      4.   Table of minimum building setbacks (all measurements are in feet and
setbacks are measured from the front property line or edge of right-of-way):
 
 
         Front    Side, Shared Side, No     Side, Abut,  Rear     Rear Abut
District Standard Party Walls  Shared Walls Residential1 Standard Residential
         Setback  Allowed                                         District1
Regional Commercial District      253   Y1 10 30 15  30
Community Commercial District     253   Y1 10 30 15  30
Neighborhood Commercial District  253   Y1 10 30 15  30
Boulevard Commercial District     253   Y1 10 30 15  30
Limited Commercial District       253   Y1 10 30 15  30
Professional Office District      253   Y1 10 30 15  30
Industrial District               253   Y1 10 30 30  30
Research and Development District 102,3 Y1 10 30 152 302
Mixed Use District                53    Y1 10 15 15  30
 
Exception: For commercial developments with a dedicated open space (canal,
trail, etc.), between the proposed development and an adjacent residential
district, the setback can be reduced to a minimum of 10 feet from the
commercial development's property line rather than the typical 30 feet.
Notes:
   1.    Provided all shared party walls meet minimum Building Code standards.
   2.    RD District: There shall be no parking between the building and a
public street. Said area shall be landscaped or developed into a pedestrian
plaza, e.g., fountain, seating, landscape planters, etc.
   3.    Building setback may be reduced to encroach into required setback
through incorporation of urban streetscape design per the provisions of the
City of Taylorsville Design Standards.
(Ord. 18-14, 5-2-2018)
      5.   Table of maximum building heights: All building heights are measured
in feet and are measured to the peak of the roof (if pitched) or to the top of
the roof parapet (if flat). If the building is located upon a slope, then the
base measurement point is taken from the average finished grade.
 
District Building Height Maximum Height Within 250' Of An R-1 Or R-2 District
Regional commercial district      See note 1 See note 1
Neighborhood commercial district  40         40
Community commercial district     35         35
Boulevard commercial district     50         40
Limited commercial district       45         35
Professional office district      503        353
Industrial district               802        402
Research and development district 802        402
Mixed use district                50         35
 
   Notes:
       1.    RC district: Buildings may be built to a maximum height of 75
feet. Buildings where appurtenances are constructed for the purpose of
mitigating noise and/or light may be built to a maximum of 115 feet. For those
developments where any portion of a building is within 100 feet of an R-
1 residential district boundary, they may be erected to a maximum height of 40
feet. An additional height bonus of 1 additional foot of height for each
additional 2 feet of setback from the required minimum setback may be granted
up to a maximum height of 60 feet for any portion of the building within the
100 foot buffer area. Maximum building height shall be measured from average
finished grade to the top of the roof.
       2.    ID/RD district: Any portion of a building within 250 feet of an R-
1 residential district boundary may be erected to a maximum height of 40 feet
to the peak of the roof. An additional height bonus of 1 foot per additional 1
foot from the required setback may be granted up to a maximum height of 80 feet
for any portion of the building beyond the 250 foot buffer area.
       3.    Building height may exceed the maximum in the building height
matrix if the current required building setbacks (front, side, and rear) are
increased by a ratio of 3 additional feet of setback for every 1 foot of
additional height. The height may be increased only up to a maximum of 60 feet.
The following 3 design criteria will be included in the project design in order
to qualify for additional height:
         a.    Open Space: The increase in building height will create
additional open space, landscaping, and gathering/plaza space which would
otherwise not be available if additional height is not granted.
         b.      Aesthetics: The proposed building design and architecture are
distinctive, unique, and compatible with the immediate surroundings (both
manmade and natural).
         c.    Impact On Residential Areas: The proposed building height will
provide for a reduced impact on adjacent residential districts, e.g., varied
building setback, unique roof lines, residential appearance, increased buffer
areas, etc.
(Ord. 16-08, 6-1-2016)
13.23.040: LOT SIZE AND WIDTH:
Lots shall be of sufficient size and width to assure compliance with all
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.050: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   General: The developer of the project shall only be responsible for the
cost of system improvements that are roughly proportionate and reasonably
related to the service demands and needs of such development activity.
Improvements that are designed to provide services for development resulting
from development activity shall include, but are not limited to: curb, gutter,
sidewalk, streetlight, drive approaches, waterways, road base, asphalt,
striping, streetscape, storm drainage, fire hydrants, copper laterals, piping
of irrigation ditches and flood control systems, fencing of canals, extension
of water lines, appurtenances and sewer lines, removal of utility lines out of
the right of way with the exception of traditionally buried lines such as
sewer, water, and natural gas transmission lines, etc.
   B.   Other Off Site Improvements: The developer may also be responsible for
other off site work, such as participation in the cost of such items as traffic
lights and traffic medians that are related to the impacts created by a
particular project.
   C.   Compliance With City Specifications: All required improvements shall be
designed and installed by the developer according to applicable city standards.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.060: PARKING LOTS AND LOADING AREAS:
   A.   General: There shall be provided at the time of erection of any main
building or at the time any main building is enlarged or increased in capacity,
minimum off street parking space with adequate provision for ingress and egress
in accordance with the requirements herein.
   B.   Parking Areas, Development, And Maintenance: Every parcel of land used
as a public or private parking area, including a commercial parking lot for
automobiles, open air sales lot, etc., shall be developed and maintained
consistent with the approved site plan for the project. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.070: SCREENING AT BOUNDARIES OF RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Masonry Wall: For commercial and industrial developments abutting
residential districts (except recognizable holding zones for future commercial
or industrial development), an opaque masonry wall shall be installed and
maintained along all district boundaries, other than streets, where the
premises abut areas zoned for residential uses.
Acceptable construction materials for walls shall be brick, stone, precast
concrete panel, concrete block, or such other masonry materials as the Director
may approve. Concrete panels and posts must be reinforced with rebar and wire
as determined by the chief building official. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   B.   Height: Except where otherwise provided, the opaque masonry wall shall
be a minimum of six feet (6') not to exceed eight feet (8') in height. If
requested by the adjacent residents, the Planning Commission may approve a
variation in wall height based upon unusual circumstances, e.g., views,
landscaping, etc. A lower height wall may be required adjacent to a front
property line for sight distance and traffic safety. (Ord. 18-07, 2-28-2018)
   C.   Grade: Where there is a difference in elevation on opposite sides of
the wall, the height of the required wall shall be measured from the highest
elevation.
   D.   Signs Are Prohibited: No signs or sign supports other than directional
signs shall be permitted on any required wall.
   E.   Other: Under special conditions where it has been determined that the
development may create unique impacts on an adjoining residential district,
e.g., hillside developments, developments adjacent to dedicated open space, the
Director shall review and may approve other methods of screening such as bermed
landscaping, open style fencing, screen height, placement of screen, or other
types of screening. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.080: STORAGE AND DISPLAY AREAS:
   A.   Storage Areas: Storage areas, including, but not limited to, areas
containing vehicle storage, merchandise, or equipment, etc., shall be paved
with hard surface paving (unless otherwise approved by the Director) and
screened with decorative opaque fencing and landscaping. Each wall or fence
shall be at least six feet (6') in vertical height or equal in height to the
material to be screened and shall be sufficient to screen facilities from view
of a public street and neighboring lots.
   B.   Outdoor Displays: Outdoor displays in front of buildings and within
parking lots, e.g., lawn mowers, trailers, tires, garden supplies, plants,
sheds, fencing, building materials, and general merchandise, shall only be
displayed in front of buildings and within parking lots as shown on the
approved site plan for the development. Said displays shall not block
pedestrian walkways and shall maintain all required parking, access, and
circulation requirements as established in chapter 13.24 of this title and
maintain a minimum setback of forty feet (40') from driveways.
      1.   Display Area: Vehicles, equipment and other merchandise for sale or
rent may only be displayed within the required front landscape setback upon the
approval of the Director only on concrete or decorative brick paver display
pads that is to be shown on an approved site plan for the development.
      2.   Display Pad Standards:
         a.   No more than two (2) display pads are allowed within the required
front landscape area for each one hundred feet (100') of owned or leased
property street frontage, i.e., greater than one hundred fifty feet (>150') of
frontage would allow up to three (3) display pads, but less than or equal to
one hundred fifty feet (150') would be limited to two (2) display pads.
         b.   Display pads may cover up to a maximum of twenty five percent
(25%) of the required front landscape area and shall not be more than two feet
(2') in height above the sidewalk grade.
         c.   All display pads shall have landscaping to surround the pads on
the front (facing the street) and both sides to a width not less than five feet
(5'). Landscaping shall consist of additional combinations of shrubs and ground
covers to enhance and soften the pad appearance.
         d.   All displays shall be kept within approved display pads.
   C.   Traffic Safety: No outside displays (either permanent or temporary)
shall be permitted to block required driveways, traffic visibility, traffic and
parking aisles, parking spaces, public rights-of-way (including sidewalks), nor
be located upon any landscaped area (other than on approved display pads).
   D.   Distance From Residential: No outdoor storage shall be located within
thirty feet (30') of any district zoned for residential use. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012)
13.23.090: TRASH ENCLOSURE AREAS:
   A.   Design Standards: Enclosures shall be provided for all garbage and/or
recycling containers (dumpsters), and design of said enclosure shall be
consistent with applicable City standards.
   B.   Enclosures And Gates: Enclosure material shall be composed of solid
masonry, a minimum six foot (6') high, compatible with adjacent buildings with
opaque gates to be closed when not in use. Gates shall be made of solid
material for durability.
   FIGURE 1
   TRASH ENCLOSURE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3800.png]
   C.   Screening: Each enclosure and its gates shall be equal or greater in
vertical height to the trash dumpster to be screened and be sufficient to
screen said facilities from view from public and private roads and neighboring
lots.
   D.   Location: No dumpster shall be permitted in the required front building
setback nor shall it block required driveways, traffic and parking aisles,
parking spaces, or sidewalks.
   E.   Setbacks: No dumpster shall be located within five feet (5') of any
side or rear commercial property line or ten feet (10') of any side or rear
property line adjacent to a residential district.
   F.   Access: Public roads shall not be used directly for refuse collection.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.100: ROOF MOUNTED MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Screened: All roof mounted mechanical equipment and vents (including
swamp coolers) shall be screened entirely from view from adjacent public
rights-of-way and properties. This may be accomplished using one or more of the
following alternatives:
      1.   A separate continuous screening system.
      2.   Groupings of pieces of mechanical equipment with an architecturally
designed screening system that blends with the architectural design and
materials of the proposed building.
      3.   Extension of the building's parapet walls to screen the equipment
from public view.
Note: Line of sight drawings will not be accepted as proof of roof equipment
screening.
   B.   Engineered: All roof mounted mechanical equipment (including its height
above the roof) and the proposed screening system shall be shown to scale on
the building's structural plans and approved by the Director prior to issuance
of a building permit. Said roof screen systems shall also be designed,
structurally engineered, and stamped by a licensed engineer for drifting snow
and wind loads, and approved by the City. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.110: LIGHTING STANDARDS IN COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Spotlights: Reflectors, spotlights, floodlights, and other sources of
illumination may be used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, signs, parking,
and loading areas provided they are equipped with proper lenses or other
devices concentrating the illumination upon the building, landscaping, signs,
parking, and loading areas.
   B.   Light Spill: No unshielded lights, reflectors, spotlights, strobe
lights, or searchlights shall be so located that they are pointed toward or are
directly visible from public rights-of-way. All lighting shall be shielded and
directed downward to avoid light spill beyond the property line. Unshielded,
exterior wall mounted floodlights (wall packs) are prohibited. Intensities
shall be controlled so that neighboring areas will not be adversely affected by
glare or excessive light.
   C.   Lighting Plan Required: A photometric lighting plan shall be required
for all areas within commercial developments. The lighting plan shall address
all areas of the development, including, but not limited to, open space,
driveways, parking lots and facilities, walkways, sidewalks, streets, plazas,
etc.
   D.   Lighting Plan Preparation: Lighting plans shall be prepared and stamped
by a recognized lighting engineer or lighting professional utilizing the
lighting recommendations of the latest edition of the Illuminating Engineering
Society (IES) Lighting Handbook. (Ord. 17-15, 6-14-2017)
13.23.120: UTILITIES:
All utility lines shall be placed underground in designated easements. No pipe,
conduit, cable, line for water, gas, sewage, drainage, steam, electricity, or
any other energy or service shall be installed on a permanent basis
aboveground. However, backflow devices have to be installed aboveground.
Therefore, no pole or other support structure shall be erected, altered, or
replaced upon any lot (outside of any building) above the surface of the ground
except for hoses, movable pipes used for irrigation or other purpose during
construction.
   A.   Transformers shall be grouped with other utility meters where possible.
Gas meters, electric service meter panels, electric service entrance equipment,
and other utility boxes shall be grouped together, where possible, and attached
to the side of the buildings and shall be painted to match the adjacent
building wall.
   B.   Each contractor and owner/developer shall be responsible to know the
whereabouts of all underground utilities. Protection of such utilities shall
also be their responsibility. Prior to construction, contact must be made with
"Blue Stakes" to identify underground utility lines.
   C.   Where overhead poles exist, service lines to new developments must be
placed underground from the nearest overhead service pole.
   D.   This section does not require removal of any existing electrical
transmission facilities and electrical distribution lines in excess of sixty
nine kilovolts (69 kV), nor does it restrict the repair, minor relocation, and
maintenance of any such existing facilities except that the developer shall be
responsible for the removing of utility poles out of the public right-of-way
that may be left in the right-of-way after public improvements associated with
the project are completed. All utility lines associated with the preexisting
utility pole(s) and distribution lines sixty nine kilovolts (69 kV) or less
shall be placed underground across the frontage of the development.
   E.   For developments with frontages of five hundred feet (500') or less,
the owners or developers of the property may, at the City's option and upon
approval from the Director, pay to the City a fee in lieu of burying existing
overhead facilities across the frontage. The fee shall be deposited into a
restricted capital projects account to pay the cost of burial at that site in
the future. The amount of the fee shall be set by the City Council based upon
an evaluation of reasonable burial costs.
   F.   Actual tree spacing during site plan review may be adjusted, as
necessary, to match existing streetscape or to adapt to unique on site
conditions that would justify such, e.g., topography, streetlights, power lines
and poles, and other utilities. In some cases, street trees may need to be
placed behind sidewalks, or eliminated, in order to accommodate on site
conditions. Park strips on arterial and collector streets should accommodate
street trees, streetlights, and other needed utilities. Street trees should be
placed such that the street lighting system functions properly and achieves the
desired result.
   G.   All utility boxes, e.g., transformers, switch gear, telephone, cable
TV, backflow preventers, etc., shall be shown on the site plan and utility plan
and shall be placed a minimum of five feet (5') from any sidewalk or parking
lot curbing. Said utility boxes shall not be located within any required
traffic sight triangle(s), as determined by the city transportation engineer,
and shall be screened from view with appropriate landscaping or architectural
elements compatible in material and color with the primary structure. Each box
shall be shown in its exact location and shall be noted with its exact height,
width, and length. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.130: GENERAL MAINTENANCE:
Property (including all buildings, landscaping, fences, walls, drives,
walkways, parking lot surfacing and striping, signs, or other structures) shall
be maintained in good repair and in accordance with the approved site plan for
the project. Roads and pavements shall be kept true to line and grade and in
good repair. Drainage ditches shall be kept clean and free of any obstructions.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.140: GRADING AND DRAINAGE:
   A.   Approval: A site plan with grading, drainage, and clearing plans
(including proposed vegetation removal) shall be approved by the director
before any such activities begin.
   B.   Adjoining Lots: Drainage shall not be allowed to flow upon adjoining
lots unless an easement for such purpose has been granted by the owner of the
lot upon which the water flows.
   C.   Natural Grade: Lot grading shall be kept to a minimum. Where possible,
roads and development shall be designed for preservation of the natural grade.
   D.   Sensitive Area: Grading shall not occur on any land where the natural
slope is equal to or in excess of thirty percent (30%) in accordance with the
provisions of the sensitive area overlay zone. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.150: RECIPROCAL ACCESS:
Provisions for creating and recording reciprocal access and common driveways
are required between all abutting developments in planned commercial centers
and between abutting, separately owned commercial developments, unless not
found to be practical by the director in consultation with the city engineer.
This will provide for a continuous flow of vehicles from one parking lot to
another and prevent the need for unnecessary ingress and egress to the public
street. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.160: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; DISTANCE REQUIREMENTS:
All alcohol beverage establishments must follow the distance guidelines
provided in the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
(Ord. 16-05, 6-1-2016; amd. Ord. 20-15, 7-1-2020)
13.23.170: DRIVE-UP/DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOWS (FOOD AND NONFOOD USES):
The following regulations shall apply to all drive-up/drive- through window
uses (including food service, service retail, general retail, and financial
services).
   A.   Adjacent To Residentially Zoned Property: Drive-up/drive- through
windows shall not be located directly adjacent to residentially zoned property.
Drive-up/drive-through windows and their stacking lanes shall be separated from
residentially zoned properties by an intervening building (when located on the
same side of the street as the drive-through use) or separated by a major
arterial road.
   B.   Stacking (Queuing) Spaces: Stacking lanes shall be provided for all
drive-up/drive-through service windows.
      1.   Minimum Queuing Spaces Required: The following number of queuing
spaces shall be provided per lane (these are in addition to the required
parking space for each use):
         a.   Drive-through restaurants: A minimum of nine (9) spaces (5 spaces
before the order board, 3 spaces before the pick up window, and 1 dedicated
space beyond the pick up window for customer waiting for food pick up).
         b.   Financial institutions: A minimum of three (3) spaces in each
teller lane.
         c.   Pharmacy: A minimum of two (2) spaces in each lane.
         d.   Dry cleaners: A minimum of two (2) spaces.
         e.   Coffee kiosks: A minimum of three (3) spaces for each service
window.
         f.   Thrift shop drop off: A minimum of five (5) spaces for each drop
off lane.
      2.   Queuing Design Standards:
         a.   Queuing lanes shall not be allowed to wrap around the front of
the main building entrance doors nor block required back out areas for adjacent
parking spaces unless there is no other alternative for location of the
building and drive-through lane(s) on the site.
         b.   Queuing lanes are strongly discouraged between the building and
the street unless there is no alternative for location of the building and
drive-through lane(s) on the site.
         c.   All drive-through queuing areas shall also provide a separate
escape lane.
      3.   Maximum Queuing Lanes: Queuing lanes shall be limited to a maximum
of the following number of lanes per business use (including ATM lanes):
         a.   Drive-through restaurants: Two (2) lanes.
         b.   Financial institutions: Six (6) lanes.
         c.   Pharmacy: Two (2) lanes.
         d.   Dry cleaners: One lane.
         e.   Coffee kiosks: Two (2) lanes (1 on each side of the building).
         f.   Thrift shop drop off: Three (3) lanes.
   C.   Placement Of Building: It is strongly encouraged to place the building
adjacent to public streets to enhance the building site. Placement of the
building beyond the required setback lines is discouraged and must be
specifically approved by the planning commission if no other viable alternative
exists.
   D.   Speaker Boxes: Speaker boxes designed to communicate from the ordering
window/menu board shall not be audible on any residential property adjacent to
the business and shall comply with applicable noise ordinances.
   FIGURE 2
   DRIVE-THROUGH DESIGN EXAMPLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3802.png]
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.180: AUTOMOTIVE FUEL SERVICE STATIONS (INCLUDES STAND ALONE GAS STATIONS
AND CONVENIENCE STORES WITH GAS PUMPS):
   A.   Purpose: To mitigate adverse impacts on adjoining streets and
properties caused by auto fuel service stations which are intense uses
characterized by large areas of paving which permit vehicles to maneuver
freely.
   B.   Site Organization:
      1.   Spatial Relationship: Structures on the site should be spatially
related, e.g., buildings should be organized into a simple cluster.
      2.   Building Locations: Service station buildings, e.g., convenience
store structures should be located on the corner of the property with the pump
islands located to the interior of the site to give the facility a good
architectural presence from the street(s).
      3.   Driveways:
         a.   Driveway cuts shall be limited and located as far from the
intersection as possible and are required to be shared with adjacent uses and/
or properties, where possible, to eliminate traffic conflicts at intersections.
         b.   Driveways shall be designed and located to ensure a safe and
efficient movement of traffic and pedestrians on and off the site.
         c.   No more than one two-way driveway shall be permitted per one
hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage.
      4.   On Site Vehicle Storage: Storage is not allowed.
   C.   Special Requirements:
      1.   Patron Vehicle Servicing: Areas should be provided on self- service
station sites to allow patrons to service their vehicles with air and water.
These facilities should be located where they do not obstruct circulation
patterns of the site.
      2.   Car Washes (Accessory To An Automotive Service Station):
         a.   A car wash structure shall meet the minimum setback standards for
the zoning district in which it is located.
         b.   Automatic car wash facilities may provide areas for vacuuming and
drying of vehicles upon exiting the car wash structure. These areas shall be
located where they do not obstruct circulation patterns of the site.
         c.   A minimum of eight feet (8') of space shall be provided between
the exit of the car wash structure and any cross driveway to allow for sight
distance of vehicles in the crossing driveway.
   D.   Pump Island Canopy Design:
      1.   Setbacks: Fuel pump island canopies located at service stations
shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet (20') from all front property lines.
      2.   Vehicle Stacking: Each pump island should generally include stacking
space for a minimum of two (2) vehicles (total of 40 feet) on site so that
driveways within the site or adjacent street areas are not utilized for waiting
customers. Pump island stacking shall not encroach upon required parking space
back out areas (24 feet minimum) or two-way driveways for general site
circulation (24 feet minimum).
      3.   Lighting: All canopy illumination and lighting directed toward the
ground shall be recessed into the canopy.
      4.   Vertical Clearance: There shall be a minimum clearance of 13.5 feet
to the bottom of the canopy above grade.
      5.   Height: Vertical canopy fascia utilized for signage may not exceed
four feet (4') in height, and the height to the top of the vertical fascia may
not exceed twenty feet (20') from grade unless otherwise approved by the
Director.
   E.   Architectural Design:
      1.   All building elevations shall comply with applicable City standards.
      2.   The length of pump canopies shall be minimized as much as possible.
If the site allows, pump canopies shall be broken up into two (2) separate
locations. This reduces the effect of pump canopies dominating other buildings
on the site.
      3.   Pump island structural columns and canopy fascia shall use the same
architectural materials as the main building, e.g., stone, brick, etc., and
shall run from ground level to the bottom of the canopy.
      4.   Gas tank vents shall be an integral part of the building design in
terms of form, color, and texture.
   F.   Speaker Boxes: Speaker boxes designed to communicate from pump islands
shall not be audible on any residential property adjacent to the business and
shall comply with the applicable noise ordinances. (Ord. 17-04, 2-1-2017)
13.23.190: AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE AND REPAIR FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: To mitigate adverse impacts on adjoining streets and
properties caused by auto service and repair facilities which are intense uses
where the business is engaged in the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles,
trailers, and similar mechanical equipment.
   B.   Site Organization:
      1.   Spatial Relationship: Structures on the site should be spatially
related, e.g., buildings should be organized into a simple cluster.
      2.   Building Locations: Service station buildings, e.g., should be
located in a manner which gives the facility a good architectural presence from
the street(s).
      3.   Driveways:
         a.   Driveway cuts shall be limited and located as far from the
intersection as possible and are required to be shared with adjacent uses and/
or properties, where possible, to eliminate traffic conflicts at intersections.
         b.   Driveways shall be designed and located to ensure a safe and
efficient movement of traffic and pedestrians on and off the site.
         c.   No more than one (1) two-way driveway shall be permitted per one
hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage.
      4.   On Site Vehicle Storage: No more than four (4) vehicles, trailers,
etc., in addition to those vehicles stored fully within the confines of a
building, may be stored on site. Vehicles being stored shall only be vehicles
in for repair. Long term storage (over 10 business days) is not allowed. Areas
in which autos, trailers, etc., are stored must be screened by a wall or opaque
fencing with a minimum height of six feet (6'). Vehicle storage and wall or
fence enclosures are not allowed within the front setback of the facility.
   C.   Architectural Design:
      1.   All building elevations shall comply with applicable City standards.
      2.   Vehicle storage and wall or fence enclosures are not allowed within
the front setback of the facility. (Ord. 17-04, 2-1-2017)
13.23.200: EXTENDED HOURS WITHIN TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FEET OF A RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT:
Any commercial use located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a
residential district where such commercial use desires to operate after ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and/or before six o'clock (6:00) A.M. shall require
separate conditional use approval from the Planning Commission. (Ord. 17-04, 2-
1-2017)
13.23.210: INDUSTRIAL USES WITHIN TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FEET OF A RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT:
Any industrial use located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of a
residential district shall require a separate nonadministrative conditional use
approval from the Planning Commission. (Ord. 17-04, 2-1-2017)
13.23.220: ADDITIONAL SPECIFIC NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS (STANDARDS
UNIQUE TO EACH INDIVIDUAL DISTRICT):
   A.   Regional Commercial District (RC): No additional development standards
are required in the RC District (other than all general commercial, office, and
industrial development standards contained in this chapter).
   B.   Community Commercial District (CC): No additional development standards
are required in the CC District (other than all general commercial, office, and
industrial development standards contained in this chapter).
   C.   Neighborhood Commercial District (NC): No additional development
standards are required in the NC District (other than all general commercial,
office, and industrial standards contained in this chapter). (Ord. 17-04, 2-1-
2017)
   D.   Limited Commercial District (LC):
      1.   Mixed Use Concept: The concept of mixed use is allowed in the LC
District and represents a departure from traditional zoning to the extent that
it encourages a combination of land uses which might normally be regarded as
incompatible.
         a.   Residential Uses: Residential dwellings are allowed only on sites
of sufficient size to assure adequate site development and a satisfactory and
safe residential environment.
         b.   Objective: Where residential uses are included, the objective of
the mixed use concept is to create self-contained communities in which
residents may walk to work, to shopping, and to recreational facilities.
      2.   Architectural Design: Buildings shall be designed to be
architecturally compatible with the adjacent residential district. (Ord. 18-14,
5-2-2018)
   E.   Professional Office District (PO):
      1.   Ancillary Retail Commercial Uses: May be allowed in PO Districts at
the following ratios:
         a.   No more than fifty percent (50%) of a shared use building.
         b.   No more than ten percent (10%) of a primary use for a stand alone
project and must be part of a complex of office buildings. Said retail use
shall not be developed prior to the first office building.
      2.   Architectural Design: Developments adjacent to residential districts
shall have a residential look to enhance compatibility with the adjacent
neighborhood.
   F.   Industrial District (ID): No loading or unloading may be performed on
any public right-of-way or private right-of-way. No loading docks shall face
rights-of-way unless approved by the Director because of site constraints. The
Director shall require screening including landscaping or walls or a
combination of walls and landscaping to mitigate the impacts of loading docks
facing rights-of-way.
   G.   Transit Corridor (TC): No additional development standards are required
in the TC District (other than all general commercial, office, industrial, and
transit corridor development standards contained in this title).
   H.   Research And Development (RD):
      1.   Parking: Parking terraces and underground parking are strongly
encouraged and shall be required for structures of five (5) stories or more.
The parking terrace may be constructed in subsequent phases with the approval
of a development agreement between the developer and the City. The signed
development agreement shall be recorded and shall be binding on all future
developers and property owners of said property.
Surface parking (permanent or temporary) may be allowed in addition to a
parking structure where it can be shown that the phasing plan, size, and scope
of the project would require some surface parking, e.g., stand alone
restaurant, bank, etc.
      2.   Development Standards:
         a.   Planned Research, Development, Or Office Park: Regardless of the
size and ownership of individual parcels, a "planned research, development, or
office park" Master Site Plan must be submitted for review and approval by the
Planning Commission showing all phases of the development including the parking
structure, if required. The plan must show both existing and reasonably
projected development on adjoining properties, determined through consultation
with adjoining owners.
            (1)   The intent of the above is to achieve a consistent overall
planned development with consistent site standards when the project area is
completely built out.
            (2)   Expansion of existing developments not previously having a
"planned research, development, or office park" approval shall require Planning
Commission approval at the time of expansion.
            (3)   The physical separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic
is encouraged.
         b.   Specific Ancillary Uses: Enclosed storage may be allowed only as
a subordinate function of the primary use of the development upon review by the
Director. (Ord. 17-04, 2-1-2017)
13.23.230: RESERVED:
(Ord. 17-04, 2-1-2017)
13.23.240: PLANNED CENTER DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
The planned center development standards are designed to ensure commercial or
mixed-use establishments are planned, developed, and managed as a unified and
contiguous unit. Planned centers shall be approved by the Planning Commission
and comply with all development standards outlined in this Code and shall be
consistent with the City’s General Plan. Planned centers shall have Codes,
Covenants and Restrictions (CCR’s) that are specific to the center which are
recorded with the property and consistent with the master plan. In addition to
the development standards outlined in this Code, planned centers shall comply
with the following requirements:
   A.   Site Plan Review: A Master Development Site Plan for a planned center
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission in conjunction with
or prior to subdividing a property.
   B.   General Site Design:
      1.   A planned center shall be designed as an integrated complex of
leasable or individually owned spaces in a single building, group of buildings,
or parcels.
      2.   Regardless of ownership, a planned center site plan shall show the
relationship and provide connectivity between all existing, proposed and future
buildings and pads to  parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, landscape
areas, service entrances, roads, and abutting streets.
   C.   Architectural Design And Materials:
      1.   The planned center, including all attached, detached, and/or
freestanding pad buildings, shall have a consistent architectural theme
compatible with the City of Taylorsville Design Standards.
   D.   Landscaping:
      1.   Landscape Design: A consistent landscaping design shall be developed
for an overall planned commercial center that includes all pads and
freestanding buildings.
      2.   Frontage: Where a planned commercial center abuts a public street
right of way, there shall be a minimum of at least fifteen feet (15') of
landscaping along the perimeter, exclusive of required driveways.
   E.   Lighting: A consistent lighting plan and light design including light
heights, standard design, and color as well as light intensity shall be
established for an overall planned center.
   F.   Signs: A sign theme, consistent with chapter 13.26 of this title, shall
be submitted which requires approval from the planning commission at the time
of review of a planned  center that covers all signage on the site including
all center identification signs as well as a theme for all tenant signs.
   G.   Grading, Drainage and Utilities: Grading, storm water drainage, and
utilities in a planned center shall have an integrated design that addresses
existing and proposed buildings and pads. Plan should allow for, where
applicable, cross access easements and maintenance agreements. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012; amd. Ord. 19-09, 8-7-2019)
13.23.250: INDUSTRIAL OR RESEARCH PARK STANDARDS:
   A.   Industrial Environmental Standards:
      1.   Finding Of Dangerous Or Objectionable Elements: No land or building
devoted to industrial uses shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to
create dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire,
explosive, or other hazard; noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor, or other
form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness, glare, electrical, or other
disturbance; liquid or solid refuse or waste; or other substance, condition, or
element, in such a manner or in such an amount as to affect adversely the
surrounding area or adjoining premises.
      2.   Performance Standards Review: In addition to meeting requirements
for potentially dangerous or objectionable elements, the application for
industrial use shall include a description of the proposed machinery, projects,
and processes to be located at the development.
If the proposed use may cause the emission of dangerous or objectionable
elements, the application may be referred for investigation and report to one
or more expert consultants qualified to advise as to whether a proposed use
will conform to the applicable environmental and performance standards
specified in this code. The cost of such expert report shall be borne by the
applicant.
Within twenty (20) days after receiving the aforesaid application or report, if
a report was required, the city shall determine whether reasonable measures are
proposed to be employed to assure compliance with the applicable environmental
performance standards. On such basis, the city may authorize or refuse to
authorize issuance of permits or may require a modification of the proposed
plans, construction specifications, device or operation and shall so inform the
chief building official.
      3.   Continued Compliance: Any permit so authorized and issued shall
evidence only that reasonable measures are proposed to be taken. It shall not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility of meeting all performance and
environmental standards when the plant is actually in operation; and, in case
of a failure to perform in accordance with the standards, whatever additional
devices or modifications in process shall be necessary to achieve full
compliance with the standards are required to be made and shall be the sole
responsibility of the applicant.
      4.   Continued Enforcement: The director shall investigate any purported
violation of environmental or performance standards; and if necessary for such
investigation, may request that the city employ qualified experts. If the city
finds that a violation has existed or does exist, the director shall cause
notice to be served stating that compliance with the environmental or
performance standards must be achieved within a specified period of time or the
plant will be shut down.
Should the violation of environmental or performance standards pose an
immediate threat to public health, convenience, or welfare, the mayor may order
the offending plant to cease operation until proper steps are taken to correct
the conditions which cause the violation.
The services of any qualified experts employed by the city to advise in
establishing a violation shall be paid by the violator if said violation is
established.
   B.   Locations Where Determinations Are To Be Made For Enforcement Of
Environmental And Performance Standards: The determination of the existence of
dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at any point provided.
However, measurements having to do with noise, vibration, odors, or glare shall
be taken at the lot line of the establishment or use.
      1.   Standards For Dangerous And Objectionable Elements (Including, But
Not Limited To):
         a.   Noise: No use shall emit or cause the emission of sound from a
stationary source such that one hour equivalent sound level (Leq) of resultant
sound measurement at the lot line of the establishment or use exceeds by six
(6) dBA or more, the one hour equivalent sound level (Leq) caused by ground
transportation as estimated for that point of measurement and that time of day,
pursuant to FHWA-RD-77-108 highway traffic noise prediction mode, or by other
techniques at least as accurate as those set out in FHWA-RD-77-108. The sound
level measuring instrumentation shall conform with ANSI S1.4-1971 type 1, and
the measurement procedure shall be compatible with that according to ANSI
S1.13-1977, with the following adjustments:
            (1)   Adjustment For Temporal And Tonal Characteristics Of Sound:
If the sound has a pronounced audible tonal quality such as a whine, screech,
buzz, or hum; or if the sound has an audible cyclic variation in sound level
such as beating or other amplitude modulation, five (5) dBA shall be added to
the measured sound level to allow for increased subjective response to the
sound.
            (2)   Quasi-Steady Impulsive Sound: Where the sound is of a
repetitive impulse nature so that a steady reading is obtained using the "slow
response" setting on the sound level meter, then ten (10) dBA shall be added to
the measured value to allow for the increased subjective response to the sound.
               (A)   An adjustment may be made under only one of the
subsections B1a(1) of this section and this subsection B1a(2). In a case where
both subsections apply, then subsection B1a(1) of this section takes
precedence.
               (B)   No use shall emit or cause or permit the emission of sound
of an impulsive nature from a stationary source such that it results in an
impulsive sound level at a point of measurement in excess of eighty (80) dBA or
in a one hour equivalent level (Leq) exceeding that one hour equivalent (Leq)
level caused by ground transportation as estimated for that point of
measurement and that time of day, pursuant to FHWA-RD-77-108 or equivalent
method.
         b.   Vibration: No vibration (other than from transportation
facilities or temporary construction work) shall be permitted which is
discernible without instruments at the property line of the industrial use.
         c.   Odors: No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall
be permitted in such quantities as to be readily detectable when diluted in the
ratio of one volume of odorous air to four (4) volumes of clean air at the
property line of the industrial use or at the point of greatest concentration.
Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be
provided with a secondary safeguard system so that control will be maintained
if the primary safeguard system should fail.
         d.   Glare: No direct or sky reflected glare, whether from floodlights
or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise,
shall be permitted to be visible at the property line of the industrial use.
This restriction shall not apply to signs or lighting of buildings or grounds
for advertising or protection otherwise regulated by the provisions of this
code.
         e.   Fire And Explosion Hazards: All activities involving, and all
storage of flammable and explosive materials, shall be provided at any point
with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and
adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in
the industry. Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited.
         f.   Air Pollution: No particulate or gaseous pollutants shall be
emitted into the air in violation of the Utah state air conservation act, its
amendments, or resulting regulations.
         g.   Liquid Or Solid Wastes: No discharge at any point into a public
sewer, private sewage system, stream, ditch, canal, or into the ground shall be
allowed contrary to the Utah state water pollution control act, its amendments,
the subsequent wastewater disposal regulations, or the Utah code on solid waste
disposal regulations.
   C.   Compliance With Other Regulations: All uses must meet any other
applicable regulations. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.23.260: MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: This section is established to provide a zone to be used near
city transportation corridors that allows a mix of specific land uses that are
typically found separately in "mutually exclusive" zoning districts. Mixed use
represents a departure from characteristic zoning to the extent that it
encourages a combination of land uses which might normally be regarded as
incompatible.
The intent of this zone is to create self-sustaining walkable neighborhoods in
which residents may walk to work, to shopping, to recreational facilities, and
have access to mass transit. These neighborhoods are to provide a variety of
housing opportunities and choices that include a range of household types,
family sizes, and incomes. They shall provide convenient pedestrian commercial
services, employment opportunities, and shall be located in areas with
existing, or probable future, multiple transportation choices. Design standards
include requirements that help provide a true "neighborhood" by stipulating
various mix of uses, "built to" lines, compact building design, preservation of
open space, pedestrian friendly streets and streetscape, parking concealment,
architectural control, and maintenance. Proposed developments with increased
land intensity and housing density but without the above "walkable" elements
are unacceptable and will not be approved.
   B.   Procedures:
      1.   All exterior building elevations visible from adjacent properties or
streets may, upon the director's request, be reviewed and approved by the
planning commission.
      2.   Prior to the planning commission taking action, plans must be
submitted in accordance with this code.
      3.   All submissions shall be made well in advance of planned
construction for proper coordination and feedback, and shall be reviewed at a
city development review meeting and/or respective architectural review meeting
before submittal to the planning commission.
      4.   For a typical building project, five (5) copies of the required
information must be submitted for complete review and approval by the planning
commission. One copy will remain on file with the city, and the second copy
will be returned with comments. All communication with the planning commission
shall be directed to the director.
      5.   The owner's representative, for ongoing coordination with the
planning commission, must also be identified including address and telephone
number.
   C.   Land Coverage: It is the intent to create efficient usage of land
within the mixed use district by controlling the intensity of different types
of land uses while providing sufficient size to create a walkable neighborhood.
      1.   Coverage for both buildings and paved areas (parking, loading, and
circulation) shall not exceed eighty five percent (85%), thereby reserving a
minimum of fifteen percent (15%) for landscaped areas and open space.
      2.   Parking terraces and underground parking is strongly encouraged.
Surface parking (permanent or temporary) may be allowed in addition to, or in
lieu of a parking structure, upon the approval of the planning commission,
where it is screened from streets and where it can be shown that the phasing
plan, design, size, and scope of the project substantially provides a walkable
community.
   D.   Uses Allowed: In order to achieve an overall "walkable" development,
appropriate land uses, pedestrian connections, cross easements, common
driveways, consistent site standards, etc., must be coordinated, even though
properties may be individually owned. In order to encourage pedestrian activity
and to improve air quality, drive-through windows are not permitted in
conjunction with uses such as fast food restaurants, dry cleaners, banks, etc.
      1.   Location Restrictions: Mixed use developments shall be located along
transportation corridors and other locations where "walkable" components, i.e.,
housing choices, convenient commercial, employment, community facilities,
transportation linkages, park or other open space, schools, churches, are
already present, planned, or where the size and scale of development is such
that said components can be provided within the project itself.
The actual blend of "vertical" and/or "horizontal" mixed use development shall
be presented in the proposed plan. Where size and scale permit, housing units
shall include a mix of housing types, housing size, and number of bedrooms,
encouraging neighborhoods with a mix of family cycles and incomes.
      2.   Ancillary Uses: All permitted and conditional land uses within the
MU zone may conduct ancillary uses, as specifically defined in the definitions
chapter of this land development code, provided such use is not regulated by
other sections or is listed as a prohibited land use in this zone.
   E.   Development Standards: The following standards are to be considered as
applying specifically to development in the mixed use (MU) district in addition
to general standards provided elsewhere in this code.
      1.   Mixed Use Master Plan: The plan must show all phases of the
development, including any phasing plans, and both existing and reasonable
projected development on adjoining properties, determined through consultation
with city staff and adjoining property owners.
         a.   The intent of the above is to achieve a consistent overall mixed
use development with uniform and compatible site standards when the project
area is completely built out. Standards that will be applied to a master plan
are set forth in this chapter.
         b.   Remnant parcels left from old developments, rebuilds of existing
parcels, or pads within existing center developments, are required to make
reasonable compliance with mixed use development standards through consultation
with the director.
      2.   Parcel Size: Parcels shall be at least two (2) acres to assure
compliance with building setbacks, landscaping, access, parking, and
walkability standards.
      3.   Building Placement And Massing:
         a.   Setbacks: Building facades shall comprise at least seventy
percent (70%) of each street edge identified as "build-to lines". To meet this
requirement, building facades must be zero to five feet (5') from streetside
(typically inside edge of sidewalk) where build-to lines are drawn. Awnings and
architectural features may project beyond build-to lines, as approved by the
planning commission. Streetside setback variations may be used when an activity
related to pedestrian use is maintained, i.e., special landscaping, outside
seating for a restaurant. Recessed plazas, courtyards, and trellises are
encouraged.
         b.   Side And Rear Setbacks: Zero lot line side setbacks with attached
structures, in compliance with the international building code, may be required
except for necessary driveway access, pedestrian access, open space, and
landscape areas. Rear setbacks shall be of sufficient depth to allow proper
parking and landscaped areas to the rear of the buildings. Unless otherwise
approved by the planning commission, rear yards and the rear of buildings shall
not directly abut streets. If the rear of building is approved adjacent to a
street, pedestrian access and street oriented building treatment must be
adequately addressed.
         c.   Building Orientation: The entrances of all retail, civic,
residential, and office buildings shall front onto streets with the exception
of center block residences (which still must front pedestrianways) and anchor
stores greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in size. Secondary
entries may be required at the rear of street facing buildings. Where possible,
like land uses shall face like land uses or open space, i.e., retail across the
street from retail, townhomes from townhomes, etc. Loading docks and service
areas must be screened from streets and adjacent properties through
architectural design and landscaping. Anchor store entrances must be connected
to adjacent streets via landscaped, public accessible walkways. Access from
parking areas may be via mid block passageways or "paseos" to the street.
   FIGURE 3
   BUILDING MASSING ADJACENT TO STREETS - ENCOURAGED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3804.png]
   FIGURE 4
   BUILDING MASSING ADJACENT TO STREETS - ENCOURAGED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3806.png]
   FIGURE 5
   WALKWAYS THROUGH PARKING LOTS - ENCOURAGED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3808.png]
         d.   Building Height: Buildings at build-to lines shall have a minimum
and maximum height as indicated on the table below by building type, with
height to be measured in accordance with the city's adopted ordinances and
standards. Buildings of greater height than allowed in the table below may be
approved by the planning commission on a limited basis, based upon the size,
scale, topography, and uniqueness of the development. Approved structures with
additional height may be required to include suitable "step back" architecture
and other architectural features which are of pedestrian scale on street level.
 
                 Commercial,    Condos,    Single-Family, Civic Uses And
                 Office And     Townhomes, Twin Homes And Other Stand Alone
                 Vertical Mixed Garden     Quads          Uses
                 Use            Apartments
Minimum building 2 stories      2 stories  1 story        1 story
height
Maximum building 4 stories      3 stories  2 stories      3 stories
height
 
         e.   CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design): Where
practically possible, CPTED principles shall be used in the design and layout
of buildings, streets, accesses, and open space areas. Design shall promote
natural surveillance, access control, territorial reinforcement, sense of
ownership, management, and maintenance. CPTED landscaping guidelines shall be
used, including planting shrubs with a maximum height of two (2) to three feet
(3') and trees with a proper ground clearance six (6) to eight feet (8') above
walkways and eight (8) to ten feet (10') above vehicular travel and parking
lanes.
In order to encourage public safety through natural surveillance, natural
access control and territorial reinforcement blank walls are not permitted
adjacent to streets, pedestrian areas, and open space amenities. Symbolic
barriers, such as low lying fences/walls, landscaping and signage shall be
used, as appropriate, to discourage crime and to promote safety. Ground floor
parking garages are not permitted immediately adjacent to streets. Developments
shall have street side building elevations with extensive windows, balconies,
decks, or landscape terraces being encouraged.
   FIGURE 6
   CPTED NATURAL SURVEILLANCE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3810.png]
      4.   Land Use Impact And Buffering: Landscape buffers are preferred over
fences and walls where a separation is desirable. A visually open look should
be encouraged between compatible uses. Visual screening which creates "outdoor
rooms" is often more important than a physical separation. Fences or walls, if
determined to be necessary or desirable, must be reviewed for their
effectiveness in protecting private space while not creating isolated uses or
dead space void of natural surveillance. Fences or walls shall be compatible in
color, texture, and design in relationship to building materials. In order to
mitigate any negative impacts, the director may modify building setbacks and
heights and require additional architectural and/or landscape elements, as
needed, between uses, within or without a mixed use development.
      5.   Architectural Design And Materials: Design and materials shall
comply with the architectural design standards.
      6.   Signage: Proper design and placement of signs and their lighting is
critical and shall be compatible with structures and uses. Mixed use
developments shall have a sign theme which promotes mixed use compatibility.
Permitted signs within the MU zone shall be in compliance with the city sign
ordinance except that freestanding and off premises signs or billboards shall
not be permitted. Wall signs, projecting wall signs, and window signs, approved
as part of a sign theme, are encouraged.
Where approved, a monument sign must comply with chapter 13.26 of this title.
Monument signs shall be constructed with the materials similar to that of the
main building. Monument signs may not extend into the required sign visibility
triangle unless otherwise approved by the director.
      7.   Open Space: Usable open space shall be provided within the mixed use
development and is dependent upon size, scale, and nature of the development as
determined by the director. Approved open space may include, but is not limited
to, commons, pocket parks, plazas, courtyards, landscape features, water
fountains and features, greenbelts, and trail connections. A "village green",
as a common area, may be required adjacent to mass transit connections or other
significant activity. Building materials used within open space areas shall be
related to the materials of adjacent buildings and shall be a nonskid finish.
Design shall encourage comfortable and safe pedestrian use including
landscaping, seating areas, and lighting, as appropriate.
Areas of environmental concern or interest may be required to be preserved,
e.g., drainages, steep slopes, connections to trail systems, and water
features. Unless otherwise specified through special agreement or understanding
with the city, all open space areas shall be maintained by property owners or
homeowners' associations.
      8.   Landscaping: Landscaping guidelines are established to improve and
then maintain site qualities while minimizing alteration, removal, or
degradation of approved landscaping. Landscaping, in general, shall follow
CPTED (crime prevention through environmental design) principles.
         a.   Landscaping in accordance with the plans submitted must be
installed within thirty (30) days following the occupancy of the site or as
otherwise approved by the director as seasonal conditions may dictate.
         b.   Future development areas or land area not occupied by buildings,
structures, hard surfacing, vehicular driveways, or pedestrian walkways shall
be kept in a weed free condition or landscaped.
         c.   The developer shall bond for such landscape improvements to
ensure that installations are completed as submitted and approved. Performance
assurance requirements for landscape improvements shall be the same as required
by the city for street improvements.
         d.   Plant Materials:
            (1)   Sixty percent (60%) medium size trees; deciduous trees with a
caliper from two (2) to three inches (3"), and evergreen trees with a height
from five (5) to eight feet (8'). Forty percent (40%) small size trees and
shrubs in a combination with deciduous trees with a caliper of one and one-half
(11/2) to two inches (2") and evergreen trees with a minimum height of four
feet (4'). Where possible, a 50/50 mix of deciduous and evergreen trees and
shrubs shall be used for on site landscaping.
            (2)   Street trees with a minimum two inch (2") caliper shall be
installed along all public rights of way by the developer. The species type,
location, and spacing of trees shall be as shown on the approved landscape plan
in compliance with designated streets within the city streetscape plan. For
streets not specified in the streetscape plan, the following trees may be used
as part of an approved landscape plan, depending upon space requirements:
 
Bur oak            (Quercus macrocarpa)
                   
Flowering pear     (Pyrus calleryana "redspire")
                  (Pyrus calleryana "aristocrat")
                   
Hedge maple        (Acer campestre)
                   
Little leaf linden (Tilia cordata "greenspire")
                  (Tilia cordata "rancho")
                   
London plane       (Platanus acerifolia "bloodgood")
                   
Norway maple       (Acer platanoides "Cleveland")
                  (Acer platanoides "columnare")
                  (Acer platanoides "emerald queen")
                  (Acer platanoides "schwedleri")
                  (Acer platanoides "Deborah")
                   (improved schwedleri)
                   
Red maple          (Acer rubrum "October glory")
                  (Acer rubrum "red sunset")
                   
Red oak            (Quercus rubrum)
                   
Redmond linden     (Tilia euchlora "Redmond")
                   
Sycamore maple     (Acer pseudoplatanus)
 
            (3)   For planted medians and accent trees, both on site and at
intersections, the following trees may be used:
 
Bechtel crab        (Malus ioensis "Klehms improved")
                    
Crimson king maple  (Acer platanoides "crimson king")
                   (Acer platanoides "royal red")
                    
Flowering plum      (Prunus cerasifera "blireiana")
                    
Kwansan cherry      (Prunus serrulata "Kwanzan")
                    
Washington hawthorn (Crataegus phaenopyrum)
 
         e.   Installation: It shall be the responsibility of the developer to
grade, place topsoil, seed, sod, install sprinkler irrigation systems, and
properly plant trees, shrubs, and other approved plant materials.
         f.   Maintenance: It shall be the responsibility of the developer and/
or property association to properly maintain landscaped areas including
watering, mowing, pruning, fertilizing, and the removal and replacement of dead
plant materials in a timely manner.
         g.   Vegetation Modification/Removal: Pruning vegetation for
"exposure" which results in unnatural plant specimens is prohibited. Necessary
vegetation removal shall be replaced with equal or better quality plant
materials. Trees that are out of necessity removed shall be replaced with trees
with minimum two inch (2") caliper and at maturity shall achieve comparable or
superior size and quality. Street trees replacement shall be in compliance with
the city's streetscape plan unless otherwise approved by the director.
         h.   Utility Connections: When disturbances are made to existing
landscaped areas, the existing landscaping must be replaced to its previous
condition. Other modification of landscaped areas shall require approval by the
director.
      9.   Outdoor Lighting: The lighting of streets, pedestrian areas, parking
lots, and open space is required. Exterior wall mounted floodlights are
expressly prohibited. Indirect lighting, bollard lighting, and landscape
lighting is encouraged. Lighting of a building and site identification signs
are permitted as allowed elsewhere in this code.
Design and location of standards and fixtures shall be specified on the site
development drawings. Intensities shall be controlled so that "safety" lighting
is provided while neighboring areas are protected from glare or excessive
direct light. Streetlight design fixtures shall be of pedestrian scale and be
installed as required by applicable city policy.
      10.   Streets And Pedestrianways:
         a.   Streets: All accesses within a mixed use development shall have
connectivity with existing and future street patterns. A grid street pattern or
modified grid pattern is required. Cul-de- sac streets will not be approved
unless it can be demonstrated that no other practical way exists to make
connectivity. In order to uphold and enhance traditional neighborhood
development principles, private streets are discouraged and gated communities
are prohibited.
   FIGURE 7
   DISCONNECTED STREET SYSTEM - DISCOURAGED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3812.png]
   FIGURE 8
   CONNECTED MODIFIED GRID SYSTEM - ENCOURAGED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3814.png]
         b.   Widths: Street widths shall comply with applicable city
standards. In general, streets shall be designed to meet the level of travel
and service while incorporating principles of traffic calming and pedestrian
compatibility, i.e., tree lined streets with pedestrianways and linkages,
decreasing the need for pavement width by spreading traffic through a grid or
modified street hierarchy system.
         c.   Sidewalks And Walkways: The design of pedestrianways may include
a solitary meandering pathway or trail, a "pedestrian street" and the many
possible designs in between. Walkways and connections to trail systems shall be
incorporated into the project. Choice of appropriate pedestrian access will be
made based upon the scale and type of mixed use project being proposed and by
the way uses are intermingled. The standard ten foot (10') cross section (5
foot park strip, 5 foot sidewalk) is a minimum, while a wider park strip and/or
sidewalk may be required depending upon the land use and the desired effect.
All streets shall have sidewalks and curbside streetscape.
Pavers, borders, and other sidewalk design materials with compatible colors
shall be used as needed in order to break up expanses of hard surfacing and to
encourage pedestrian interest and activity.
In "vertical mixed use" areas, a minimum of eight foot (8') sidewalks are
required in order to enhance street and land use connectivity. Portions of the
park strip may be paved to accommodate street furniture, leaving tree wells for
street trees. Street furniture, including, but not limited to, benches, trash
receptacles, artwork, drinking fountains, bike racks, and newspaper racks, if
allowed, may be required depending upon the nature of approved uses. Street
furniture requirements shall include an overall design theme for compatibility.
         d.   Crosswalks: Extensive use of crosswalks shall be incorporated
within the project at intersections, midblocks, within parking lots, or other
needed pedestrian connections. A pedestrian inconvenience distance of one
hundred fifty feet (150') should be used as a guideline. Crosswalks shall be so
configured to be a design feature of the development, i.e., heavy painted
lines, pavers, edges, and other methods of emphasizing pedestrian use. Bulb
outs and other pedestrian designs shall be used to shorten walking distances
across open pavement. Planted medians shall be used in appropriate areas to
encourage walking and to act as a "refuge" for crossing pedestrians.
      11.   Other Forms Of Transportation: All forms of transportation shall be
considered within and without the mixed use development with the intent to
improve convenience and reduce automobile trips. All forms of transportation
should be encouraged including bus, bicycle, and pedestrian. Access connections
shall be required where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to
churches, schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other
community facilities.
Appropriate bus turnouts and stops shall be coordinated and planned as part of
the development review process. Based upon land use and the level of demand,
bicycle parking shall be provided in appropriate locations, i.e., visible from
storefronts and entrances to office buildings and residential structures.
      12.   Parking Areas: Parking areas shall be addressed in the design
process since they present a three-dimensional appearance when occupied.
         a.   Location: Location of parking shall be determined not only from
its visual relationship to the building and site, but also as it relates to
safe convenient pedestrian and vehicular circulation patterns. The placing of
building and parking elements on a site shall be evaluated by the director on
the basis of the following factors:
            (1)   Type of land use and structure.
            (2)   Building height and configuration.
            (3)   Relationship to other buildings, both horizontally and
vertically.
            (4)   Natural land features such as slopes and vegetation.
            (5)   Physical features such as rail lines, canals, and controlled
ingress and egress.
            (6)   Visibility from vehicular approaches and distant highways.
            (7)   Safe pedestrian connections to buildings, walkways, open
space, and streets.
         b.   Outdoor Rooms: Where possible, parking lots shall be broken up
and planned as "outdoor rooms" through the use of buildings, walkways, open
space, and landscape design. When approved, larger parking lots shall be broken
up with substantial tree and ground cover. Large parking lots should be broken
up into "rooms" of no more than three hundred (300) parking stalls through the
use of connecting walkways.
         c.   Parking Structures: Underground parking, deck or terrace parking,
and parking garages are encouraged and may be required in conjunction with
structures of three (3) stories or more. Said structures shall have
architectural treatments compatible with adjoining buildings. Parking
structures shall be designed around natural light with "safety" lighting added
as needed. Landscaping, within and without, may be required to enhance
compatibility and safety.
   FIGURE 9
   PARKING STRUCTURE DESIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3816.png]
   F.   Environmental Concerns:
      1.   Building, landscape, and solar design should be adjusted, where
possible, to be compatible with the local climate. Such design should include,
but may not be limited to, window placement, building recesses, overhangs,
trellises, awnings, porches, and landscape placement planned in such a way to
enhance livability and reduce energy costs.
      2.   The use of lighter colored building materials, i.e., rooftops,
fences/walls, and extensive deciduous and evergreen tree cover, shall be
incorporated into developments in order to reduce the urban heat island effect.
Where possible, streets, driveways, parking lots, etc., should use concrete or
other materials which absorb less sunlight. Parking lot landscaping shall be
provided at the ratio of at least one tree per six (6) parking stalls.
      3.   Where possible, drought resistant ground covers, shrubs, and trees
shall be incorporated into the landscape to reduce water usage and storm
runoff. Extensive areas of grass or other high water use plants without a
public purpose are discouraged.
   G.   Requirements Unique To Residential Uses: The following shall apply to
residential uses:
      1.   Multi-Family Residential: Multi-family residential uses shall
comprise a variety of types of housing, fulfilling housing needs with a wide
assortment of housing options and shall be designed using traditional
neighborhood development (TND) design principles. The number of bedrooms per
unit and other housing design options shall be varied in proportions to assist
in providing suitable housing for a market range of household incomes, family
size, and life cycles. The site plan design of multi-family development shall
conform to requirements heretofore presented. Setbacks shall be determined by
the planning commission based upon acceptable layout and design.
         a.   Required Standards: The following TND standards shall be required
for multi-family residential:
            (1)   Properly designed off street surface parking hidden from
streets, parking terraces, or underground parking. Garage units associated with
multi-family development should be rear loaded. Where only front loaded garages
are possible, they shall be subservient to the residential structure.
            (2)   Roofs with a four to twelve (4/12) pitch or greater.
            (3)   Dwelling and garage gables facing streets or alleys.
            (4)   Extensive windows facing streets, alleys, and pedestrian
connections.
            (5)   Covered entrance porches.
            (6)   Entry sidewalks that connect directly to public sidewalks.
         b.   Encouraged Standards: The following TND standards for multi-
family residential shall be encouraged:
            (1)   Multilevel structures.
            (2)   Dormers and/or shutters and other window treatments.
            (3)   Streetside balconies/decks.
            (4)   Streets which deemphasize the need and speed of automobiles.
            (5)   Other pedestrian oriented design.
   FIGURE 10
   GARDEN APARTMENTS - PLAN VIEW
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3818.png]
   FIGURE 11
   GARDEN APARTMENTS - ELEVATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3820.png]
   FIGURE 12
   CONDOS WITH UNDERGROUND PARKING - PLAN VIEW
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3822.png]
   FIGURE 13
   CONDOS WITH UNDERGROUND PARKING - ELEVATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3824.png]
   FIGURE 14
   TOWNHOMES B PLAN VIEW
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3826.png]
   FIGURE 15
   TOWNHOMES - ELEVATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3828.png]
      2.   Single-Family Residential: Single-family residential uses, if
approved, shall be designed using traditional neighborhood development (TND)
design principles. Front setbacks shall range between twelve (12) and twenty
feet (20') typically measured from the inside edge of sidewalk to the porch.
Front loaded garages shall be subservient to the dwelling and shall not have a
setback less than eighteen feet (18'). Side and rear setbacks shall be
determined by the planning commission based upon acceptable subdivision layout
and design.
         a.   Required Standards: The following TND standards shall be required
for single-family residential:
            (1)   Subservient garages, e.g., back loaded detached with alley
access, front loaded detached, attached but set back from the front line of the
home by at least five feet (5'), side entry attached, or a combination of the
above.
            (2)   Roofs with a four to twelve (4/12) pitch or greater.
            (3)   Dwelling and garage gables facing streets and alleys.
            (4)   Covered open front porches comprising at least fifty percent
(50%) of the front elevation (not including the garage), in no case being no
less than fifteen feet (15') in width.
            (5)   Entry sidewalks that connect directly to public sidewalks.
         b.   Encouraged Standards: The following TND standards for single-
family residential shall be encouraged:
            (1)   Two-story dwellings.
            (2)   House dormers and/or shutters and other window treatments.
            (3)   Streetside balconies/decks.
            (4)   Wraparound porches, particularly on corner lots.
            (5)   Streets which deemphasize the need and speed of automobiles.
            (6)   Other pedestrian oriented design.
   FIGURE 16
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL - PLAN VIEW
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3830.png]
   FIGURE 17
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL - ELEVATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3832.png]
   H.   Service Areas: Loading and refuse collection areas must be screened
from public view. These areas are not permitted between buildings and streets
unless they can be adequately screened through landscaping and architectural
design. Streets shall not be used directly for commercial loading, unloading,
or refuse collection. Building and improvements upon lots must be designed to
properly accommodate loading, unloading, and refuse collection. Screen walls
and enclosures shall be constructed with materials compatible with the
structures they serve. Loading and refuse collection areas shall be properly
maintained in a debris free condition. Except for approved and screened RV
storage lots associated with a residential use, storage areas, including the
storage of materials, merchandise, pallets, etc., shall be within buildings.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.24
PARKING, ACCESS AND CIRCULATION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
13.24.010: Purpose
13.24.020: General Provisions
13.24.030: Special Access And Parking Provisions
13.24.040: Residential Parking Requirements And Restrictions
13.24.050: Parking Lots; Design Criteria
13.24.060: Loading Areas
13.24.070: Accessible Parking Spaces Requirements For Persons With Disabilities
13.24.080: Parking Space Requirements
13.24.090: Parking Structure Design Standards
13.24.100: Parking Stall Dimensions
13.24.110: City Approval Of Access Required
13.24.120: Traffic Impact Analysis
13.24.130: Access; Ingress And Egress
13.24.140: Access And Maneuvering For Fire And Refuse Trucks
13.24.150: Driveway Access; General Standards
13.24.160: Driveway Separations
13.24.170: Driveways; Widths And Curb Designs, Nonsingle-Family Residential
Developments
13.24.180: Unused Or Abandoned Drive Approaches
13.24.190: Improvements In Public Right Of Way
13.24.200: Pedestrian And Bicycle Access And Circulation Standards
13.24.010: PURPOSE:
These regulations are established to reduce street congestion and traffic
hazards in the city by incorporating adequate, attractively designed facilities
for off street parking as an integral part of every use of land in the city.
These regulations are intended to complement any performance standards relating
to development of parking lots as may be contained in other chapters of this
code.
This chapter also provides for vehicle ingress and egress, internal
circulation, reciprocal access, and transportation demand management options
within developments. Vehicular access and circulation must be properly designed
so that the city street system will be able to accommodate traffic at an
acceptable level of service. Thus, this chapter is intended to balance the
right of reasonable access to private property with safe and efficient travel.
Streets have been categorized by the city by function and classified for access
purposes based upon their level of importance and function. Regulations have
been applied to these roadways for the purpose of mitigating traffic demand and
reducing traffic accidents, personal injury, and property damage attributable
to access systems, and to thereby improve the safety and operation of the
street network. These regulations further the orderly use of land, protect
community character, provide universal pedestrian and bicycle access, and
conserve natural resources by promoting well designed road and access systems.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.020: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   General:
      1.   Minimum off street parking space with adequate provision for ingress
and egress by standard sized vehicles shall be provided at the time of erection
of any main building or at the time any main building is enlarged or increased
in capacity. Provided, however, those homes existing or constructed prior to
July 11, 2012, shall be exempt from the requirement to enlarge their garage to
meet the present standard.
      2.   Parking areas shall be considered during the design process since
they represent a three-dimensional appearance when occupied. Parking shall be
designed as attractive and functional spaces.
   B.   Parking Space Size:
      1.   All parallel parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet (8')
wide by twenty two feet (22') long as designated on the diagram in this
chapter.
      2.   All parking spaces (not including parallel spaces) shall be a
minimum of nine feet (9') wide by twenty feet (20') long as designated on the
diagram in this chapter.
      3.   Parking spaces (not including parallel spaces) may be reduced to
eighteen feet (18') in depth based upon the following exceptions:
         a.   Where vehicles overhang landscape areas that are at least fifteen
feet (15') wide along street frontages; or
   FIGURE 1
   REDUCTION FOR LANDSCAPE BUFFER
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3834.png]
         b.   Where vehicles overhang landscape areas that are at least five
feet (5') wide along a side or rear property line or adjacent to an interior
parking lot landscape area that is at least ten feet (10') wide (for double
loaded parking); or
   FIGURE 2
   REDUCTION FOR PLANTER OVERHANGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3836.png]
         c.   Where vehicles overhang a sidewalk on a single side on private
property where the sidewalk is at least six feet (6') in width and complies
with all applicable codes and standards; or
   FIGURE 3
   REDUCTION FOR SIDEWALK OVERHANG
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3838.png]
         d.   Where parking within a parking structure is used for general
office use only.
         e.   The minimum garage size for residential development shall be as
follows:
 
Type Of Garage Minimum Width (Feet) Minimum Depth (Feet) Minimum Square Footage
Single         12                   20                   240 sq. ft.
Double         20                   20                   400 sq. ft.
Triple         30                   20                   600 sq. ft.
 
   C.   Floor Area Defined: For the purposes of parking requirements, "floor
area" shall be defined as the gross square footage of the building.
   D.   Compact Parking Stall Requirements: A reduction of the required parking
spaces to eight feet by sixteen feet (8' x 16') in size may be allowed for up
to a maximum of fifteen percent (15%) of total required parking spaces at the
discretion of the director for the accommodation of compact sized cars. Back up
and maneuvering space may be reduced accordingly, subject to approval of the
director. All compact parking stalls shall be clearly marked. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012)
13.24.030: SPECIAL ACCESS AND PARKING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Alternative To On Site Parking:
      1.   Off Site Parking: Off site parking may be allowed for the required
parking of any new commercial use or structure that cannot be provided on the
premises due to the property's size or location according to the following
criteria:
         a.   The off site parking must be located on other appropriately zoned
property.
         b.   The off site parking cannot be more than three hundred feet
(300') of walking distance from the nearest point of the parcel.
         c.   The adjacent site has excess parking that is not required for
their use, or the hours parking is needed will not conflict with the hours of
use on the adjacent property.
         d.   The applicant shall provide a document to the community
development department, signed by the owners of the alternate site and recorded
at the Salt Lake County recorder's office, that stipulates the permanent
reservation of use of the site for said parking.
      2.   Temporary Off Site Event Parking: Temporary off site parking for
events may be allowed after review and approval of a parking and access
management plan by the director. Temporary parking is parking established for a
fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such parking upon the
expiration of the time period. An occasional event with an expected attendance
of less than five hundred (500) persons or if the event does not occur more
than once a year shall not be subject to the requirements of this section.
The applicant will be responsible to make provisions for on and off site
parking, safe pedestrian routes to and from the off site parking,
transportation to and from off site parking locations beyond a five thousand
foot (5,000') (approximately 15 minutes) walking route, entry and exiting
methods, temporary or permanent traffic control methods, and restricting
parking in identified areas.
The parking and access management plan must be approved prior to the issuance
of a temporary use permit, business license, or certificate of occupancy
required for the event, project, or use. Upon approval, the parking and access
management plan shall be available for public inspection. All approved updates
of a parking and access management plan shall be available for public
inspection.
   B.   Parking Requirements Increase/Decrease:
      1.   When justified, the planning commission may decrease parking
requirements based upon projected usage by employees and customers; but in no
case shall the requirements be decreased by more than twenty five percent
(25%).
      2.   At the time of site plan review, a parking plan shall be submitted
showing all parking spaces, the overall circulation system, an analysis of the
parking demand for the specific land uses proposed, and other justification as
necessary for requesting reductions in parking space requirements.
      3.   Developments may be under parked upon the review and approval of the
planning commission if justified with a walkable design and/or where local
multimodal transit systems exist or are immediately planned that would help
reduce the number of needed parking stalls and automobile trips.
   C.   Shared Parking:
      1.   Shared Parking Proposal: Notwithstanding any other parking
requirements provided in this chapter, when land uses occupy the same lot or
adjacent lots, the total number of off street parking spaces required for each
use may be combined and shared. A proposal for sharing off street parking shall
be presented to the director. If the proposal involves the accommodation of
more than ten (10) parking spaces (total accumulated spaces required for all
involved uses), the director may present the proposal to the planning
commission for site plan review.
      2.   Requirements: In order to qualify for shared parking, applicants
shall present the following:
         a.   The location and identity of each use that will share the
facility.
         b.   The total parking requirement for each use.
         c.   The projected hours of operation of each use and the hours during
which the peak parking demand will be experienced.
         d.   The number of existing and/or proposed parking spaces.
         e.   A site plan that provides for a distance of no greater than five
hundred feet (500') from the nearest entrance of each use to the nearest edge
of the parking facility.
         f.   A site plan that demonstrates that the proposed shared parking
facility will comply with all standards required by this code for parking lot
development.
   D.   Drive-Through Business Stacking Space: (See commercial, office,
industrial, and transit corridor development standards chapter of this
development code.)
   E.   Excessive Parking: Developments shall not have parking in excess of
that required by this code without prior approval of the director upon written
justification of the specific need for more parking spaces than the provisions
of this code allows. In addition, developers are encouraged to work out shared
parking agreements with adjacent users wherever possible according to the
provisions for shared parking contained within this code.
   F.   Prohibited Parking: No parking shall occur in any alley, driveway,
service driveway, traffic aisle (either public or ways open to the public),
delivery area (other than for a minimal period of time needed for the delivery
of goods and materials to a specific tenant) or other location designed for
through traffic unless:
      1.   Said area has been specifically designated for parking on the
original approved site plan; or
      2.   The original site plan has been specifically modified by written
approval of the director for parking space use; and
      3.   Be designed in accordance with the parking designs specified in this
chapter. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.040: RESIDENTIAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Vehicles, Recreational Vehicles, And Trailers Must Be Parked Upon A
Hard Surface: All areas utilized for the parking of vehicles, recreational
vehicles, and trailers shall be paved with a hard surface, e.g., concrete,
asphalt, brick, or other hard surface approved by the director. This includes
the front yard, side yard, and rear yard of the home. It is prohibited to park
upon areas that have been landscaped or are reserved for future landscaping.
      1.   Exceptions: Single-family residential properties with animal rights
will be allowed to store animal transport trailers. These trailers are not
required to be parked on a gravel or hard surface but must be parked within the
rear setback of the home.
   B.   Maximum Area: The maximum area of hard surface for the purpose of
parking vehicles on a residential lot shall be restricted to not more than
twenty percent (20%) of the front yard excluding the driveway providing access
to the primary attached or detached garage, thirty five percent (35%) of the
rear yard, and one of the two (2) side yards associated with the lot.
Exception: The maximum area of hard surface allowed for residential lots with
circular driveways shall be determined on a case by case basis.
   C.   Carports, Vehicle Covers: All structures attached to the dwelling for
the purpose of protecting or otherwise covering vehicles shall comply with
applicable building codes for the structure and with existing zoning
regulations for minimum distance between main dwelling structures and side
property lines. Detached carports are required to meet the minimum standards
for an accessory structure and adopted applicable building codes. Where vehicle
covers are used, covers shall be approved manufactured covers.
   D.   Parking Of Recreational Vehicles:
      1.   Parking Location Restrictions: Recreational vehicles parked or
stored at a residence must be located within the rear or side yard of the home.
Such vehicles may only be parked or stored within the front yard of a home if
it is physically impossible due to natural topography or property boundaries to
locate a recreational vehicle within the rear or side yard of a home.
      2.   Restricted Parking Area: No recreational vehicle shall park or
extend within a restricted parking area. The restricted parking area is defined
as follows:
         a.   Interior lots (noncorner lots): The street right of way, which
includes the back edge of sidewalk (edge closest to the home, a minimum of 5
feet), or any area in which parking or storing of a recreational vehicle would
create a traffic visibility hazard.
         b.   Corner lots: Both frontages shall comply with those standards
outlined for interior lots, and nothing shall be parked that intrudes into the
corner "sight visibility triangle" as defined by this code.
      3.   Prohibited Parking Locations: Recreational vehicles shall not be
parked or stored within the street right of way.
      4.   Number Of Recreational Vehicles Permitted: One recreational vehicle
per dwelling. The vehicle may be parked within the front yard and then only
when a side or rear yard location is not available.
   E.   Parking Of Commercial Vehicles:
      1.   Parking Location Restrictions: Commercial vehicles parked or stored
at a residence must be located within the rear or side yard of the home. Such
vehicles may only park within the front yard of a home if it is physically
impossible due to natural topography or property boundaries to locate a
commercial vehicle within the rear or side yard of the home.
      2.   Restricted Parking Area: No commercial vehicle shall park or extend
within the restricted parking area. The "restricted parking area" is defined as
follows:
         a.   Interior Lots (Noncorner Lots):
            (1)   Any area in which parking or storing of the commercial
vehicle would create a traffic visibility hazard.
            (2)   Commercial vehicles less than twenty four feet (24') in
length and less than eight feet (8') in height may not be closer than ten feet
(10') from the back edge of the sidewalk (edge closest to the home) or the
public right of way.
            (3)   Commercial vehicles between eight feet (8') and ten feet
(10') in height and less than thirty feet (30') in length shall be parked in
the side yard or rear yard.
            (4)   Commercial vehicles over ten feet (10') in height or more
than thirty feet (30') in length shall not be parked on a residential lot.
            (5)   Semi-tractors, trailers, or trucks shall not be parked on a
residential lot.
         b.   Corner Lots: Both frontages shall comply with those standards
outlined for parking or storage of commercial vehicles on interior lots, and
nothing shall intrude into the corner "sight visibility triangle" as defined by
this code.
         c.   Prohibited Parking Locations: Commercial vehicles shall not be
parked or stored within the street right of way.
         d.   Number Of Commercial Vehicles Permitted: Only one such vehicle
may be parked on a residential lot. A commercial vehicle parked or stored on a
residential lot must be owned or apportioned by an occupant who resides at the
residence.
         e.   Storage Of Commercial Vehicles: The storage of any commercial
vehicles for a period exceeding seventy two (72) hours is prohibited except for
a bona fide temporary absence of the owner.
   F.   Enforcement: The authority to enforce the provisions of this section
shall be vested in the police department and with the community development
department. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.050: PARKING LOTS; DESIGN CRITERIA:
   A.   On Site Parking Required: All required parking shall be provided on
site unless otherwise allowed by other provisions in this chapter.
   B.   Parking Consolidation:
      1.   Parking facilities need not be located in one consolidated area of a
particular site but may be separated by landscaping or building elements for
reasonable safe pedestrian access to the building. However, all parking must be
conveniently located to the entrances to all buildings.
      2.   Location of parking shall be determined not only from its visual
relationship to a building and site but also as it relates to safe and
convenient pedestrian and vehicular circulation patterns. Location may also be
determined by the relationship and location of customer parking, employee
parking, service area parking, vehicular display areas, and circulation
patterns thereto on adjoining properties. Combined entrance, access,
circulation, service, loading, and parking areas may be required.
   C.   Reciprocal Access:
      1.   Reciprocal access shall be designed into all commercial
developments. Some cases may exist where grading differences or building
locations make reciprocal access between developments impractical.
      2.   When a development is built in phases, each phase shall include the
minimum number of parking stalls, necessary driveways, and access points
required for the uses proposed in that phase of construction.
   D.   Minimum Parking Back Out: The minimum depth of a parking space back out
area for all parking lots designed with ninety degree (90°) parking, whether
designed for single or double loaded parking, shall be a minimum of twenty four
feet (24').
   E.   Curb: The perimeter of all paved surfaces shall be finished with six
inch (6") high concrete curbing with handicap ramps, where necessary.
   F.   Parking Lot Surface: Every parcel of land used as a parking or storage
area shall be paved with asphalt, brick, or concrete surfacing and shall be
arranged and striped to provide orderly and safe loading, unloading, parking,
and storage of vehicles.
   G.   Deviations To Surfacing Materials: The city engineer and director shall
review and may approve or deny other types of surfacing materials.
   H.   Striping: Parking lot striping shall be maintained on a regular basis
so that striping is visible for the safe ingress/egress and parking of
vehicles. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.060: LOADING AREAS:
Loading and refuse collection areas shall not be permitted between buildings
and streets. Loading areas and refuse collection areas shall not face toward
any street and must be screened from view of public and private streets and
rights of way.
   A.   Streets shall not be used directly for loading, unloading, or refuse
collection.
   B.   Buildings and improvements upon lots must be designed to properly
accommodate loading, unloading, and refuse collection.
   C.   At least one off street loading space shall be provided and maintained
on the same lot with every building or part thereof having a gross floor area
of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, that is to be occupied by a
commercial or industrial use, to or from which delivery of materials or
merchandise are regularly made by a motor vehicle.
   D.   Off street loading spaces may not block use of required parking space
areas of site or adjacent sites.
   E.   Loading space shall be located no closer than thirty feet (30') from
the edge of the dock to any residential district and shall be located in the
side or rear yard.
   F.   All loading and unloading shall be performed on the site. Such on site
loading areas shall be in addition to required off street parking and shall not
be located within driveways.
   G.   Each loading area shall be not less than twelve feet (12') wide, twenty
five feet (25') long, and if enclosed or covered, fourteen feet (14') high.
Adequate turning and maneuvering space must be provided on the site.
   H.   Loading/unloading and refuse collection activities shall follow hours
specifically noted in the applicable noise ordinance. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.070: ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES REQUIREMENTS FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES:
   A.   Accessible parking and passenger loading facilities for residential and
commercial uses shall comply with applicable laws, rules and regulations.
   B.   Accessible parking spaces required by this section may be counted
toward the fulfillment of the general on site parking requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.080: PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Specific Requirement For Each Land Use: Off street parking shall be
provided for land uses as described below. Requirements based upon floor area
shall be calculated as defined above. Parking for uses not specifically listed
below shall be provided in the same ratio as the use most nearly approximating
the characteristics of the unlisted use, as determined by the planning
commission for nonadministrative conditional uses and the director for
permitted and administrative conditional uses. Land uses are grouped into
categories that have comparable parking requirements. (Ord. 16-14, 11-2-2016)
   B.   Table Of Parking Requirements By Land Use Category:
 
Land Use Categories Space Requirements
Residential:                             
Dwelling, single-family                 2 spaces per dwelling unit (within an
                                        enclosed garage)
Dwelling, duplex                        2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, multiple-unit (triplex,       2 spaces per dwelling unit
fourplex, and fiveplex)
Dwelling, multiple-unit (apartments):    
1 bedroom unit                          1.5 spaces per unit
2 bedroom unit                          2.0 spaces per unit
3 or more bedroom unit                  2.5 spaces per unit
Guest parking                           0.25 space per unit
                                        Note: There shall be no less than 1.5
                                       covered parking spaces (1.0 carports,
                                        0.5 garages) per unit
Assisted living center, nursing home,   0.5 space per bed, plus 10% for support
convalescent home and other similar     staff/physicians, plus a bus only
uses as determined by the planning      parking stall to meet the dimensions of
commission upon review                  a handicap parking stall
                                        1 space per unit
                                        (The completed parking ratio may be
                                        reduced to 1 space per unit for any
                                        congregate care facility, provided that
                                        adequate space is created and
                                        landscaped that can be converted to
                                        additional parking stalls to comply
Senior or elderly housing               with the minimum standards as set forth
                                        for site-specific developments. The
                                        area that is held in reserve for
                                        additional parking shall not be located
                                        within a required landscape setback
                                        area and shall not be used in the
                                        calculations for any required
                                        landscaping or open space coverage
                                        percentage.)
Retail commercial:                       
Automotive repair (service bays are not 5 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
included in the required number of      floor area
required parking spaces)
                                        5 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area

Commercial retail sales and services    Exceptions: Reduction may be allowed by
                                        the planning commission for retail
                                        businesses and shopping centers over
                                        80,000 square feet
Commercial center, community            5 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Commercial center, convenience          5 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Commercial center, neighborhood         5 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Commercial center, regional             5 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Heavy commercial                        5 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Liquor sales                            5 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Commercial services, offices:            
Bar, tavern, club                       3.5 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Business or financial services          4.0 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Dance hall, discotheque                 3.5 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
                                        4.0 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        activity or assembly area. Childcare
                                        facilities providing care or
Daycare, group                          instruction to 10 or more individuals
                                        at any one time shall also provide a
                                        designated passenger loading/unloading
                                        zone
Medical and healthcare                  5.0 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
                                        1.0 space per rental unit; 1.0 space
                                        for each 200 square footage of floor
Motel, hotel                            area of assembly, conference space,
                                        banquet, sit down restaurant facility,
                                        and office space
Office, call center                     6.0 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Office, professional                    5.0 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Veterinary office                       5.0 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Recreation, indoor:                      
Bowling center                          5 spaces per lane
Movie theater                           1 space per 4 seats
Skating rink                            3 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area of skating area
Restaurants:                             
Restaurant - drive-in/drive-through     10 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
(all fast food outlets with large       floor area. Required parking spaces do
proportion of takeout and/or drive-in   not include spaces required in drive-
service)                                through lanes
Restaurant - sit down                   10 spaces per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Public uses:                             
Elementary and middle school (public or 1 space per teacher and staff, plus 1
private)                                space per 2 classrooms
Hospital                                2 spaces per bed
Rehabilitation center                   0.5 space per bed
Religious or cultural activity          1 space per 4 seats
Senior high school (public or private)  1 space per teacher and staff, plus 1
                                        space per 5 nonbussed students
Theater or concert hall                 1 space per 4 seats
Industry:                                
Industry, light and medium              1 space per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Warehouse, wholesale, storage           1 space per 1,000 square footage of
                                        floor area
Special review:                          
Athletic, tennis or health centers      Specific off street parking shall be
                                        determined by the planning commission
Auto, truck, RV, and equipment sales    Specific off street parking shall be
and storage                             determined by the planning commission
Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum        Specific off street parking shall be
                                        determined by the planning commission
Golf course                             Specific off street parking shall be
                                        determined by the planning commission
Park (active and passive)               Specific off street parking shall be
                                        determined by the planning commission
Recreation center                       Specific off street parking shall be
                                        determined by the planning commission
Recreation, outdoor                     Specific off street parking shall be
                                        determined by the planning commission
 
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 16-14, 11-2-2016; Ord. 20-12, 4-15-2020)
13.24.090: PARKING STRUCTURE DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Setbacks: The parking structure shall comply with the minimum
requirements including all height adjustments for stepped buildings.
   B.   Maximum Height: The parking structure shall comply with all height
requirements including the stepping back of the additional stories above grade.
   C.   Parking Stall Size Requirements:
      1.   Retail/Hotel Projects: Retail/hotel developments are characterized
by constant traffic flow and parking space ingress/egress, and generally have a
higher daily traffic count than a single/multiple user office building
development. Because of such, all parking stalls shall conform to the minimum
parking stall design standards. There shall be no reduction in the minimum
parking stall depth for a parking structure constructed for a retail or hotel
land use.
      2.   Office Building Project: Office building developments are
characterized by nonconstant traffic flow and parking space ingress/egress, and
generally have two (2) time periods of activity. The balance of the day is
characterized by a very low activity level, and evening hours are normally not
occupied. Because of such, the minimum parking stall depth for ninety degree
(90°) parking may be reduced from twenty feet (20') to eighteen feet (18') upon
review and approval by the planning commission. The minimum travel aisleway
shall not be reduced in any circumstance. All other parking stall dimensions
for angled parking, including stall width and depth, shall not be reduced.
      3.   Multiple Uses: A project that includes multiple uses in addition to
office shall require the higher standard.
   D.   Parking Structure Appearance Requirements: Parking structures shall be
designed to complement adjacent nonparking structures and blend in with the
local manmade or natural environment. If adjacent to an existing or future
office building and the facility is adjacent to a right of way, the parking
structure shall be designed to appear as an office building with simulated
window openings and doors, unless otherwise approved by the planning
commission. Exterior elements shall follow all applicable standards listed in
the architectural design standards adopted by the city.
   E.   Landscaping: The parking structure shall be landscaped at the base of
the facility with trees and shrubs, along with other materials that will
deemphasize the use of the facility as a parking structure. It is strongly
encouraged, but not required, to landscape the top level with trees, grass, and
other pedestrian friendly elements. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.100: PARKING STALL DIMENSIONS:
   FIGURE 4
   PARKING STALL AND AISLE DIMENSIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3840.png]
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.110: CITY APPROVAL OF ACCESS REQUIRED:
Access to a public street requires approval by the director based on the
standards contained in this code and applicable standards. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012)
13.24.120: TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS:
The city may require a traffic impact analysis prepared by a registered
engineer to determine access, circulation, transportation demand management,
and other reasonable transportation system mitigation requirements. (Ord. 12-
15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.130: ACCESS; INGRESS AND EGRESS:
   A.   Ingress And Egress: All parking areas shall be designed to provide
ingress and egress from a public street by forward motion of the vehicle.
Single-family developments are exempt from this requirement.
   B.   Paved Access: All off street parking areas shall have access to a
public street by means of a paved driveway that extends no less than fifteen
feet (15') from the public right of way to the nearest parking area and/or
driveway access to parking spaces. No parking space shall be located within the
first fifteen feet (15') of a driveway. Single-family developments are exempt
from this requirement.
   FIGURE 5
   MINIMUM SETBACK FOR INGRESS AND EGRESS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3842.png]
   C.   Entry/Guardhouse Gateways: Where an entry gate or guardhouse controls
vehicle access or egress, a stacking lane shall be provided as required by the
city engineer. The stacking lane shall not interfere with maneuvering, traffic
flow of aisles, streets, bike paths, parking spaces and sidewalks.
   D.   Unobstructed Access: Unobstructed and direct driveways shall be
provided from commercial off street parking or loading facilities to a street
or alley. Loading driveways may coincide with driveways to parking facilities.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.140: ACCESS AND MANEUVERING FOR FIRE AND REFUSE TRUCKS:
Parking lots shall include the necessary dimensions for the on site maneuvering
of refuse vehicles and firetrucks as determined by the city engineer and
applicable fire authority. A minimum twenty foot (20') wide, unobstructed
driveway, lane, or other accessway and turnaround may be required for this
purpose. No off site maneuvering is permitted. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.150: DRIVEWAY ACCESS; GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Determination Of Necessity: In establishing permissible curb openings
and sidewalk or driveway crossing for access to private property, such curb
openings or driveways shall not be authorized where they are unnecessary or
where they would interfere with the movement of vehicular traffic, with public
improvements, or with the rights of the public in the adjacent street or alley.
In no case shall any curb opening be of greater width than necessary for
reasonable access to the property to be served.
   B.   Width Of Curb Openings: In determining the width of curb openings and
spacing of driveways, the end transitions in each case will not be considered a
part of the width of the curb opening. The curb opening or width of each
driveway shall be defined as the throat width of the driveway at the inside
point of the curb transition radius at the top face of the curb.
   C.   Number Of Curb Openings: Only one driveway opening per street frontage/
per parcel shall be allowed unless a capacity or safety need for more than one
driveway opening can be demonstrated to the city transportation engineer. This
may be determined on a case by case basis.
   D.   Reciprocal/Shared Access: Where nonresidential uses share a property
line, off street parking lots serving the properties shall be made accessible
to each other unless grade differences or building locations make reciprocal
access between developments impractical.
   E.   Single-Family Residential: Minimum separation from driveways, measured
from edge of driveway to edge of driveway at back of sidewalk is thirty feet
(30') for multiple drive approaches along the same parcel. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012)
13.24.160: DRIVEWAY SEPARATIONS:
   A.   Frontage On Arterial (106 Feet Plus) Or Major Collector (80 Feet Plus)
Streets: Uses, other than single-family dwellings, on parcels with less than
one hundred fifty feet (150') of frontage shall be required to share a common
driveway in order to assure that a minimum of one hundred seventy feet (170')
of continuous curb and gutter exists from the throat of one driveway to the
throat of the next adjacent driveway. Driveways offset less than one hundred
seventy feet (170') from existing driveways, approved driveways, or existing
public streets on the opposite side of the street shall not be allowed unless
the city engineer determines that an unacceptable capacity or safety impact
will not result.
   B.   Frontage On Minor Collector (66 Feet) Or Local (50 Feet Plus) Streets:
Uses with less than seventy feet (70') of frontage shall be required to share a
common driveway in order to assure that a minimum of ninety feet (90') of
continuous curb and gutter exists from the throat of one driveway to the throat
of the next adjacent driveway. Driveways offset less than one hundred seventy
feet (170') from existing or approved driveways on the opposite side of the
street shall not be allowed unless the city engineer determines that an
unacceptable capacity or safety impact will not result. Single-family
developments are exempt from this requirement.
   C.   Driveways Adjacent To Intersections: The minimum distance from the
intersection to the nearest driveway shall be according to the following
intersection illustration and distance table. (Distances are measured from the
back of curb to the throat of the nearest edge of the driveway.)
 
                   Median Barrier Arterial Major Collector Minor Collector
                   Present
Driveway clearance No             200 feet 175 feet        50 feet
Driveway clearance Yes            185 feet 115 feet        50 feet
 
   FIGURE 6
   DRIVEWAY CORNER CLEARANCE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3844.png]
   D.   Deviations To Driveway Separation: The city engineer shall review and
may approve or deny deviations to the above standards based upon a site visit
and review of items including, but not limited to:
      1.   Safety.
      2.   Alternative access points and potential for reciprocal/shared
access.
      3.   Sight lines.
      4.   Impact on traffic flow. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.170: DRIVEWAYS; WIDTHS AND CURB DESIGNS, NONSINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   One-Way:
      1.   Width: One-way driveways shall be not less than twelve feet (12')
nor more than twenty four feet (24') in width. A wider one- way driveway may be
required by applicable fire authority.
      2.   Exception: No two (2) complementary one-way driveways may total more
than forty five feet (45') in width.
   B.   Two-Way:
      1.   Two-way driveway approaches shall be not less than twenty four feet
(24') nor more than thirty six feet (36') in width. In determining the width of
curb openings and spacing of driveways, the end transitions in each case will
not be considered a part of the width of the curb opening.
      2.   Wherever a common driveway is constructed serving two (2) or more
properties, the common curb opening shall have a maximum width of thirty six
feet (36').
      3.   The city transportation engineer shall review and may approve or
deny deviations to the above driveway width standards based upon review of the
site and land use, along with impact on streets and neighbors.
   C.   Drive Approaches: All driveway approaches shall be constructed with
curb radii and provide for handicap access.
      1.   Minimum Curb Radius: All drive approaches shall have a minimum end
transition (curb radius) of ten feet (10') and a maximum of thirty feet (30').
If the driveway is to be used for delivery truck traffic, the minimum curb
radius shall be twenty five feet (25').
      2.   Driveways: Driveways shall be located a minimum of five feet (5')
from the property line. This does not apply to property lines where a shared
driveway is proposed.
      3.   One-Way Paired Driveways: Where a driveway is of the split, one-way
paired directional type, there shall be a raised landscaped island of at least
five feet (5') in width between the two (2) driveways. The size of the entrance
shall have a minimum of fourteen feet (14') and a maximum of sixteen feet
(16'). The exit lanes shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') and a maximum of
twenty nine feet (29') (combined).
   FIGURE 7
   PAIRED AND TWO-WAY DRIVEWAY DESIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3846.png]
      4.   Maximum Curb Opening Coverage: The total width of all curb openings
shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of a project's frontage. For corner lots,
the total width of all curb openings shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of
the combined frontages.
      5.   Vehicle Encroachment: No curb opening will be approved that allows
vehicle encroachment on any portion of a street right of way for loading,
unloading, or standing.
      6.   Drainage: Curb openings and driveways shall be paved and shall
provide for adequate drainage.
      7.   Drive Angle To Right Of Way: All driveways shall intersect the
street at a ninety degree (90°) angle to a distance at least fifteen feet (15')
from the property line. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.180: UNUSED OR ABANDONED DRIVE APPROACHES:
   A.   Upon the issuance of a building permit, any unused or abandoned drive
approaches or portions thereof shall be restored to the original curb section
by the removal of the drive approach and replacement with high back curb and
gutter to applicable city standards at the expense of the property owner
adjoining that portion of the right of way.
   B.   Upon refusal or neglect of the property owner or agent to restore the
unused or abandoned drive approach to its original high back curb and gutter
section, the city may proceed to do such work and all expenditures so incurred
shall be charged against the owner or agent. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.190: IMPROVEMENTS IN PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Improvements in the public right of way shall be designed and
constructed in conformance with applicable city standards, including, but not
limited to, the following:
      1.   Minimum Design Vehicle: The minimum design vehicle shall be the
single unit truck.
      2.   Sight Obstructions: No object shall be situated to interfere with
the required sight distance of intersections as set forth in the AASHTO
specifications. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.24.200: PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE ACCESS AND CIRCULATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide transportation
options and ensure that new pedestrian and bicycle facilities are designed to
be attractive, safe, and convenient to use as well as ADA accessible and
supportive of transit use.
   B.   Pedestrian And Bicycle Accessibility: All projects that are subject to
the provisions of this code shall provide for pedestrian and bicycle
accessibility. Accessibility shall be from a direct, convenient, and attractive
pathway system that conforms to the following standards:
      1.   Continuous Pathways: A pathway system shall extend through the
development site and connect the street sidewalk to all primary building
entrances as generally shown in figure 8 of this section. The director may
require the developer to connect or stub pathway(s) to adjacent streets,
private property, adjacent trails, plazas, future phases of development, and
open space areas (when reciprocal access is available or can reasonably be
provided).
   FIGURE 8
   PATHWAY CIRCULATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3848.png]
      2.   Pathways Through Parking Lots: For the purpose of pedestrian safety,
pathways through parking lots are encouraged to be raised on a six inch (6")
high curb with the exception of areas crossing driveways.
   C.   Pathway Safety, Comfort, And Convenience: All portions of a development
shall be accessible by a direct, convenient, attractive, safe, and comfortable
system of pedestrian facilities as follows:
      1.   Direct: Pathways should not deviate unnecessarily from a direct
route or involve a significant amount of out of direction travel.
      2.   Safety, Comfort, And Accessibility: Pathways should be free from
hazards, have appropriate lighting levels, i.e., relative to the adjacent uses
and considering natural surveillance, be suitable for people in wheelchairs,
e.g., traction, not bumpy, etc., and/or people with visual impediments, and
provide a reasonable route of travel between destinations. The pathway system
shall comply with ADA requirements.
      3.   Access To Primary Building Entrances And Parking Areas: For
commercial, industrial, mixed use, public, and institutional buildings, at
least one pedestrian pathway is required to connect the public sidewalk to the
primary entrance. A primary entrance is the main public building entrance. In
the case where no public entrance exists, pathway connections shall be provided
to the main employee entrance.
For multi-family buildings and ground floor residential uses in mixed use
buildings, the primary entrance is the front door facing the street except that
multi-family buildings or courtyard housing in which each unit does not have
its own exterior entrance facing a street, the primary entrance may be a lobby,
courtyard, plaza, or breezeway that serves as a common entrance for more than
one building.
      4.   Pedestrian Amenities: Pedestrian amenities such as benches,
planters, trees, lighting, etc., are required along sidewalks and pathways to
provide defensible space, crime prevention, pedestrian comfort, and
accessibility.
   D.   Design And Construction Standards For Pathways And Accessways: At a
minimum, all pathways and accessways shall conform to the following standards:
      1.   Vehicle Separation From Pathways And Accessways: Pathways and
accessways adjacent to a driveway, street (public or private), or parking
spaces are encouraged to be raised six inches (6") and curbed, and be separated
from the driveway/street by a buffer strip with a minimum width of eleven feet
(11') (combined landscaping and meandering walk), utilizing bollards, lighting,
landscape berming, or other physical barriers. The ends of the raised portions
must be constructed with accessible curb ramps.
      2.   Housing Separation From Pathways And Accessways: Pedestrian pathways
and accessways shall be separated a minimum of ten feet (10') from all
residential living areas on the ground floor, except at building and courtyard
entrances, to provide for privacy in living areas. Separation is measured from
the pathway edge to the closest dwelling unit. The separation area shall be
landscaped. Pathway building separation is not required for commercial,
industrial, public, or institutional uses except as may be required through
site plan review.
      3.   Crosswalks: Where pathways and accessways cross parking areas,
driveways, or private streets, they shall be clearly marked in accordance with
ADA standards. Continuous pedestrian pavement materials are encouraged across
such areas.
      4.   Surface Materials: Pathway and accessway surfaces shall be concrete
and have a width that is based on their function. Pavers, brick and other
ornamental paving may be used if it has a smooth finish. Textured or bumpy
materials may be used as an edge treatment provided an accessible route is
provided between the edge treatment. Multiuse paths, e.g., bicycles and
pedestrians, shall be concrete or asphalt.
   E.   Shade On Long Accessways And Pathways:
      1.   When the primary entrance of a building is more than one hundred
feet (100') from the nearest point of a public sidewalk, and the entrance is
accessed by a pathway traversing a parking lot with more than one hundred (100)
parking spaces, an overhead shade structure or tree canopy is encouraged along
the pathway.
      2.   Shade elements may include opaque structures, e.g., arbors,
pergolas, porticoes, awnings, canopies, etc., and/or shade trees planted twenty
five feet (25') on center or closer.
   F.   Bicycle Parking:
      1.   All new nonresidential construction, all new residential
construction with a density of eight (8) or more dwelling units per acre, and
remodels of the same uses of more than fifty percent (50%) (or expansions or
intensification of use) shall provide bicycle parking.
      2.   The amount of bicycle parking required for new construction and/or
remodels is determined by multiplying the total number of automobile parking
spaces required by 0.05 (5 percent). If the calculation returns a number less
than 0.5 (or 1/2 of a parking space), the installation of bicycle parking is
optional. In all other cases the calculated amount is rounded to the nearest
whole number.
      3.   Bicycle parking is only useful to cyclists if it is located
properly. Accordingly, bicycle parking shall be located:
         a.   On the same lot as the principal use;
         b.   To prevent damage to bicycles by cars;
         c.   In a convenient, highly visible, active, well lighted area;
         d.   So as not to interfere with pedestrian movements;
         e.   As near the principal entrance of the building as practical; and
         f.   To provide safe access from the parking spaces to the right of
way or bicycle lane.
      4.   Both employees and customers shall be considered when determining
locations for bicycle parking. For example, a bike rack located within a
parking structure may work for employees but would not work well for customers
who would normally access the business from an exterior entrance. A highly
visible location is determined from the vantage point of someone inside the
building or near the principal pedestrian entrance. Locating bicycle parking
under a building overhang, or in another way providing a degree of protection
from the weather, will greatly improve its convenience.
      5.   Appropriate parking facilities include bike racks which allow the
bicycle to be supported upright by its frame in two (2) places and should allow
the frame and one or both wheels to be secured. For long term employee parking,
bike lockers are encouraged. Bicycle parking facilities shall be:
         a.   Consistent with the surroundings in color and design and
incorporated, whenever possible, into buildings or street furniture design;
         b.   Designed to allow each bicycle to be supported by its frame;
         c.   Designed to allow the frame and wheels of each bicycle to be
secured against theft;
         d.   Designed to avoid damage to the bicycles;
         e.   Anchored to resist rust or corrosion, or removal by vandalism;
and
         f.   Designed to accommodate a range of bicycle shapes and sizes and
facilitate easy locking without interfering with adjacent bicycles.
   FIGURE 9
   BICYCLE RACK EXAMPLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3850.png]
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.25
LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
SECTION:
13.25.010: General Landscaping Standards
13.25.020: Commercial, Office, Multi-Family, And Industrial Landscaping
Requirements
13.25.030: Tree Stewardship
13.25.040: Water Efficient Landscaping
13.25.010: GENERAL LANDSCAPING STANDARDS:
The following standards shall apply to all districts:
   A.   Preservation Of Natural Features: The preservation of natural features
that enhance the development and will benefit the community including trees,
scenic points, view corridors, historic buildings or locations, unique
geological formations, and other community assets shall be preserved and
incorporated into the overall landscape plan.
   B.   Parking In Landscaped Areas: Parking is prohibited upon any front,
side, rear, or interior landscaped areas or areas intended for landscape.
   C.   Park Strip Maintenance: Park strip maintenance shall be the
responsibility of the adjacent property owner. Proper maintenance shall include
the removal of all weeds (regardless of height) and debris. Adjacent property
owners are required to landscape and beautify the park strip with approved
streetscape materials. Unless otherwise approved by the city, placement of
concrete slabs or other impenetrable material, other than approved hard surface
materials, as set forth below, within the park strip is prohibited.
   D.   Park Strip Hard Surface And Streetscape Materials: Park strip hard
surface material includes material that is not plant material, does not need
watering, and is a permanent surface. Examples would include colored concrete,
stamped concrete, e.g., Bomanite, concrete pavers, or rock and gravel mulch (1
inch minus in size).
Developments in the following zones may elect to use a mix of hardscape and
landscape materials as permitted by this section: regional commercial,
boulevard commercial, transit corridor, professional office, and mixed use. All
other zones require one hundred percent (100%) landscape materials. In general,
it is preferable to have no more than fifty percent (50%) of the park strip
area covered in hard surface material. Hard surface sections should alternate
with planted sections and be complementary to the surrounding landscape. When
it is desired to have the entire park strip area covered in hard surface, the
material must have physical separations every four (4) to five feet (5'),
including an expansion joint between the sections and adjacent to the sidewalk,
curb, and gutter. Any surface around a water meter lid, shutoff, streetlight,
or other cover or access must have at least twelve inches (12") of clear space
around the entire cover, lid, etc. Any surface around a fire hydrant must have
a three foot (3') clearance. All hard surface sections should be poured/slashed
or set flush with both the sidewalk and curb and gutter. The use of colored
concrete is allowed only when the sections are stamped or inlaid with a
pattern, such as rock or brick. Earth tone colors are preferable in order to
blend with the landscape. Color should go through the entire depth of the
material and should not be a surface color only. No unpatterned concrete is
allowed.
Landscaped sections used in conjunction with hard surface sections should not
include trees if the park strip is less than five feet (5') wide. If the park
strip is five feet (5') wide, planting may include trees (planted equidistant
from the sidewalk and curb and gutter in a planter bed no smaller than 5 feet
wide by 5 feet long), sod, ground cover, drought tolerant shrubs (not to exceed
3 feet in height), bark, or colored mulch. Planting within fifteen feet (15')
of the driveway should not exceed three feet (3') in height. Drip irrigation
systems are highly encouraged and landscaping shall comply with applicable
water efficiency guidelines. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.25.020: COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, MULTI-FAMILY, AND INDUSTRIAL LANDSCAPING
REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Front Yard: Front yard landscaping is measured from the front property
line(s) after any required street dedication. This standard shall apply to all
street frontages.
      1.   All Commercial, Office, Multi-Family, And Industrial Districts: In
all commercial and industrial zones, a minimum of fifteen feet (15') of front
yard landscaping shall be required.
      2.   Berming: The use of berms (random sculptured mounds), twelve (12) to
eighteen inches (18") high above the curb level, are required in all front
landscape areas where found to be practical by the director.
      3.   Street Trees: Two inch (2") minimum caliper street trees shall be
planted in the front park strip area (centered between the sidewalk and the
curb to minimize tree conflicts and to maximize tree root zone) where the park
strip is a minimum of five feet (5') in width, according to the varieties and
spacing specified in applicable standards. Where the sidewalk has been placed
against the curb, street trees shall be planted four feet (4') behind the
sidewalk.
      4.   Front Landscape: Front landscape areas shall include a combination
of sod as well as areas of trees, shrubs, ground covers, and mulch.
      5.   Elimination Of Park Strip: The planning commission may approve the
elimination of the park strip in a commercial district allowing the sidewalk to
be placed against the curb. If the elimination of the park strip is approved by
the planning commission, the sidewalk against the curb shall be increased in
width to six feet (6') or wider as per applicable standards. In these
instances, the front landscape area shall not be less than twenty feet (20') in
depth.
      6.   Nonexistent Park Strips: Where a sidewalk exists directly adjacent
to a public right of way, the front landscaping shall be a minimum of twenty
feet (20') in depth.
   B.   Side And Rear Yards:
      1.   There shall be a minimum of five feet (5') of landscaping between
parking areas and side or rear property lines (except between commercial uses
where said landscaping is not visible from areas of public access) and a
minimum of five feet (5') of landscaping between an access driveway and a side
or rear property line unless said driveway is to be used for common access by
an adjacent lot.
      2.   Areas not visible from the street shall have one landscape area in
the amount of one hundred (100) square feet for every seventy five (75) linear
feet of property line not visible from the public right of way.
   C.   Landscaping Within Parking Areas:
      1.   Landscaping within all parking and driveway areas shall comprise a
minimum five percent (5%) of the total square footage of those areas. In
addition, the required front, side, and rear landscaping (parking area shall be
defined to include all asphalt areas with parking spaces and driveways). The
placement of this landscaping shall be within parking areas to break up the
mass of asphalt as well as adjacent to the building for foundation landscaping.
Such landscaping shall be composed of natural elements including ground cover,
shrubs, trees (evergreen and deciduous), and combinations of mulch.
      2.   All traffic islands shall be landscaped and be considered as a
portion of the required five percent (5%) parking lot landscaping and shall be
a minimum of five feet (5') in width.
      3.   Landscape planters and/or raised barrier sidewalks shall be
installed along buildings (except where not visible from public access areas or
loading areas) and any paved areas where visible from the street to provide
safety to pedestrians, to protect the structure, and to provide foundation
landscaping to soften a structure's appearance.
      4.   All landscaped areas abutting any paved area shall include a six
inch (6") high concrete curb. Concrete bumper stops are not acceptable.
      5.   At intersections of streets, driveways, sidewalks, etc., landscaping
shall be limited to a height of not more than three feet (3') above street
level within the area required for minimum sight distances for local roads and
streets.
   D.   Undeveloped Areas:
      1.   All undeveloped areas shall be maintained free of weeds and trash.
      2.   All expansion areas or pad sites shall be maintained with drought
tolerant sod, mulch, or other materials as approved by the director until such
time as construction is started on that building pad.
   E.   Adjacent To Residential Districts: A minimum ten foot (10') width of
landscaping shall be provided on an applicant's property, including a
combination of trees and shrubs (evergreen and deciduous), and ground covers
shall be provided to create a buffer for the adjacent residential district.
   F.   Installation:
      1.   It shall be the responsibility of the developer to grade, place
topsoil, seed or sod, install automatic sprinkler irrigation systems, and
properly plant trees, shrubs, and other approved plant materials.
      2.   All trees planted on site less than two inch (2") caliper shall be
double staked.
      3.   All landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the plans
submitted and approved by staff.
         a.   All landscape work must be installed prior to a certificate of
occupancy of the building being issued or as otherwise approved by the director
as seasonal conditions may dictate.
         b.   The developer shall bond for such landscape improvements as part
of the private improvement bond to ensure that installations are completed as
submitted and approved.
   G.   Maintenance:
      1.   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to properly
maintain landscaped areas in accordance with the approved site plan and
landscape plan which includes watering, mowing, proper pruning, fertilizing,
the removal and replacement of dead plant materials in a timely manner, and the
maintenance of the irrigation systems to eliminate waste of water.
      2.   All pruning shall be accomplished according to good horticultural
standards. Trees shall be pruned to promote healthy trees and to accommodate
street maintenance and garbage collection (minimum height over street 131/
2 feet and over sidewalks 7 feet) and as necessary to promote healthy growth.
      3.   Unless approval is otherwise provided by the director, trees shall
be allowed to attain their normal size and shall not be severely pruned up from
the ground or "hat racked" in order to permanently maintain growth at a reduced
height. Pruning trees solely for the purpose of exposure is prohibited.
      4.   Pruning trees for traffic safety reasons shall be reviewed and
approved by the city engineer.
   H.   Vegetation Removal:
      1.   Once the required landscaping has been installed, it shall not be
removed without the approval of the community development department.
      2.   Removed vegetation shall be replaced with equal or better quality
plant materials. Trees that are necessarily removed shall be replaced with
trees with comparable total caliper. Street trees that are necessarily removed
shall be replaced with comparable original landscape plan caliper in compliance
with the city street tree guide unless otherwise approved by the director.
      3.   When utility connections or other disturbances are made to existing
landscaped areas, the existing landscaping must be replaced to its previous
condition. Other modifications of landscaped areas shall require approval by
the director.
   I.   Minimum Tree Size: The minimum size of all trees planted on a
development site shall be as follows:
      1.   Street Trees: Two inch (2") caliper minimum as measured eighteen
inches (18") above grade.
      2.   All Other Trees: All other trees on site, one and one-half inch (11/
2") caliper minimum as measured eighteen inches (18") above grade.
      3.   Evergreen Trees: Six foot (6') minimum height above grade.
   J.   Tree Mix: There shall be a mix of evergreen and deciduous trees on all
development sites to allow for a green winterscape. A minimum of forty percent
(40%) of all trees on the proposed site shall be evergreens where found to be
practical by the director.
   K.   Existing Trees:
      1.   The retention of existing healthy, desirable tree species on site is
strongly encouraged. Buildings and parking areas should be designed around
existing trees, wherever possible.
      2.   A tree survey on an existing site may be required as determined by
the director.
   L.   Minimum Number Of Trees: A minimum ratio of one tree per every five
hundred (500) square feet of on site landscaping shall be provided on the
overall site plan.
   M.   Xeriscape:
      1.   Xeriscape is encouraged in required landscape areas. A true
xeriscape may include a combination of drought resistant trees, shrubs, ground
covers, organic mulches, as well as some dry landscape materials.
      2.   All xeriscape design and installation shall be completed by a
professional landscape designer and installer certified in the design and
installation of xeriscape. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.25.030: TREE STEWARDSHIP:
   A.   Purpose: The city prides itself on its many areas of public and private
landscapes, both natural and enhanced, and recognizes the importance of trees
within the community. It is declared to be a policy of the city that:
      1.   City property will be landscaped to enhance the natural beauty of
the city.
      2.   Responsibilities of city departments be coordinated to encourage
quality landscaping.
      3.   Landscaped city properties be effectively managed.
      4.   The city plant species of trees that are aesthetically pleasing,
require less maintenance (so as to prevent damage to sidewalks and streets and
reduce risks to pedestrians and motorists), work with utilities, and conserve
natural resources.
      5.   The street environment be made hospitable through landscaping.
      6.   Residents of the city be encouraged to participate in beautification
efforts through installing and maintaining quality trees and landscaping on
private property.
To fulfill this policy, this section is enacted and intended to establish a
tree stewardship ordinance. This section may be referred to as the TREE
STEWARDSHIP ORDINANCE.
   B.   Urban Forester: The city shall designate a qualified person or entity
as the city's urban forester, who shall:
      1.   Be responsible for the long term management, health, maintenance,
inventory, planting, and design of city trees in cooperation with the director.
      2.   Foster and maintain partnerships between public and private parties
for the benefit of trees.
      3.   Facilitate communication, coordination, cooperation, and education
for the stewardship of city and private trees.
      4.   Keep abreast of new information and research in arboriculture.
      5.   Train and supervise city crews or contract providers so the best
methods of tree care are practiced in the community.
      6.   Work with engineers, architects, and the community development
department during the design phase of development.
   C.   Citizen Responsibilities: Citizens/property owners, occupants, and
their agents shall have the following responsibilities for the protection of
trees in park strips abutting their real property except in those park strips
that are maintained by the city.
      1.   Periodic watering and fertilization of city trees as necessary to
maintain good health and vigor.
      2.   Protect city trees in park strips from damage caused by lawn mowers,
weed trimmers, snowblowers, and similar equipment.
      3.   Protect city trees in park strips from damage caused by attachment
of any items such as signs, nails, wires, ropes, and chains.
      4.   The species of trees planted in the park strips should comply with
the city street tree guide or otherwise approved by the director.
      5.   Remove private trees or limbs that have fallen upon a city street,
property, or sidewalk.
      6.   Maintain ground covers except in those park strips maintained by the
city.
      7.   Notify the city of any hazard tree.
      8.   Raking, cleanup, and properly disposing of leaves that fall from
city and private trees so leaf fall does not impede the stormwater system.
      9.   The city shall have no liability for the failure of any tree or
landscaping installed by private parties on other than city maintained
property.
   D.   City Responsibilities: The city shall assume responsibility for:
      1.   Tree care in city owned and operated parks, on the grounds of city
buildings, and in park strips that the city administration has designated will
be maintained by the city.
      2.   Pruning of city trees, as necessary, after appropriate notification
to property owners.
      3.   Pruning of city trees in the public rights of way and utility
easements.
      4.   Removal of diseased or dying city trees that are beyond reclamation.
      5.   Removal of city trees and/or limbs that the city determines to be a
hazard after appropriate notification.
      6.   Maintenance of planted areas on city property and specifically
designated city rights of way.
   E.   Responsibility For Correcting Private Hazard Trees: Where a hazard tree
exists upon private property, the property owner and all other persons having
control of the property on which such hazard tree exists shall be responsible
to mitigate, abate, remove, or correct the hazard. Any tree that is a hazard
tree is a public nuisance.
      1.   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, either as
owner, agent, or occupant, to create, aid in creating, or maintain a hazard
tree.
      2.   If the city determines that a particular tree is a hazard tree, the
city may give a written notice to the owner, occupant, or agent of any lot,
building, or premises in or upon which a hazard tree is found, or to the person
who may be the cause of such hazard tree to remove, mitigate, abate, or correct
the hazard, including its recommendation as to the most effective method of
doing so.
      3.   Notice under this section may be served by personal service or by
mailing the notice to the person, firm, or corporation by certified mail
(return receipt requested), and posting a copy on the property a minimum of
twenty eight (28) calendar days in advance of further action.
      4.   If the hazard tree is not mitigated, abated, removed, or corrected
within twenty eight (28) additional calendar days after the notice is complete,
the city may mitigate, abate, correct, or remove the hazard tree at the expense
of such person, firm, or corporation or may take further action as determined.
      5.   The city may recover the costs and expenses incurred in mitigating,
abating, correcting, or removing the hazard tree, serving notice, and the costs
of a lawsuit, if any.
      6.   If the person, firm, or corporation disputes or denies the city's
determination that the tree is a hazard tree or refuses to remove or permit
removal, the city may bring an action to abate the hazard tree as a public
nuisance. If the city is granted a judgment, the city may recover the costs of
having the public nuisance abated.
      7.   The city, its agents, or employees, if acting in good faith, incur
no liability for causing removal of a hazard tree.
      8.   Notice of appeal of the city's determination that a tree is a hazard
tree may be filed with the city recorder within ten (10) days of service of the
notice to abate. Appeals of the urban forester's decisions shall be heard by
the mayor or his designee within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the appeal,
which decision is final.
   F.   Protection Of City Trees:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
         a.   Construct a concrete, asphalt, brick, or gravel sidewalk within
eighteen inches (18") of a city tree that damages any part (roots, crown,
trunk) of the tree so as to cause injury or death to the tree.
         b.   Fill up the ground area around any city tree so as to shut off
air, light, or water from its roots.
         c.   Pile building material, equipment, or other substance on or near
a city tree so as to cause injury to the tree.
         d.   Pour or spray any injurious matter on or around a city tree.
         e.   Injure any city tree, tree stake, or guard with any vehicle or
animal, or in any other manner causing injury to any city tree, shrub, ground
cover, or lawn.
         f.   Post any sign, tree stake, or guard, or by fastening any guywire,
cable, or rope to any city tree, tree stake, or guard.
         g.   Prune trees for commercial exposure.
      2.   Any person doing construction, excavation, or demolition work in the
near vicinity of a city tree shall protect the tree from injury or damage with
a substantial protective barrier. Said barrier shall not be less than four feet
(4') high and have a two foot (2') radius or to a distance in feet from the
tree equal to the diameter of the tree trunk in inches measured four and one-
half feet (41/2') aboveground, whichever is greater. All building materials,
extra dirt, or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier. The city
engineer must be consulted about any deviation to this standard.
      3.   No person shall use a city tree for any unauthorized purpose.
   G.   Trees Planted In Park Strips: Trees planted in park strips or other
public rights of way should be in conformance with the streetscape plan.
   H.   Interference With Service: It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with city personnel or city contractors under the direction of the
city's designee in the performance of their duties.
   I.   Preservation Of Trees During Development: Tree surveys must identify
both city and private trees or groves of trees of at least two inch (2")
caliper and shall indicate which, if any, may be preserved or relocated. Where
practically possible, site designs should be modified to accommodate
significant tree cover. Proper care should be taken during the construction
phase to protect tree root zones from compaction and excessive excavation.
Clear cutting an area of trees on a site will not be allowed unless determined
appropriate by the director.
   J.   Violation And Penalty: Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. In addition to other remedies
provided for herein or otherwise provided by law, if the violation of any
provision of this chapter causes the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree,
shrub, or other plant located on city owned or maintained property, the
violating party shall pay the cost of repair or replacement of such tree,
shrub, or other plant. The replacement value of trees and/or shrubs shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of the "Guide For Plant
Appraisal" as published by the International Society Of Arboriculture. The city
may pursue criminal or civil actions against any person or entity who violates
this chapter as is deemed appropriate, including abatement or injunctive
relief. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.25.040: WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Purpose: The city finds that it is in the public's interest to conserve
public water resources and promote water efficient landscaping. The purpose of
this section is to protect and enhance the community's environmental, economic,
recreational, and aesthetic resources by promoting efficient use of water in
the community's landscapes, reduce water waste, and establish a structure for
designing, installing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes throughout
the city.
   B.   Commercial, Industrial, And Multi-Family Development:
      1.   Applicability: The provisions of this subsection B shall apply to
landscaping for all new and reconstructed landscaping for public agency
projects, private commercial and industrial projects, developer installed
landscaping in multi-family residential projects, and developer installed
landscaping in single-family projects that required project review and approval
by the city. Such review includes site plan review, modified conditional use
permit review, and building permits issued for exterior modifications to
commercial and multi-family buildings. This subsection B does not apply to
homeowner provided landscaping at single-family projects nor registered
historical sites.
      2.   Documentation To Be Submitted For Plan Approval: A landscape plan
documentation package shall be submitted to and approved by the director prior
to the issuance of any permit. A copy of the approved landscape plan
documentation package shall be provided to the property owner or site manager
and to the local retail water purveyor. The landscape plan documentation
package shall be prepared by a registered landscape architect or a landscape
designer. The irrigation plan shall be prepared by an irrigation designer or a
landscape architect. The landscape plan documentation package shall consist of
the following items:
         a.   Project Data Sheet: The project data sheet shall contain the
following:
            Project name and address;
            Applicant or applicant's agent's name, address, phone, e-mail, and
fax number;
            Landscape designer/landscape architect's name, address, phone, e-
mail, and fax number; and
            Landscape contractor's name, address, phone, e-mail and fax number.
         b.   Planting Plan: A detailed planting plan shall be drawn at a scale
that clearly identifies the following:
            Location of all plant materials, a legend with botanical and common
names, and size of plant materials;
            Property lines and street names;
            Existing and proposed buildings, walls, fences, light poles,
utilities, paved areas, and other site improvements;
            Existing trees and plant materials to be removed or retained; and
            Designation of landscape zones.
         c.   Irrigation Plan: A detailed irrigation plan shall be drawn at the
same scale as the planting plan and shall contain the following information:
            Layout of the irrigation system and a legend summarizing the type
and size of all components of the system, including manufacturer name and model
numbers;
            Static water pressure in pounds per square inch (psi) at the point
of connection to the public water supply; and
            Flow rate in gallons per minute and design operating pressure in
psi for each valve and precipitation rate in inches per hour for each valve
with sprinklers.
         d.   Grading Plan: A grading plan shall be drawn at the same scale as
the planting plan and shall contain the following information:
            Property lines and street names, existing and proposed buildings,
easements, walls, fences, utilities, paved areas, and other site improvements;
and
            Existing and finished contour lines and spot elevations as
necessary for the proposed site improvements.
         e.   Soils Report: A soils report will be required where irrigated
landscaped areas consisting of grass or similar turf exceed thirty three
percent (33%) of the overall landscaped area. The soils report shall describe
the depth, composition, and bulk density of the topsoil and subsoil at the site
and shall include recommendations for soil amendments. The planting plan shall
incorporate the recommendations of the soils report into the planting
specifications.
         f.   Irrigation Schedule: A monthly irrigation schedule shall be
prepared that covers the initial ninety (90) day plant establishment period and
the typical long term use period. This schedule shall consist of a table with
the following information for each valve:
            Plant type, e.g., turf, trees, low water use plants;
            Irrigation type, e.g., sprinklers, drip, bubblers;
            Flow rate in gallons per minute;
            Precipitation rate in inches per hour (sprinklers only);
            Run times in minutes per day;
            Number of water days per week; and
            Cycle time to avoid runoff.
      3.   Landscape Design Standards:
         a.   Plant Selection: Plants selected for landscape zones shall
consist of plants that are well suited to the microclimate and soil conditions
at the project site. Plants with similar water needs shall be grouped together
as much as possible in landscape zones.
            For projects located at the interface between urban areas and
natural open space (nonirrigated), extra drought tolerant plants shall be
selected that will blend with the native vegetation and are fire resistant or
fire retardant. Plants with low fuel volume or high moisture content shall be
emphasized. Plants that tend to accumulate excessive amounts of dead wood or
debris shall be avoided.
            Areas with slopes greater than thirty percent (30%) shall be
landscaped with deep rooting water conserving plants for erosion control and
soil stabilization. Irrigation devices are limited to drip emitters, bubblers,
or sprinklers with a maximum precipitation rate not to exceed 0.85 inch per
hour.
            Park strips and other landscaped areas less than eight feet (8')
wide shall be landscaped with water conserving plants and/or grass.
         b.   Mulch: After completion of all plantings, all irrigated nonturf
areas shall be covered with a minimum layer of four inches (4") of mulch to
retain water, inhibit weed growth, and moderate soil temperature. Nonporous
material shall not be placed under the mulch.
         c.   Soil Preparation: Soil preparation shall be suitable to provide
healthy growing conditions for the plants and to encourage water infiltration
and penetration. Soil preparation shall include scarifying the soil to a
minimum depth of six inches (6") and amending the soil with organic material as
per specific recommendations of the landscape designer/landscape architect
based on the soils report.
      4.   Irrigation Design Standards:
         a.   Standards: Irrigation design standards for this title shall be as
outlined in the latest version of the water retailer's standards. In addition,
the following portions of this section shall also be applicable.
         b.   Pressure Regulation: If using a dedicated water meter for
irrigation, a pressure regulating valve shall be installed and maintained by
the consumer if the static service pressure exceeds eighty (80) pounds per
square inch (psi). The pressure regulating valve shall be located between the
landscape water meter and the first point of water use, or first point of
division in the pipe and shall be set at the manufacturer's recommended
pressure for sprinklers.
         c.   Automatic Controller: All irrigation systems shall include an
electric automatic controller with multiple program and multiple repeat cycle
capabilities and a flexible calendar program. All controllers shall be equipped
with an automatic rain shutoff device.
         d.   Slopes: On slopes exceeding thirty percent (30%), the irrigation
system shall consist of drip emitters, bubblers, or sprinklers with a maximum
precipitation rate of 0.85 inch per hour and adjusted sprinkler cycle to
eliminate runoff.
         e.   Similar Conditions: Each valve shall irrigate a landscape zone
with similar site, slope and soil conditions, and plant materials with similar
watering needs. Turf and nonturf areas shall be irrigated on separate valve(s).
         f.   Drip Emitters And Bubblers: Drip emitters or a bubbler shall be
provided for each tree, where practicable. Bubblers shall not exceed 1.5
gallons per minute per device. Bubblers for trees shall be placed on a separate
valve unless specifically exempted by the public utilities department due to
the limited number of trees on the project site.
         g.   Matched Precipitation Rates: Sprinklers shall have matched
precipitation rates with each control valve circuit.
         h.   Elevation Differences: Check valves shall be required where
elevation differences will cause low head drainage. Pressure compensating
valves and sprinklers shall be required where a significant variation in water
pressure will occur within the irrigation system due to elevation differences.
         i.   Underground Placement: Drip irrigation lines shall be placed
underground or otherwise permanently covered, except for drip emitters and
where approved as a temporary installation. Filters and end flush valves shall
be provided as necessary.
         j.   Irrigation Times: Irrigation zones with overhead spray or stream
sprinklers, except drip or bubbler zones, shall be designed to operate between
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to reduce water loss from
wind and evaporation.
         k.   Program Valves: Program valves for multiple repeat cycles where
necessary to reduce runoff, particularly slopes and soils with slow
infiltration rates.
      5.   Plan Review, Construction Inspection, And Postconstruction
Monitoring:
         a.   As part of the site plan approval and building permit process, a
copy of the landscape plan documentation package shall be submitted to the city
for review and approval before construction begins. With the landscape plan
documentation package, a copy of the landscape water allowance worksheet shall
be completed by a landscape designer and submitted to the city.
         b.   All landscape plan documentation packages submitted must be
certified by a licensed landscape architect or an approved landscape designer.
The irrigation plan must be prepared by an approved irrigation designer or a
landscape architect.
         c.   All landscape irrigation systems shall be installed by an
irrigation contractor. The person representing the contracting firm shall be a
full time employee of the firm and shall be directly involved with the project
including at least weekly site visits during construction.
         d.   All installers, designers, and auditors shall meet state and
local license, insurance, and bonding requirements and be able to show proof of
such upon demand.
         e.   During construction, site inspection of the landscaping may be
performed by the city.
         f.   Following construction and prior to the release of the bond
guarantee posted for the project, an inspection shall be scheduled with the
city to verify compliance with the approved landscape and irrigation plans. A
certificate of substantial completion as defined in the city specifications
shall be completed by the property owner, contractor, or landscape designer/
landscape architect and submitted to the city.
   C.   Residential (Single-Family) Development:
      1.   The provisions of this subsection C apply to landscaping for all new
and reconstructed landscaping for single-family residential dwellings. This
subsection C does not apply to residential developments with developer
installed landscapes nor registered historical sites.
      2.   Provisions For New Or Reconstructed Landscapes: A copy of the
landscape education package shall be given to all new single- family homeowners
by the city at the time of application for a building permit and all new or
modified water account owners. The landscape education package shall consist of
the following items:
         a.   Principals of water efficient landscape design;
         b.   List of water conserving plants;
         c.   List of certified landscape designers, certified irrigation
system designers and suppliers, and certified landscape irrigation contractors;
and
         d.   Information packet about the various area demonstration gardens.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.26
SIGNAGE AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING
SECTION:
13.26.010: Purpose And Scope
13.26.020: Administration And Enforcement
13.26.030: Prohibited Sign Devices
13.26.040: Nonconforming Signs
13.26.050: General Guidelines For Signs In The City
13.26.060: Measurement Of Regulated Sign Area
13.26.070: Sign Themes
13.26.080: Standards For Permanent Signs Allowed Without A Permit
13.26.090: Standards For Permanent Signs That Require A Permit
13.26.100: Temporary Signs
13.26.110: Sign Permit Process
13.26.120: Sign Regulations For Sexually Oriented Businesses
13.26.130: Newspaper Or Periodical Racks And Stands
13.26.010: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to outline regulations which are
fair, comprehensive, and enforceable while allowing the city to create and
maintain safe and aesthetically pleasing building elevations and streetscapes.
These regulations serve to balance the need to protect the public safety and
welfare, the need for a well maintained and attractive community, and the need
for adequate identification, communication, and advertising for land uses. By
adherence to these regulations the following objectives should be achieved:
   A.   Signs that are compatible with their surroundings and provide easily
understood guidance and direction to establishments while preserving the
aesthetics and sense of order within the community.
   B.   Signs that do not negatively impact traffic safety and add to the
convenience of public travel and are not a visual distraction or physical
impediment for motorists and cyclists or pedestrians.
   C.   Signs that adhere to adopted fire, traffic, and safety standards in
order to ensure the safety of residents and visitors to the city.
The regulations of this chapter are intended to apply to both on premises and
off premises signs but do not apply to interior signs nor handheld placards and
other similar devices used for public protest and the noncommercial exercise of
free speech. Any noncommercial message may be substituted for any commercial
message permitted under this chapter. (Ord. 15-13, 11-18-2015)
13.26.020: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Interpretation: The sign regulations contained herein are declared to
be the maximum allowed for the purposes set forth. Any sign not expressly
allowed by this chapter is prohibited.
   B.   Authorities: The director shall be vested with the duty of enforcing
this chapter and in performance of such duty shall be empowered and directed
to:
      1.   Issue Permits: Unless stipulated otherwise, a sign permit is
required to erect, install, paint, or remodel any sign, whether it be temporary
or permanent in nature. This includes new signs, signs to be added to existing
buildings or uses, and existing signs that are to be enlarged, changed, or
modified. If no action is taken, the expiration date for such permits shall be
one hundred eighty (180) days from date of issuance. Upon written request sign
permits may be extended an additional one hundred eighty (180) days by the
director.
      2.   Determine Conformance: The city may make any necessary inspection(s)
of any sign for which a permit has been issued and for which an inspection has
been deemed necessary. Such inspections shall be performed to ascertain that
all signs, construction, and all reconstruction or modifications of existing
signs are built or constructed in conformance with the development code and as
represented at application for a permit.
      3.   Issue Notices Of Violations, Citations, And Information: The
director shall issue a written notice of violation to the person having charge,
control, or benefit of any sign found to be hazardous, abandoned,
nonmaintained, or in violation of this code, particularly when the city is
considering removal of said sign. Such official may also take criminal or civil
action against violators.
      4.   Abate And Remove Signs: The director may at once abate and remove
signs or, in the alternative, use all available legal means to have a sign
removed, including, but not limited to, criminal or civil action with the
appropriate court.
         a.   Abatement or removal may occur under the following circumstances:
            (1)   A hazardous sign is not repaired or made safe within five (5)
working days after receiving written notice of such condition from the city.
The building official or city engineer may also require a sign to be removed or
made safe within one working day after written notice from the city if such
sign poses an immediate hazard. In such cases the area shall be secured by
barricades or other methods to ensure public safety.
            (2)   An abandoned, nonmaintained, or sign identifying a
discontinued use has not been repaired or put into use within forty five (45)
calendar days after receiving written notice from the city.
            (3)   A permanent sign installed or in process of being installed
without a permit or is otherwise illegal as defined by this code, does not
obtain a permit, or made to conform within thirty (30) calendar days after
receiving written notice from the city.
            (4)   A temporary sign has been installed or in process of being
installed without a permit or is otherwise illegal as defined by this code and
has not been made to conform either through removal of the temporary sign or by
obtaining a temporary sign permit within seventy two (72) hours after receiving
written notice from the city.
            (5)   A sign posted upon public property may be removed by the city
at any time. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the sign, though removed, shall not
be destroyed in a period less than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of
removal. In no case shall the failure to remove said signs constitute approval
by the city of the illegal placement of the sign.
         b.   Persons having charge, control, or benefit of the affected sign
shall pay to the city the full cost incurred by its abatement or removal.
Payment shall be made within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving written
notice of such cost.
         c.   Guidelines for the abatement and removal of permanent signs or
temporary signs shall be in accordance with applicable standards. Abatement of
billboards shall be in accordance with those standards outlined in the Utah
state code.
      5.   Unsafe Structures, Signs, And Equipment:
         a.   Conditions: Structures, signs, or existing equipment that are or
hereafter become unsafe or deficient or which constitute a fire hazard, or are
otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve
illegal or improper or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe
condition. Unsafe structures or signs shall be taken down and removed or made
safe, as the building official deems necessary and as provided for in this
section. A vacant structure or sign that is not secured against entry shall be
deemed unsafe.
         b.   Record: The building official shall cause a report to be filed on
an unsafe condition. The report shall state the nature of the unsafe condition.
         c.   Notice: If an unsafe condition is found, the chief building
official shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the structure
or sign, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and
specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe
condition, or that requires the unsafe structure or sign to be demolished
within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to
declare within twenty four (24) hours to the building official acceptance or
rejection of the terms of the order.
         d.   Method Of Service: Such notice shall be deemed properly served if
a copy thereof is: 1) delivered to the owner personally; 2) sent by certified
or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address with the
return receipt requested; or 3) delivered in any other manner as prescribed by
local law. If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the
letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in or about the structure or sign affected by such notice. Service of such
notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person
responsible for the structure or sign shall constitute service of notice upon
the owner.
         e.   Restoration: The structure, sign or equipment determined to be
unsafe by the building official is permitted to be restored to a safe
condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations or additions are made during
the restoration of the structure, such repairs, alterations or additions shall
comply with the requirements of the building official and this chapter.
   C.   Right To Appeal: Any person who has been ordered to alter or remove any
sign, or whose application for a sign permit has been denied because of
conflict with regulations stated herein, may appeal the decision. For appeal
procedures, please see chapter 13.34 of this title. (Ord. 15-13, 11-18-2015)
13.26.030: PROHIBITED SIGN DEVICES:
   A.   Prohibited: Any sign not specifically allowed by this chapter is
prohibited. The following devices used to attract pedestrian or vehicular
attention are prohibited in the city:
      1.   Signs on bus benches. Bus benches which do not contain advertising
are encouraged in order to provide shelter and a more enjoyable experience for
those utilizing mass transit.
      2.   Flashing or animated signs. This shall also include architectural
lighting features or elements. Signs or lighting which have subtle changes of
light intensity are allowed. This does not include time/temperature or
electronic message center signs complying with the standards herein.
      3.   Graffiti.
      4.   Off premises signs. All off premises signs shall be prohibited,
including billboards, except as provided in subsections
13.26.090A4 and A8 of this chapter.
      5.   Roof signs, excluding roof flags as provided in subsection
13.26.090A13 of this chapter.
      6.   Sexually oriented signs. Any display, decoration, sign, or show
window that provides the observation of any material depicting, describing, or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      7.   Statuary. Statuary bearing the likeness or suggestion of any product
or logo.
      8.   Snipe signs.
      9.   Flagpole accents. This shall not include poles in nonresidential
areas which have lighting attached to or directed toward a pole for purposes of
illuminating a flag as defined herein and not serving to illuminate solely the
pole itself. (See figure 1 of this section.)
   FIGURE 1
   PROHIBITED FLAGPOLE ACCENTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3852.png]
   B.   Handbills, Signs; Public Places And Objects:
      1.   Except as otherwise stipulated, no person shall paint, mark or write
on, post or otherwise affix any handbill or sign to or upon any sidewalk,
crosswalk, curb, curbstone, park strip, street lamppost, hydrant, tree, shrub,
tree stake or guard, railroad trestle, public utility pole (e.g., light or
power, telephone, or light rail wire pole), or wire appurtenance thereof or
upon any lighting system, public bridge, drinking fountain, lifesaving
equipment, street sign, traffic sign, or vehicles.
      2.   Any handbill or sign found posted upon any public property contrary
to the provisions of this section may be removed without notice by any
designated city employee. The person responsible for any such illegal posting
shall be liable for the cost incurred in the removal thereof, and the city is
authorized to effect the collection of said cost.
      3.   Nothing in this section shall apply to the installation of a metal
plaque or plate or individual letters or figures in a sidewalk commemorating a
historical, cultural, or artistic event, location, or personality for which the
city has granted a written permit.
      4.   Nothing in this section shall apply to the painting of house numbers
upon curbs. (Ord. 16-07, 6-1-2016)
13.26.040: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Regulation, Containment, And Elimination: In order to minimize
confusion and unfair competitive disadvantage to those businesses which are
required to satisfy this code, the city intends to apply firm regulation of
existing nonconforming signs with a view to their eventual elimination.
Excluding normal maintenance and repair, a nonconforming sign shall not be
moved, altered, or enlarged unless it is brought into complete compliance with
this chapter. The following alterations are exempt from this provision:
      1.   Face changes;
      2.   Copy changes in nonconforming permanent signs which were originally
approved by the city with a changeable copy feature; and
      3.   An alteration that renovates or remodels an existing nonconforming
sign intended solely to visually enhance the sign without increasing the level
of nonconformity.
   B.   Abandonment: Within forty five (45) calendar days after vacation of an
existing business, any on site nonconforming signs must be removed or brought
into compliance by the property owner. If removal does not occur, the city may
have the entire nonconforming sign (both face and structure) removed through
the process specified herein. An abandoned sign may not regain any legal
nonconforming status later, even if the original or a new business occupies the
property.
   C.   Billboards: Any billboards shall be in conformance with state code.
(Ord. 15-13, 11-18-2015)
13.26.050: GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR SIGNS IN THE CITY:
   A.   Standards Of Construction:
      1.   Building Codes: All signs erected in the city shall comply with all
applicable standards.
      2.   Licensed Contractor Required: No sign requiring a permit shall be
erected, installed, or modified in the city except by a licensed and bonded
sign contractor. Electrical wiring or connections for such sign, fixture, or
device must be installed or connected by a licensed and bonded electrical
contractor.
      3.   Engineering Required: Where required by the city, all sign permit
applications shall be accompanied by a drawing stamped by an appropriate
engineer, licensed by the state of Utah, attesting to the adequacy of the
proposed construction of the sign and its supports and demonstrating
conformance with the applicable provisions of the international building code.
Standard engineering may be submitted to the city for approval and filed for
use with multiple applications by authorized companies. Thereafter, permits may
be obtained which utilize such engineering without refiling detailed structural
plans. The city may require sign specific engineering regardless of standard
details on file with the city.
      4.   Durability: All permanent signs must be built of durable and
permanent exterior grade materials.
      5.   Power Source: Permanent power sources for signs must be concealed
underground away from public view or within the structure of the sign or
building to which the sign is attached and comply with all provisions of all
applicable standards.
      6.   Foundations: All ground signs must be mounted on foundations and
footings which conform to all applicable standards.
   B.   Sign Company Tag: All permanent signs must have a sign builder's
identification tag or signature. The tag or signature must be made of durable
weatherproof material and must be affixed to the sign so as to be visible from
the sidewalk or nearest convenient location by city inspectors.
   C.   Location And Setback Requirements: The following shall apply:
      1.   General Location: No part of any sign shall interfere with the use
of any fire escape, exit, required stairway, door ventilator, or window.
      2.   Traffic Safety:
         a.   Visibility Triangle: No sign more than thirty inches (30") in
height (above the top back of curb) shall be erected near any driveway or
intersection for vehicular traffic within a triangular area formed by the
intersection of straight lines extended from the back of curb (or a future
curb) and a line connecting them at points sixty feet (60') from the
intersection of the lines. (See figure 2 of this section.) Deviations from
these requirements must be reviewed and approved by the city engineer.
   FIGURE 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3854.png]
         b.   Copy Standards: No sign or other advertising structure shall be
erected which in any manner may be confused with an official traffic sign or
signal, or which bears words normally used in such signs (e.g., stop, go slow,
caution, danger, warning, etc.). No sign or advertising structure shall be
erected which by reason of its size, location, shape, content, coloring, or
manner of illumination might be confused as a traffic control device. No sign
shall have lighting which impairs the vision of anyone traveling upon a public
street or distracts any driver so as to create a public nuisance. Signs shall
not extend over any pedestrian or vehicular access area unless specifically
approved by the city engineer.
      3.   Public Rights Of Way: No sign shall be located on public property or
inside street rights of way except signs owned and erected by permission of an
authorized public agency or specifically authorized herein.
      4.   Vertical Setback: In addition to the height restrictions contained
herein, no sign shall be erected or maintained which has less horizontal or
vertical clearance from communication lines and energized electrical power
lines than that prescribed by the laws of the state of Utah, its agencies, or
appropriate utility company.
      5.   Additional Setbacks: All permanent signs must be located at least
two feet (2') from a required parking stall or parking area.
   D.   Landscaping: All permanent pylon or monument signs must be incorporated
into a landscape design or planter box. The landscaped area in which any sign
is placed shall be kept free from weeds, garbage, and debris. Removal of
required landscaping to facilitate sign placement must be in compliance with
commercial landscape standards in this title.
   E.   Lighting: Signs shall be carefully oriented so that light emitted from
a sign or group of signs is not a traffic hazard, obtrusive, or a nuisance to
adjacent properties, particularly residential. Signs with exterior illumination
must have luminary devices shielded and screened from public view and directed
to avoid light spill from the affected sign(s).
   F.   Electronic Message Center Signs: Persons installing or manufacturing a
sign which has an LED or electronic message center must demonstrate that the
brightness of such sign will not exceed one foot-candle along the property line
as measured six feet (6') above curb grade. Such signs must also be equipped
with a dimmer switch to change the intensity of light emitted from the sign to
meet the one foot-candle brightness if needed after installation.
   G.   Amount Of Motion Included On The EMC Sign: The inclusion of text or
video that flash, appears to flash or strobe is prohibited. An image shall not
change more frequently than once every eight (8) seconds. In order to better
regulate changing images a fade in and fade out transition must be used. The
fade in and fade out prevents a dark image transitioning abruptly to a light
image and vice versa, thus creating a flash or strobelike effect.
   H.   Conversion Of Existing Static Sign To EMC: If an applicant desires to
convert an existing static sign (i.e., cabinet, monument, or pole sign) to an
EMC a conditional use permit shall be required. A building permit for the
conversion, regardless of size, shall also be required. The amount of space
used for the EMC is limited to sixty five percent (65%) of the total sign area.
   I.   Maintenance: All signs shall be maintained in a safe, presentable, and
good condition including the replacement of defective parts, cleaning,
painting, oiling, changing of light bulbs, or other acts required for the
maintenance of said sign. Maintenance shall also include the restoration or
repair of any exterior wall penetrations, discolorations, or other damages
caused by the installation, removal, or placement of signs on a building. (Ord.
15-13, 11-18-2015)
13.26.060: MEASUREMENT OF REGULATED SIGN AREA:
For the purpose of this chapter, a complete phrase, copy and/or image, and the
proposed layout of such shall be considered a sign (e.g., 1 Hour Photo).
   A.   Single Plane/Panel Signs: Regulated area shall be according to the
following standards:
      1.   Sign copy mounted as individual letters and/or graphics against a
wall, window, or fascia of a building or other structure that has not been
painted, textured, or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background for
the sign copy, the area shall be defined as the area enclosed by the smallest
eight (8) sided polygon that will enclose all sign area. (See figure 3 of this
section.)
   FIGURE 3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3856.png]
      2.   Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area
distinctly textured or constructed as a background for the sign copy shall be
measured as that area contained within the outside dimensions of the background
panel or surface. (See figure 4 of this section.) Any illuminated bands or
illuminated structures which contain sign copy, corporate logos, etc., are by
definition wall signs in their entirety. However, illuminated bands on canopies
covering gasoline pump islands shall be regulated per this chapter.
   FIGURE 4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3858.png]
      3.   Sign copy as an illuminated architectural element of a building
shall be calculated as that portion of the illuminated surface or illuminated
element which contains sign copy. (See figure 5 of this section.)
   FIGURE 5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3860.png]
      4.   The regulated area of a monument sign shall include all parts of the
sign or structure that contain identification (words or symbols) and
information. (See figure 6 of this section.)
   FIGURE 6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3862.png]
      5.   The regulated area of a pylon sign shall include all parts of the
sign or structure that contain identification (words or symbols) and
information. (See figure 7 of this section.)
   FIGURE 7
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3864.png]
   B.   Multiple Face Signs (Including, But Not Limited To, Pylon Or Monument
Signs):
      1.   Double Panel: If the interior angle between two (2) faces is forty
five degrees (45°) or less, the sign area to be measured is a single face. If
the angle is greater than forty five degrees (45°), the sign area to be
measured will be the area sum of the areas of the two (2) faces. (See figure 8
of this section.)
   FIGURE 8
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3866.png]
      2.   Three Or More Faces: The sign area shall be the sum of the areas of
the three (3) or more faces.
   C.   Nonplaner Signs: For spherical, free form, or other nonplaner signs,
the sign area shall be the sum of the areas of the four (4) vertical sides of
the smallest polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure. (See figure 9
of this section.)
   FIGURE 9
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3868.png]
(Ord. 15-13, 11-18-2015)
13.26.070: SIGN THEMES:
All multi-tenant centers/buildings must submit a proposal for design and
placement of all on premises signs that are in architectural harmony with the
development. All such developments must have an approved sign theme before any
sign permits will be issued to a business locating within it. The use of
multiple cabinet signs or combination of cabinet and individual lettering signs
shall not be allowed. (See figures 10 and 11 of this section.)
   FIGURE 10 - PROHIBITED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3870.png]
   FIGURE 11 - ENCOURAGED
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3872.png]
(Ord. 15-13, 11-18-2015)
13.26.080: STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT:
   A.   Building Identification: Numbers which are used to denote the address
of a building shall not be counted against the allowable square footage for the
same building but must comply with the standards for building identification as
found in the city property addressing section (
13.29.050) of this title.
   B.   Flags: Up to three (3) flags in a single-family residential district
and five (5) flags in a multi-family residential, commercial or industrial
district may be displayed on a lot without a sign permit issued by the city.
Flagpoles shall be of a permanent construction and not exceed sixty feet (60')
in height or the maximum height of a structure allowed in said district,
whichever is less.
   C.   Home Occupations: A legally licensed business in a residence may have a
single, three (3) square feet in area, nonilluminated, flat wall sign mounted
to the residence.
   D.   Institutional Uses: Churches, public schools, private schools, charter
schools, public utility companies, libraries, governmental buildings, parks,
public golf courses, etc., are allowed a single monument sign of thirty two
(32) square feet per street frontage. Wall signs shall be regulated as set
forth in this chapter.
   E.   Memorial Signs: These include signs or tablets with the names of
buildings and date of erection cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to
be part of the building. Said sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
area.
   F.   Neighborhood Identification Signs: In any zone district, a sign,
masonry wall, landscaping, and other similar materials or features may be
combined to form a display for a neighborhood or planned unit development
project identification provided that such signs comply with the monument sign
standards herein. Provisions for perpetual maintenance of signage must be
provided.
   G.   Notice Bulletin Boards: Notice bulletin boards for institutional
buildings may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area. Such signs must
be oriented solely to the interior of the property and not be used to direct
exterior vehicular attention to the institution or its services.
   H.   Plaques: Plaques, nameplates, and commemorative plaques of recognized
historical agencies, not exceeding two (2) square feet, may be fastened
directly to a building.
   I.   Symbols Or Insignia: Religious symbols, identification emblems of
religious orders, or historical agencies are permitted provided that such signs
conform to the relevant wall or monument sign standards herein.
   J.   Wayfinding Signs: As set forth by all applicable standards. (Ord. 15-
13, 11-18-2015)
13.26.090: STANDARDS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS THAT REQUIRE A PERMIT:
   A.   Permanent Signs That Require A Permit:
      1.   Applications For Permanent Signs: All applications for permanent
signs shall include the following information:
         a.   Proof of current city business license.
         b.   Business owner, address and phone number.
         c.   Property owner, address and phone number.
         d.   General or sign contractor, address, phone number, and contractor
number.
         e.   Value of the sign (including the cost of manufacturing and
installation).
      2.   Awning, Canopy And Marquee Signs:
         a.   General Provisions:
            (1)   Awning and canopy coverings shall be made of metal, high
quality exterior grade fabric, or other similar material as approved by city
staff.
            (2)   Illumination of awning or canopy signs with signage shall be
external.
            (3)   The color, style, size, scale, and proportion of the sign
shall enhance the exterior of the building and not place too much bulk nor be
an excessive external distraction on the building's exterior.
            (4)   No signage is permitted on any portion of an awning, canopy,
or marquee that is sloping or nonflat.
         b.   Area:
            (1)   Signs On Awnings: Signage on an awning shall be limited to no
more than forty percent (40%) of the vertical awning area.
            (2)   Translucent Channel Letters Or Accents: Translucent channel
letters or accents constructed as part of a canopy or marquee are permitted up
to seventy five percent (75%) of a canopy face.
            (3)   Subtracted From Area For Wall Signs: The area of the awning,
canopy, and/or marquee sign shall be subtracted from the maximum permitted
aggregate area for wall signs per subsection A12b(1) of this section.
         c.   Height:
            (1)   All awning, canopy, or marquee signs shall maintain a minimum
nine foot (9') clearance above grade.
         d.   Location: Awning, canopy, and marquee signs shall be limited to
street level locations only.
         e.   Additional Application Information: Additional application
information required for awning, canopy, and marquee signs:
            (1)   Two (2) scaled elevation drawings showing square foot
dimensions of both the building and the sign, sign composition, type of
illumination and the relationship between the sign and building.
            (2)   Details of sign construction, electrical plan, and attachment
details with appropriate engineer's stamp(s).
      3.   Directional Signs (Freestanding, On Premises): Signs which provide
direction or instruction and are located entirely on the premises are permitted
as provided below.
         a.   General Provisions:
            (1)   On premises directional signs shall be made from high
quality, durable materials, and may contain a business name or corporate logo
and directional information wording such as "Entrance", "Exit", "One-Way", or
directional arrows. No advertising text is allowed.
            (2)   No portion of the on premises directional sign may include
changeable copy or an electronic message center (EMC).
         b.   Area: On premises directional signs shall not exceed five (5)
square feet in area. A pedestal not to exceed one foot (1') in height may be
used and which shall not be included in the area of the sign.
         c.   Height: The maximum height of an on premises directional sign
shall be three feet (3') unless the sign is located outside of the clear vision
triangle, where the sign can be a maximum of four feet (4') in height.
         d.   Location:
            (1)   The number and location allowed shall be determined by the
director during site plan review and shall be the minimum required for safe
circulation of traffic onto and within a development.
            (2)   On premises directional signs shall be located at least
twenty five feet (25') from any other freestanding sign (monument sign, pylon
sign, menu board, etc.).
         e.   Additional Application Information: Additional application
information required for on premises freestanding directional signs:
            (1)   Two (2) accurately dimensioned plot plans showing
relationship of signs to buildings, property lines, setback from public rights
of way, intersections, easements, driveways, existing site contours (1 foot
intervals), and freestanding signs on the same property.
            (2)   Two (2) accurately dimensioned, scaled elevation drawings
showing height, color, square foot dimensions, landscaping, sign composition,
materials, type of illumination, and how the sign will appear from the street.
            (3)   Details of sign construction including an electrical plan and
foundation schemes with appropriate engineer's stamp(s).
      4.   Directional Signs (Freestanding, Off Premises): Signs which provide
direction or instruction to a property or use on an adjacent private property
are permitted as provided below.
         a.   General Provisions:
            (1)   Off premises directional signs shall be made from high
quality, durable materials, and may contain a business name or corporate logo
and directional information wording such as "Entrance", "Exit", "One-Way", or
directional arrows. No advertising text is allowed.
            (2)   No portion of the off premises directional sign may include
changeable copy or an electronic message center (EMC).
            (3)   Proof of an agreement to locate the proposed off premises
directional sign must be provided to the city by the party seeking the off
premises directional sign prior to obtaining the sign permit.
         b.   Area: The maximum area allowed for off premises directional signs
is nine (9) square feet. The amount of sign area used for off premises
directional signage shall be deducted from the sign area otherwise available
for a monument or pylon sign located on the same property as the off premises
directional sign. A pedestal not to exceed one foot (1') in height may be used
which shall not be included in the area of the sign.
         c.   Height: Off premises directional signs shall not exceed three
feet (3') in height, unless the sign is located outside of the clear vision
triangle, where the sign can be a maximum of four feet (4') in height.
         d.   Location:
            (1)   Off premises directional signs must be located on a direct
access to the subject property at no more than four hundred feet (400') from
the said property. Under no circumstances may any business or property have or
obtain more than one off premises directional sign.
            (2)   Off premises directional signs shall be located at least
twenty five feet (25') from any other freestanding sign (monument sign, pylon
sign, menu board, etc.).
         e.   Additional Application Information: Additional application
information required for off premises freestanding directional signs:
            (1)   Two (2) accurately dimensioned plot plans showing
relationship of signs to buildings, property lines, setback from public rights
of way, intersections, easements, driveways, existing site contours (1 foot
intervals), and any freestanding signs on the same property.
            (2)   Two (2) accurately dimensioned, scaled elevation drawings
showing height, color, square foot dimensions, landscaping, sign composition,
materials, type of illumination, and how the sign will appear from the street.
            (3)   Details of sign construction including an electrical plan and
foundation schemes with appropriate engineer's stamp(s).
            (4)   Distance from off premises directional sign to the property
or use for which the sign is providing direction.
      5.   Gas Island Canopy Signs:
         a.   General Provisions: Signs containing individual letters, logos,
or symbols may be placed on a gas island canopy face. Signage shall not project
above or below the canopy face or project out from the surface of the canopy
more than ten inches (10").
         b.   Area: Sign copy, corporate logos, etc., may be a maximum of
fifteen percent (15%) of the vertical canopy face per elevation.
         c.   Additional Information Required: Additional information required
for gas island canopy signs:
            (1)   Two (2) scaled elevation drawings showing square foot
dimensions of both the gas island canopy and the sign, sign composition, type
of illumination and the relationship between the sign and building.
            (2)   Details of sign construction, electrical plan, and attachment
details with appropriate engineer's stamp(s).
      6.   Menu Boards:
         a.   General Provisions:
            (1)   Area: Thirty five (35) square feet maximum for primary sign.
Nine (9) square feet for secondary sign.
            (2)   Height: Eight feet (8') maximum.
            (3)   Location: The menu boards shall not be located within any
front landscaped setback area.
            (4)   Number: One primary menu board sign and one smaller secondary
menu board sign is permitted per drive-through lane.
            (5)   Additional Application Information: Additional application
information required for menu board signs:
               (A)   Two (2) scaled elevation drawings showing square foot
dimensions of both the building and all proposed menu board signs, sign
composition, and type of illumination.
               (B)   Two (2) accurately dimensioned plot plans showing
relationship of signs to buildings, property lines, setback from public rights
of way, intersections, easements, driveways, existing site contours (1 foot
intervals), and freestanding signs on the same property.
               (C)   Details of sign construction, electrical plan, and
attachment details with appropriate engineer's stamp(s).
      7.   Monument Signs:
         a.   General Provisions:
            (1)   A low profile or upright monument sign is permitted for any
commercial building not associated with a planned commercial center provided
the parcel has a minimum of fifty feet (50') of linear street frontage. For
corner locations, an additional sign is permitted for the second frontage
provided that each frontage has a minimum two hundred (200) linear feet.
            (2)   A low profile or upright monument sign is permitted for
freestanding pad buildings associated with planned commercial centers in
addition to a planned center sign provided the pad location is contiguous to an
arterial street and has at least one hundred feet (100') of street frontage.
            (3)   Low profile or upright monument signs are allowed for planned
commercial centers that do not have pylon signs provided the parcel has a
minimum of two hundred feet (200') of linear street frontage. An additional
monument sign is permitted for each five hundred feet (500') of linear
frontage. For corner locations, an additional sign is permitted for the second
frontage provided that each frontage has a minimum four hundred (400) linear
feet.
         b.   Area:
            (1)   Commercial buildings not associated with a planned center and
pad buildings associated with a planned commercial center:
               (A)   Low Profile Monument Signs:
                  (i)   The maximum area for low profile monument signs shall
be thirty two (32) square feet plus one square foot per three (3) linear feet
of street frontage over fifty feet (50') to a maximum size of ninety (90)
square feet.
               (B)   Upright Monument Signs:
                  (i)   The maximum area for upright monument signs shall be
forty (40) square feet plus one square foot per ten (10) linear feet of street
frontage over fifty feet (50') to a maximum size of fifty four (54) square
feet.
                  (ii)   The maximum width of an upright monument sign shall be
six feet (6').
            (2)   Planned commercial shopping centers:
               (A)   Low Profile Monument Signs:
                  (i)   The maximum area for low profile monument signs shall
be thirty two (32) square feet plus one square foot per three (3) linear feet
of street frontage over fifty feet (50') to a maximum size of one hundred (100)
square feet.
               (B)   Upright Monument Signs:
                  (i)   The maximum area for upright monument signs shall be
forty (40) square feet plus one square foot per ten (10) linear feet of street
frontage over fifty feet (50') to a maximum size of eighty eight (88) square
feet.
                  (ii)   The maximum width of an upright monument sign shall be
eight feet (8').
            (3)   Reader boards (changeable copy areas) and electronic message
centers are permitted, however, such devices shall not exceed sixty five
percent (65%) of the overall sign area.
         c.   Height: The height of a monument sign shall be the distance from
the highest point of the sign to the height of the street curb or sidewalk.
            (1)   Low Profile Monument Signs:
               (A)   Sign face: The cabinet or face of a low profile monument
sign may not exceed five feet (5') in vertical size.
               (B)   Overall height: Maximum height for a low profile monument
sign is six feet (6').
            (2)   Upright Monument Signs:
               (A)   Commercial buildings not associated with a planned center
and pad buildings associated with a planned commercial center:
                  (i)   Sign face: The cabinet face of an upright monument sign
may not exceed nine feet (9') in vertical size.
                  (ii)   Overall height: Maximum height for an upright monument
sign is ten feet (10').
               (B)   Planned commercial shopping centers:
                  (i)   Sign face: The cabinet face of an upright monument sign
may not exceed eleven feet (11') in vertical size.
                  (ii)   Overall height: Maximum height for an upright monument
sign is twelve feet (12').
            (3)   Signs Placed Within Bermed Areas: Signs placed within bermed
areas may have an additional inch of overall height for each vertical inch of
berm directly under the sign. In such cases the entire frontage must have
existing or equal berming treatment, and the sign shall not exceed an overall
height of eight feet (8'). Site centric architectural features or enhancements
to the sign supports are excluded.
            (4)   Pedestal Standards: All monument signs must have at least a
one foot (1') opaque pedestal designed as part of the foundation which conceals
any pole support. Height of the pedestal is measured from the highest grade
below the sign. The pedestal should run at least fifty percent (50%) of the
horizontal length of the sign and extend from the sign into the ground below
the sign. There shall be no copy or sign element on the pedestal, except
addresses. The pedestal shall utilize materials and design elements that relate
the sign to the associated building(s). The director may review and approve/
deny any variation to the pedestal base requirements based on site
characteristics, topography, or design integrity.
         d.   Location:
            (1)   Monument signs shall be set back at least three feet (3')
from the public sidewalk or right of way (whichever is greater).
            (2)   Monument signs shall be located at least their height in
distance from side property lines in order to prevent damage to adjacent land
in case the sign is toppled by accident or act of nature.
            (3)   Signs within the visibility triangle shall only be allowed
with the permission of the city engineer.
            (4)   Monument signs shall be no closer than one hundred feet
(100') to any other monument or pylon sign located on the same frontage.
         e.   Application Information: Applicants for monument signs shall
submit the following information:
            (1)   Plot plan showing relationship of signs to buildings,
property lines, setback from public rights of way, intersections, easements,
driveways, existing site contours (1 foot intervals), and nearest monument or
pylon signs on the same frontage.
            (2)   Two (2) accurately dimensioned, scaled elevation drawings
showing height, color, square foot dimensions, landscaping, sign composition,
materials, type of illumination, and how the sign will appear from the street.
            (3)   Details of sign construction including an electrical plan and
foundation schemes with appropriate engineer's stamp(s).
            (4)   Number of acres and length of linear street frontage of
property.
      8.   Commercial District Signs:
         a.   General Provisions:
            (1)   An off premises identification and/or directional monument
sign is allowed as a nonadministrative conditional use for commercial shopping
districts comprising at least five (5) contiguous acres and one thousand feet
(1,000') of street frontage.
            (2)   Monument signs may have a logo/identification theme as part
of the sign.
            (3)   Only businesses within the commercial district may advertise
on the commercial district monument sign.
            (4)   A maximum of two (2) signs shall be allowed in any contiguous
commercial district.
            (5)   Landscaping shall be installed with all off premises
commercial district signs. Responsibility for maintenance of the sign and
landscaping shall be established as a condition of approval of the
nonadministrative conditional use process.
         b.   Area:
            (1)   The maximum area of a commercial district monument sign shall
be eighty (80) square feet.
         c.   Height: Commercial district monument signs shall adhere to the
monument sign height standards in subsection A7 of this section.
         d.   Location: Commercial district monument signs shall adhere to the
monument sign location standards in subsection A7 of this section.
         e.   Application Information: Applicants for commercial district signs
shall submit the following information:
            (1)   Plot plan showing relationship of signs to buildings,
property lines, setback from public rights of way, intersections, easements,
driveways, existing site contours (1 foot intervals), and nearest monument or
pylon signs on the same frontage.
            (2)   Two (2) accurately dimensioned, scaled elevation drawings
showing height, color, square foot dimensions, landscaping, sign composition,
materials, type of illumination, and how the sign will appear from the street.
            (3)   Details of sign construction including an electrical plan and
foundation schemes with appropriate engineer's stamp(s).
            (4)   Number of acres and length of linear street frontage of
property.
      9.   Projecting Or Suspended Signs:
         a.   General Provisions:
            (1)   Projecting or suspended signs will only be allowed on
projects with an approved sign theme.
            (2)   Projecting or suspended signs are only permitted for street
level tenants. Projecting or suspended signs above the first level are
prohibited.
            (3)   Electronic message centers or changeable copy signs are not
allowed as projecting or suspended signs.
            (4)   There must be a minimum horizontal distance of thirty feet
(30') between suspended or projecting signs.
            (5)   Projecting and suspended signs should blend with the
architectural character of the building. The color, style, size, scale, and
proportion of the sign should enhance the exterior of the building and not
place too much bulk nor be an excessive external distraction on the building's
exterior. Equal treatment and design consideration should be given to any
mounting and supporting structure for the sign.
            (6)   Projecting and suspended signs shall not extend more than six
feet (6') from the vertical wall.
            (7)   Projecting or suspended signs may be used in conjunction with
wall, window, marquee, awning or canopy signs.
         b.   Area:
            (1)   No projecting or suspended sign shall be larger than sixteen
(16) square feet or be more than twelve inches (12") thick. No projecting or
suspended sign shall be larger than five percent (5%) of the first level facade
upon which it is placed.
            (2)   The area of the projecting or suspended sign shall be
subtracted from the maximum permitted aggregate area for wall signs per
subsection A12b(1) of this section.
         c.   Height: Projecting or suspended signs shall have a minimum
clearance of nine feet (9') from the sidewalk or finished grade.
         d.   Number: No business location or tenant space shall be permitted
to have more than one projecting or suspended sign per facade that contains a
public entrance.
         e.   Additional Information Required: Additional information required
for projecting and canopy signs:
            (1)   Two (2) scaled elevation drawings showing square foot
dimensions of both the building and the sign, sign composition, type of
illumination and the relationship between the sign and building.
            (2)   Details of sign construction, electrical plan (if
applicable), and attachment details with appropriate engineer's stamp(s).
      10.   Pylon Signs:
         a.   General Provisions:
            (1)   Pylon signs are allowed for developments, planned centers, or
parcels that have at least seven (7) acres and five hundred feet (500') of
frontage on an arterial street, as identified in the Taylorsville general plan.
            (2)   All pylon signs shall be part of an approved sign theme.
            (3)   Structural supports for all pylon signs shall be covered or
concealed with decorative pole covers. The covers shall utilize materials and
be architecturally compatible to the building or development to which it is
associated.
         b.   Area:
            (1)   One hundred twenty five (125) square feet plus three (3)
square feet per acre of land over seven (7) acres to a maximum size of three
hundred fifty (350) square feet.
            (2)   Reader boards, changeable copy areas, and electronic message
centers shall not exceed sixty five percent (65%) of the total sign copy area
of the sign.
         c.   Height:
            (1)   Pylon signs shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in
height.
            (2)   The height of a pylon sign shall be the distance from the
highest point of the sign to the top of the curb or sidewalk or crown of the
street when there is no curb or sidewalk.
         d.   Location:
            (1)   All portions of pylon signs shall be located within the
required landscape adjacent to the arterial street and set back at least three
feet (3') from the back of sidewalk or right of way (whichever is greater).
            (2)   Pylon signs shall be set back at least three feet (3') from
all driveways.
            (3)   Pylon signs shall be located at least their height in
distance from side property lines in order to prevent damage to adjacent land
in case the sign is toppled by accident or act of nature.
            (4)   Signs within the visibility triangle shall only be allowed
with the permission of the city engineer.
         e.   Number: One pylon sign shall be permitted per five hundred feet
(500') of frontage on an arterial street.
         f.   Application Information: Applicants for pylon signs shall submit
the following information:
            (1)   Plot plan showing relationship of signs to buildings,
property lines, setback from public rights of way, intersections, easements,
driveways, existing site contours (1 foot intervals), and nearest monument or
pylon signs on the same frontage.
            (2)   Two (2) accurately dimensioned, scaled elevation drawings
showing height, color, square foot dimensions, landscaping, sign composition,
materials, type of illumination, and how the sign will appear from the street.
            (3)   Details of sign construction including an electrical plan and
foundation schemes with appropriate engineer's stamp(s).
            (4)   Number of acres and length of linear street frontage of
property.
      11.   Pylon Signs (Freeway Oriented):
         a.   General Provisions:
            (1)   The planning commission may approve as a nonadministrative
conditional use one freeway oriented pylon sign for parcels that have a minimum
of five hundred (500) linear feet of frontage adjacent to and/or fronting
Interstate 215.
            (2)   Freeway oriented pylon signs shall be part of an approved
sign theme.
            (3)   Structural supports for all pylon signs shall be covered or
concealed with decorative pole covers. The covers shall utilize materials and
be architecturally compatible to the building or development to which it is
associated.
         b.   Area:
            (1)   Three hundred fifty (350) square feet plus one-half (0.5)
square foot for each linear foot of freeway frontage over three hundred fifty
feet (350') to a maximum size of nine hundred fifty (950) square feet.
            (2)   Reader boards, changeable copy areas, and electronic message
centers shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the total sign copy area of the
sign or three hundred fifty (350) square feet; whichever is less.
            (3)   No part of the sign structure may exceed thirty feet (30') in
width.
         c.   Height: Freeway oriented pylon signs shall have a height not
greater than thirty five feet (35') above the nearest traveled freeway lane or
frontage road, whichever is greater. No portion of an electronic message center
(EMC) sign shall be located higher than twenty five feet (25') above the
freeway grade.
            (1)   The Planning Commission may grant an exception for additional
height for freeway oriented pylon signs that are adjacent to a freeway overpass
or other view obscuring structure (excluding vegetation) provided that it can
be demonstrated that the increased height is necessary to provide full
visibility of the sign and that the increased height will not adversely impact
nearby residential uses. Applications for additional height will be
supplemented with the following submittals:
               (A)   A topographic map with one foot (1') interval contours is
provided to illustrate existing conditions at the site.
               (B)   Visual simulations or scaled profile drawings which
illustrate the required and requested sign heights in relation to the view
obscuring structure.
               (C)   The additional height is the minimum necessary to provide
reasonable visibility above the view obscuring structure. Under no
circumstances, however, shall the height of the EMC portion of a freeway
oriented pylon sign be increased.
         d.   Location:
            (1)   Freeway oriented pylon signs shall be located within thirty
feet (30') of the shared property line with the interstate or frontage road.
            (2)   Freeway oriented pylon signs shall be located at least three
feet (3') from any driveway.
            (3)   Freeway oriented pylons signs shall be set back at least one
hundred feet (100') from any collector or arterial street.
            (4)   Freeway oriented pylon signs shall be located at least five
hundred feet (500') from any Residential District.
         e.   Number: No development, planned center or parcel may have more
than one freeway oriented pylon sign.
         f.   Application Information: Applicants for freeway oriented pylon
signs shall submit the following information:
            (1)   Plot plan showing relationship of signs to buildings,
property lines, setback from public rights-of-way, intersections, easements,
driveways, existing site contours (1 foot intervals), and nearest monument or
pylon signs on the same frontage.
            (2)   Two (2) accurately dimensioned, scaled elevation drawings
showing height, color, square foot dimensions, landscaping, sign composition,
materials, type of illumination, and how the sign will appear from the street.
            (3)   Details of sign construction including an electrical plan and
foundation schemes with appropriate engineer's stamp(s).
            (4)   Number of acres and length of linear street frontage of
property. (Ord. 16-07, 6-1-2016)
      12.   Wall Signs:
         a.   General Provisions:
            (1)   Wall signs must be located on a wall surface under complete
control by the tenant applying for the signage.
            (2)   Wall signs shall not cover key architectural features or
elements on buildings.
            (3)   Tenants who access their space through a common entrance(s)
or tenants above ground level are not allowed to have individualized wall signs
on the exterior of the building other than a directory sign located next to or
within the common entrance of the building. Such directory signs may not exceed
twelve (12) square feet and copy shall not exceed one inch (1") in height.
            (4)   Signs shall not be mounted on a sloping or roof portion
(including faux roofs) of any building. Signs may be mounted within a roof area
if mounted upon a permanent, architecturally appropriate vertical surface such
as a gable, dormer, or similar structure. A vertical sign board permanently
attached to a sloping roof is prohibited.
               (A)   Such signs will only be allowed to avoid architectural
conflicts on the face of the building. They shall not be approved solely for
better signage visibility.
               (B)   Such vertical structure must be finished in a manner that
closely matches the architectural design, materials and colors of the building
and must be permanently integrated and attached to the roof.
               (C)   Signs mounted upon a vertical structure integrated into
the sloping roof of a building must meet the size requirements as set forth in
this chapter. Such signs may not protrude beyond the vertical face of the
structure or cover any architectural ornamentation.
               (D)   If a roof structure is to be constructed for purposes of
mounting a sign, the applicant must apply for, and receive the proper building
and zoning clearances and permits before a sign permit will be issued.
               (E)   Window signs shall not cover more than twenty five percent
(25%) of any single window or twenty five percent (25%) of any group of
windows.
            (5)   Illuminated wall signs on businesses that back directly onto
residential areas are prohibited.
            (6)   Wall signs with changeable copy, reader board, or electronic
message capability are not allowed.
            (7)   Wall signs shall not project more than eighteen inches (18")
from the wall to which they are attached.
            (8)   Painted signs or murals applied directly to any building face
must have specific approval of the Director.
         b.   Area: The area of signage allowed on a wall shall be based on the
dimensions of the exterior wall under complete control by the tenant applying
for a permit.
            (1)   Area standards for single story buildings and ground floor
tenants on multi-level buildings:
               (A)   The maximum aggregate area of all signs (wall, window,
awning, canopy, marquee, suspended, projecting, etc.) attached to the front
facade of a tenant space controlled by a single user shall not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the elevation area.
               (B)   Wall cabinet signs may not occupy more than five percent
(5%) or forty (40) square feet, whichever is less, of the primary wall. No
cabinet signs are permitted on a secondary wall.
               (C)   Wall signage which utilizes molded logos and individual
letters may occupy up to fifteen percent (15%) or six hundred (600) square
feet, whichever is less, of a primary wall, and five percent (5%) of a
secondary wall.
               (D)   Wall signs composed solely of individual raised letters
shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) or six hundred (600) square feet,
whichever is less, of a primary wall, and five percent (5%) of a secondary
wall.
            (2)   Standards for signs located on upper levels of multi-story
buildings:
               (A)   Shall be limited to one sign per building.
               (B)   Cabinet wall signs shall be prohibited on upper levels of
multi-story buildings.
               (C)   Upper level wall signs shall not comprise more than
seventy five percent (75%) of the building frontage in width and the following
in height:
                  (i)   Signs located above the second or third level: Thirty
six inches (36").
                  (ii)   Signs located above the fourth or fifth level: Forty
two inches (42").
                  (iii)   Signs located above the sixth through ninth level:
Forty eight inches (48").
                  (iv)   Signs located on the tenth level or above: Sixty
inches (60").
         c.   Location:
            (1)   No part of the sign or the sign structure shall project above
or below the highest or lowest part of the wall upon which the sign is mounted
or painted.
            (2)   Wall signs located above the ground floor on a multi-level
building shall be located on a vertical surface between the top of the windows
of the highest level of the building and the top of the building.
         d.   Number:
            (1)   Multiple signs on the primary facade are permitted provided
that there is a maximum of one cabinet wall sign.
         e.   Additional Application Information: Additional application
information required for all wall signs:
            (1)   Two (2) scaled elevation drawings showing square foot
dimensions of both the building and the sign, sign composition, type of
illumination and the relationship between the sign and building.
            (2)   Details of sign construction, electrical plan, and attachment
details with appropriate engineer's stamp(s). (Ord. 19-08, 7-17-2019)
      13.   Roof Flags:
         a.   General Provisions:
            (1)   Flags shall be made of high quality exterior grade fabric, or
other similar material as approved by City staff.
            (2)   Roof flags are limited to a maximum of two (2) per structure.
         b.   Area Of A Roof Flag:
            (1)   The shape of an individual roof flag shall be rectangular and
limited to fifty (50) square feet for each flag.
            (2)   The total area of a roof flag will be exempt from the maximum
permitted aggregate area for signs (see section
13.26.060 of this chapter).
         c.   Height:
            (1)   The maximum height for any flag and/or pole structure above
the roof plane is twelve feet (12').
            (2)   Roof plane is the topmost part of a structure's roof.
         d.   Location: Roof flags shall be located so as to accent roof or
architectural elements and shall be integrated into the design of the building.
         e.   Additional Application Information Required For Roof Flags:
            (1)   Two (2) copies of the scaled exterior elevation and roof plan
drawings showing the exterior building design and the roof flag(s), the type of
illumination, if provided, and the relationship between the roof flag and the
building. (Ord. 16-07, 6-1-2016)
13.26.100: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   A.   Standards For Temporary Signs: Temporary signs may not flash, blink, be
illuminated, spin, rotate, block traffic visibility, constitute a vehicular or
pedestrian traffic hazard, or cause a public nuisance of any kind. They shall
not be attached to utility poles, fences, or trees. They must be secured to a
building or the ground. Temporary signs may be attached to existing permanent
signs only for the grand opening period. Temporary signs may cover or obscure
an existing permanent sign only if the business has changed hands or changed
names. No off premises temporary signs are allowed except those specifically
noted and regulated for real estate purposes or otherwise noted in this
chapter.
   B.   Examples Of Typical Temporary Sign Types: It is intended that the
following images will serve to illustrate the terms being used within this
portion of this chapter and not to be comprehensive. Any sign not expressly
allowed by this chapter is prohibited.
   FIGURE 12
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3874.png]
   C.   Temporary Signs Allowed Without A Permit In All Zones:
      1.   Banners On Utility Poles: Banners on utility poles may be used on
developments within a planned shopping center, or planned development which has
more than eleven (11) acres and under the following guidelines. (See figure 13
of this section.)
   FIGURE 13
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3876.png]
         a.   Must be made of durable, weather resistant, material.
         b.   Must use logos or symbols instead of copy, where possible, where
copy would cause a distraction to vehicular traffic.
         c.   Shall be uniform in size and be no larger than three feet (3')
wide and six feet (6') tall.
         d.   The city must approve any banners to be placed on streetlights
within the public right of way.
      2.   Community Signs: Community signs require review by the community
development department and/or other pertinent city departments for compliance
with the following criteria:
         a.   May not be attached to another temporary or business sign or
traffic device.
         b.   May not exceed thirty two (32) square feet.
         c.   Signs attached to a building may be larger but must be
appropriate in scale and location and not pose a public safety risk as approved
by the director.
         d.   Such signs for any single purpose or event may not be displayed
for more than thirty (30) calendar days. However, the director may approve
community purpose signs for long term purposes subject to review on a ninety
(90) day basis.
      3.   Corporate Flags: Corporate flags may not exceed sixteen (16) square
feet. Flagpoles shall be of permanent construction and not exceed sixty feet
(60') in height or the maximum height of the zoning district, whichever is
less.
      4.   Holiday Decorations: Holiday decorations include noncommercial
displays of a primarily decorative nature, clearly incidental, customary, and
commonly associated with any national, local, or religious holidays. Such
displays may include any type, number, and area and shall be contained entirely
within the boundaries of the lot or premises on which they are erected. They
must be placed so as to avoid confusion with authorized traffic lights and
signals and shall conform to traffic safety standards. They shall be removed
within ten (10) calendar days after the respective holiday is over.
      5.   No Trespassing Or No Dumping Signs: One sign, not exceeding sixteen
(16) square feet, or four (4) signs not exceeding four (4) square feet each,
may be installed to prevent trespassing or unauthorized dumping on property.
The director may allow more signs, if appropriate, to prevent violation.
      6.   Temporary Signs With Noncommercial Messages: Temporary signs with
noncommercial message such as signs on behalf of candidates for public office
or measures on election ballots are allowed as follows:
         a.   Any one sign shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet in
aggregate area on an individual sign and one hundred twenty eight (128)
cumulative square feet for all signs on the property and, if freestanding,
shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height. Such signs shall not be erected in
a manner as to constitute a roof sign. Signs may not be placed on public
property, in a public right of way or in any place which would impede traffic
visibility or safety except as stated in subsection C6d of this section. Signs
on roadways without curb and gutter may not be placed closer than ten feet
(10') to the edge of the paved surface.
         b.   Temporary signs with noncommercial message may not be placed
closer than one hundred fifty feet (150') to a building where any official
voting station is located.
         c.   The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this chapter
may substitute noncommercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or
noncommercial copy. This substitution of copy may be made without any
additional approval or permit. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any
inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech or favoring
of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message.
Provisions prevail over any more specific provisions to the contrary.
         d.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, these provisions
do not ban handheld or personally attended, temporary signs with a
noncommercial message in or on a traditional public forum.
      7.   Public Necessity Signs: Signs installed by a unit of the government
for control of traffic and other regulatory purposes, including street signs,
danger and warning signs, railroad crossing signs, hospital signs, wayfinding
signs, directional or warning signs for public service companies, utilities or
institutions, or signs erected by or on the order of a public officer in the
performance of his public duty.
   D.   Temporary Signs Allowed Without A Sign Permit; Residential Districts:
      1.   On Premises Development Identification Signs:
         a.   Subdivisions, Planned Unit Developments, Multiple-Family Housing
Developments:
            (1)   One development promotional sign per street frontage may be
placed on the premises of each development having five (5) or more lots or
approved unit sites in any residential zone. The size allowed for the sign
depends on the number of lots to be developed as shown in the following table:
 
Number Of Units/Lots Maximum Size Of Sign
                     (Square Feet)
5 - 24               641
25 - 49              961
50 or more           1281
   Note:
      1.    Building permit required.
Additionally, four (4) temporary flags, not to exceed twenty four (24) square
feet, may be displayed at the entrance to such development. All temporary signs
shall be removed within two (2) years of the issuance of the first building
permit in the project, or if the lots are sold out before two (2) years,
immediately upon sale of the last lot. Maximum height for all temporary signs
is twelve feet (12').
            (2)   Three (3) directional signs may be allowed for a developer to
guide traffic to a site. They are limited to thirty two (32) square feet in
area and eight feet (8') in height and must be placed entirely upon private
property. These signs must have written permission of the property owner and be
presented to the director for approval before they are erected. The duration of
display shall be the same as on premises development promotional signs.
         b.   Construction And Service Company Identifier: One sign announcing
the name of the construction/development company is allowed on the site where
work is being performed by such company. Area of the sign may not exceed
sixteen (16) square feet nor six feet (6') in height. The sign may not be
erected more than five (5) days prior to the beginning of construction for
which a valid building permit has been issued. It must be removed before final
occupancy.
      2.   Residential Real Estate Signs, On Premises:
         a.   Signs advertising the sale, rent, or lease of property shall be
limited to one real estate sign on each lot. Each such sign shall not exceed
eight (8) square feet in size and six feet (6') in height. The sign shall not
be placed in any public right of way and shall be located outside the clear
vision area at street and driveway intersections.
         b.   One real estate sign per street frontage is allowed for any
multi-unit residential building or lot intended for such. It may not exceed
thirty two (32) square feet in area or eight feet (8') in height. Such signs
shall be constructed per the monument sign criteria herein and provide adequate
space to advertise vacancies.
         c.   Model home signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in
area or six feet (6') in height and shall be placed entirely upon the premises
of the model home.
      3.   Residential Real Estate, Temporary Off Premises Open House Signs:
         a.   For each open house, the number of signs allowed includes one
sign at the arterial street intersection closest in driving distance to the
property for sale, and from thence, one additional sign at each intersection
leading directly to the property. This regulation does not restrict other open
houses from occurring on the same street. (See figure 14 of this section.)
   FIGURE 14
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3878.png]
         b.   They may not exceed six (6) square feet in area per side and four
feet (4') in height. They shall not exceed three feet (3') in height if such
signs are placed in a park strip.
         c.   They shall be displayed only those hours during which the house
is open for actual inspection.
         d.   Such signs may be placed in the park strip only with the approval
of the person responsible for maintaining the landscaping of that park strip.
They may only be placed within front facing residential park strips and may not
be placed within park strip areas adjacent to back facing or side facing lots.
         e.   The open house signs shall be located outside the clear vision
area at any street or driveway intersection. (See section
13.26.050, figure 2 of this chapter.)
      4.   Charity And Community Signs: Signs which are associated with
charity, community, school, or church events and functions, which are clearly
of a temporary nature. The time and size restrictions in subsection C6 of this
section are applicable.
   E.   Temporary Signs Allowed Without A Permit; Nonresidential Zones:
      1.   Changing Copy: The changing of copy on a marquee, reader board,
electronic message center, or other replaceable copy area is allowed when such
is part of a permitted sign. Sign face changes are not included in this
category and as such require a permit.
      2.   Gas Island Advertisements: A single eight and one-half inch by
eleven inch (8.5" x 11") sign may be located at each gas island and must be
located directly on top of a gas dispenser. Lettering shall be no larger than
two inches (2") tall. (Ord. 15-13, 11-18-2015)
      3.   Window Signs: Window signs are allowed for ground floor tenants
only. They shall not be located as to block clear view of exits or entrances or
to create a safety hazard. The following shall also apply:
         a.   They shall not cover more than twenty five percent (25%) of any
single window, twenty five percent (25%) of the entire surface area of a group
of windows. (See figure 15 of this section.)
   FIGURE 15
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3880.png]
         b.   They shall not exceed sixty four (64) cumulative square feet nor
shall the window signs and wall signs combined exceed twenty percent (20%) of
the exterior wall area of the tenant.
         c.   Temporary window signs shall not be displayed for more than
thirty (30) calendar days. (Ord. 19-08, 7-17-2019)
      4.   Business Identification: Upon application for permanent signage, one
banner, not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet, attached to the building/
lease space is allowed until permanent signage can be installed, maximum ninety
(90) calendar days from date of occupancy.
      5.   Road Construction Periods: Businesses with frontage immediately
adjacent to a road right-of-way construction zone may have one banner not to
exceed thirty two (32) square feet nor five feet (5') in height during periods
of construction within the road right-of-way. The signs shall be located on
site and may be in landscape areas abutting the right-of-way or on the
building. They must be removed immediately upon restoration of normal traffic
flow on the affected right-of-way.
      6.   Temporary Businesses: Temporary businesses are allowed only two (2)
temporary signs under the following conditions:
         a.   The two (2) signs may only be banners and/or portable signs.
         b.   Banners may not exceed thirty two (32) square feet and portable
signs must comply with the size and area requirements for portable signs
allowed without a permit and shall not be allowed in the public right-of-way.
      7.   Development Identification Signs, On Premises: One sign announcing
or identifying the future development of commercial or industrial property is
allowed per public or private street frontage. The sign(s) may not be erected
before the proposed development has been submitted for site plan review. They
must be removed before permanent signs are installed. The size of the sign
depends on the number of acres involved in the project.
 
Acreage Of Development Maximum Size Of Sign Maximum Height
   0 to 4.9         64 sq. ft.           10'
   5 to 9.9         128 sq. ft.          10'
   10 or more       256 sq. ft.          10'
 
      8.   Real Estate Signs, On Premises:
         a.   One on premises real estate sign advertising the sale or lease of
property is allowed per street frontage for any commercial, office, or
industrial planned center, building, lease space, or lot intended for such use
based on the following guidelines and must be attached to the vacant building
or property.
 
Size Of Property   Maximum Size Maximum Height
   Lease space  24 sq. ft.   8'
   Pad in a cent24 sq. ft.   8'
   2 or less acr32 sq. ft.   12'
   Over 2 acres 64 sq. ft.   15'
 
      9.   Portable Signs: One portable sign is allowed per business under the
following guidelines:
         a.   The sign is entirely outside of roadways, on site drive aisles,
or designated parking areas. The sign shall be located either in a pedestrian
or landscape area within ten feet (10') of the building, at least five feet
(5') behind the public sidewalk, and within the extent of the business face.
(See figure 16 of this section.)
   FIGURE 16
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3882.png]
         b.   The sign shall not be closer than thirty (30) horizontal feet to
another portable sign.
         c.   A six foot (6') wide clear path area on the existing hard surface
shall be maintained, and such sign shall not obstruct any pedestrian or
wheelchair access, including, but not limited to, access from the sidewalk to
any of the following:
            (1)   Transit stop areas.
            (2)   Designated disabled parking spaces.
            (3)   Disabled access ramps.
            (4)   Building exits including fire escapes.
         d.   The sign shall not exceed two feet (2') in width or 3.5 feet in
height (see figure 17 of this section) except feather signs which may not
exceed ten feet (10') in height.
   FIGURE 17
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3884.png]
         e.   No signs may be placed within the public right of way.
      10.   Holiday Promotional Periods: A business may advertise a special
service, product, or sale during the following holiday periods without a
permit. Only one banner sign not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet is
allowed during these periods. Such must be secured to the building and removed
by the end of the first working day after the associated holiday.
 
Holiday Period                         Permitted Display Time
Presidents' Day and Valentine's Day -  5 days including the holiday
February
Easter - March or April                5 days including the holiday
Memorial Day - May                     5 days including the holiday
July 4 and July 24                     5 days including the holidays
Labor Day - September                  5 days including the holiday
Thanksgiving, Hanukkah, Christmas, New 5 days prior to Thanksgiving through
Year's                                 January 2
 
   F.   Temporary Signs Requiring A Permit; Nonresidential Districts: Temporary
signs displayed during the following promotional periods require a temporary
sign permit and may not be prolonged by those above periods allowed without a
permit.
      1.   Grand Opening: Temporary signs announcing the initial opening of a
business or the relocation or change of ownership of an existing business may
be allowed within the first year of operation for a period not to exceed forty
five (45) calendar days. A combination of banners, wind signs, inflatables,
beacon lights, portable, and mobile signs may be used. The signs must be
removed at the end of the forty five (45) day period.
      2.   Special Promotions: A business may apply for up to three (3) special
promotion periods during the calendar year. Each period may not exceed seven
(7) days in length. A single banner not exceeding thirty two (32) square feet
(1 per street frontage) is allowed during this period. It must be attached to
the business structure/lease space. These periods may run consecutively.
      3.   Going Out Of Business/Bankruptcy: A business may apply for a special
permit in order to facilitate the liquidation of in stock inventory for a
failing business for a period not to exceed ninety (90) calendar days. This
permit is allowed only once for any business license. A single banner or
portable sign is allowed during this period. (Ord. 15-13, 11-18-2015)
13.26.110: SIGN PERMIT PROCESS:
   A.   Temporary Signs:
      1.   Plot plan showing relationship of sign(s) to buildings, property
lines, setback from public rights of way, intersections, easements, and
driveways.
      2.   Length of period for display.
      3.   Type of request, e.g., grand opening, special promotions, etc.
   B.   Required Inspections And Tags:
      1.   Permanent Signs: All permanent signs containing electrical
components, footings, engineering, or as otherwise required by the chief
building official shall receive final inspections by an authorized building
official to certify that the placement and construction of such sign is in
conformance with representations made in permit applications, and that work is
completed and meets all applicable building and safety codes and conditions of
approval.
      2.   Temporary Signs: Temporary signs for which a permit is required and
has been approved shall have attached thereto a city issued tag recognizing the
temporary nature of its approval. Such tags shall be displayed for the duration
of the city approved period. Inspections shall be made to ensure that the sign
is in conformance with representations made in permit applications, and that
all applicable codes, standards, and conditions of approval are met.
   C.   Penalties For Installing Signs Without Permits Or Inspections: New or
existing signs installed or maintained without a required permit or the
required inspections will be required to be removed or assessed a penalty fee
established by the city. (Ord. 15-13, 11-18-2015)
13.26.120: SIGN REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in this chapter, the more
restrictive requirements for signs shall prevail. Signs for sexually oriented
businesses shall be limited as follows:
   A.   No more than one exterior wall sign, not to exceed eighteen (18) square
feet, shall be allowed.
   B.   No animation shall be permitted on or around any sign or on the
exterior walls or roof of such premises.
   C.   No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to or
inferring the nature of the business shall be allowed on any sign. Said signs
shall contain alphanumeric copy only.
   D.   No display, decoration, sign, or show window that provides the
observation of material depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas is allowed.
   E.   Painted wall advertising is not allowed.
   F.   The sexually oriented business shall not construct or allow to be
constructed any temporary sign, banner, light, or other device exhibiting or
describing "specific sexual activities" or specific anatomical areas. (Ord. 15-
13, 11-18-2015)
13.26.130: NEWSPAPER OR PERIODICAL RACKS AND STANDS:
   A.   Intent And Purpose:
      1.   Protection Of Public Health, Morals, And Welfare: The provisions and
prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the
purpose of securing and promoting the public health, morals, and general
welfare of persons in the city in their use of public rights of way through the
regulation of placement, appearance, number, size, and servicing of newsracks
on the public rights of way and private property so as to:
         a.   Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience.
         b.   Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic, including ingress to or egress from any place of business
or from the street to the sidewalk.
         c.   Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of
sidewalks, piles, posts, traffic signs and signals, hydrants, mailboxes,
landscaping, and similar appurtenances, and access to locations used for public
transportation purposes.
         d.   Reduce visual blight on the public rights of way, protect the
aesthetics and value of surrounding properties, and protect the quiet of
residential areas.
         e.   Protect the right to distribute information protected by the
United States and the Utah state constitutions through the use of newsracks.
      2.   Preservation Of Constitutional Rights: It is not the intent of this
chapter to in any way discriminate against, regulate, or interfere with the
publication, circulation, distribution, or dissemination of any printed
material that is constitutionally protected.
   B.   Newsracks Prohibited:
      1.   No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack which
projects onto, into, or rests, wholly or in part, upon the roadway of any
public street.
      2.   No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack which in
whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk:
         a.   When such installation, use, or maintenance endangers the safety
of persons or property.
         b.   When such site or location is used for public utility or public
transportation purposes or other governmental use.
         c.   When such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including parked or stopped vehicles;
the ingress in or egress from any residence or place of business; the use of
poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects
permitted at or near said location.
         d.   When such newsrack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk
by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery.
         e.   When such newsrack does not allow a minimum sidewalk clearance of
six feet (6') in width or depth.
         f.   In any other manner inconsistent with or in violation of the
provisions of this title.
   C.   Newsracks Permitted:
      1.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to erect, place, maintain, or operate on any public street,
sidewalk, or in any other public way or place in the city any newsrack without
first having obtained a permit from the community development department
specifying the exact location and construction and appearance details of such
newsrack.
      2.   Application For Permit: Application for such permit shall be made in
writing to the community development department upon such form as shall be
provided and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the proposed
specific location of said newsrack, including plot plan, the structural design
and color of the newsrack, listing of other joint distributors within the
newsrack, a hold harmless agreement, proof of insurance, and shall be signed by
the applicant. All applications shall be accompanied by payment of the newsrack
fee, as set by the city council. The fee is per location, not per application.
      3.   Condition For Permit: Such permits shall be valid for three (3)
years and shall be renewable pursuant to the procedure for original
applications and upon payment of the application fee.
      4.   Hold Harmless Agreement: Every owner of a newsrack who places or
maintains a newsrack on a public sidewalk or other public property in the city
shall file a written statement with the community development department in a
form satisfactory to the city attorney, whereby such owner agrees to indemnify
and hold harmless the city, its officers, and employees, from any loss,
liability, or damage, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal
injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the
installation, use, and/or maintenance of a newsrack.
   D.   Newsrack Identification Required: Every person or other entity which
places or maintains a newsrack on a public sidewalk or other public property of
the city shall have his or its name, address, and telephone number affixed
thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. However, such
information shall not take up space on the rack in excess of six (6) square
inches.
   E.   Location And Placement: Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part
upon, or on any portion of a public right of way or which projects onto, into,
or over any part of a public right of way shall be located in accordance with
the following provisions:
      1.   No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into,
or over any part of the roadway or any public street, or which rests wholly or
in part upon, along, or over any portion of the roadway or park strip of any
public street.
      2.   No newsrack shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any
fixture located in the public right of way, or any post, pole, semaphore, or
governmental sign which may be adjacent to the right of way. Such prohibition
includes all public utility poles, all streetlight poles, and other facilities
placed and maintained by local, state, or federal governmental authorities.
         a.   No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used, or maintained:
            (1)   Within five feet (5') of any marked crosswalk.
            (2)   Within fifteen feet (15') of the curb return of any unmarked
crosswalk.
            (3)   Within five feet (5') of any fire hydrant or other emergency
facility.
            (4)   Within five feet (5') of any driveway.
            (5)   Within three feet (3') ahead or twenty five feet (25') to the
rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop.
            (6)   Within five feet (5') of the outer end of any bus bench
enclosure.
            (7)   At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet (6').
            (8)   Within three feet (3') of or on any public area improved with
lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees, or other landscaping, or within three feet (3')
of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or park strip or in
such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window
for display purposes.
            (9)   Within one hundred feet (100') of any other newsrack on the
same side of the street in the same block containing the same issue or edition
of the same publication.
            (10)   No newsrack shall be erected near any driveway or
intersection for vehicular traffic within a triangular area formed by the
intersection of straight lines extended from the back of curb (or a future
curb) and a line connecting them at points sixty feet (60') from the
intersection of the lines. Deviations from these requirements must be reviewed
and approved by the city engineer. (See section
13.26.050, figure 2 of this chapter.)
            (11)   On any access ramp for disabled persons.
      3.   For locations upon private property, the newsrack shall be placed
adjacent to the building and be located near or at the main entrance to the
facility. They shall not be placed in such a manner to act as a billboard or
similar off premises advertising sign.
   F.   Newsrack And Stand Design: No newsrack shall extend above fifty six
inches (56") in height. All newsracks shall use dark brown or dark green
coloring. Should the placement of more than one newspaper or periodical be
desired, they will all be contained in one unit holding up to six (6)
newspapers or periodicals. Should more than six (6) newspapers or periodicals
be desired, another rack or stand may be used. Individual periodical
dispensers/racks may not be placed next to one another. (See subsection H of
this section for adjacent placement requirements.) (See figure 18 of this
section.)
   G.   Examples Of Acceptable Rack And Stand Design: (See figure 18 of this
section.)
   FIGURE 18
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3886.png]
   H.   Adjacent Placement Requirements: Newsracks may be placed next to each
other provided there are more than six (6) newspapers or periodicals that
cannot be placed in one unit, with not more than six inches (6") separating
each newsrack. No more than two (2) 6-unit newsracks shall be located on any
public right of way within a space of two hundred feet (200') in any direction
within the same block.
   I.   Advertising Cards: No newsrack shall be used for advertising or display
purposes except that newsrack cards may be used to advertise the publication
sold therein, and the name of the publication may appear on the display window.
   J.   Standards For Maintenance And Installation: Any newsrack which in whole
or in part rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk or parkway shall comply
with the following standards:
      1.   No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity
purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale, or purchase of the
newspaper or news periodical sold or distributed therein.
      2.   Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in the event
the person is unable to receive the paid for publication. The coin return
mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.
      3.   Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so
as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting forth the name and
address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone
service to call to report a malfunction, to secure a refund in the event of a
malfunction of the coin return mechanism, or to give the notices provided for
in this title.
      4.   Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and
in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so that:
         a.   It is reasonably free of dirt and grease.
         b.   It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked
paint in the visible painted areas thereof.
         c.   It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible
unpainted metal areas thereon.
         d.   The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which
the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks,
dents, blemishes, and discoloration.
         e.   The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably
free of tears, peeling, or fading.
         f.   The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
         g.   It is free of graffiti or other vandalism.
   K.   Display Of Certain Matter Prohibited: Publications offered for sale or
free distribution from newsracks placed or maintained on or projecting over the
street or sidewalk shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which
exposes to public view from the street or sidewalk any of the following:
      1.   Any publication or material which exposes to public view any
pictorial material that is obscene.
      2.   Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual
organs, or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or
effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront.
      3.   Any picture or illustration of a person's genitals, pubic hair,
perineum, anus, or anal region where such picture or illustration has as its
purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront.
      4.   Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts as
defined in this title where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or
effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront.
   L.   Violations: Upon determination by the director that a newsrack has been
installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this title, an
order to correct the offending condition shall be issued to the distributor of
the newsrack.
Such order shall be telephoned or made in person to the distributor and
confirmed by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail return receipt
requested. The order shall specifically describe the offending condition,
suggest actions necessary to correct the condition, and inform the newsrack
distributor of the right to appeal. Failure to properly correct the offending
condition within five (5) days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal
holidays) after the mailing date of the order or to appeal the order within
three (3) days after its receipt shall result in the offending newsrack being
summarily removed and processed as unclaimed property. If the offending
newsrack is not properly identified as to the owner under the provisions
described herein, it shall be removed immediately and processed as unclaimed
property. An impound fee, which shall be measured by the city's cost and
expense of impounding, shall be assessed against each newsrack summarily
removed. The director shall cause inspection to be made of the corrected
condition or of a newsrack reinstalled after removal under this section.
   M.   Appeals: Any appeal shall be filed in accordance with the appeals
chapter of this code.
   N.   Abandonment: In the event that a newsrack remains empty for a period of
thirty (30) continuous days, the same shall be deemed abandoned and may be
treated in the manner as provided in this chapter for newsracks in violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
   O.   Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase
of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 15-13, 11-18-
2015)
CHAPTER 13.27
GRADING AND EXCAVATING
SECTION:
13.27.010: Purpose
13.27.020: Application For Grading And Excavating Permit
13.27.030: Final Review And Approval
13.27.040: Distribution And Use Of Approved Plans
13.27.050: Compliance With Permit Requirements And Plans
13.27.060: Modification Of Approved Plans
13.27.070: Responsibility Of The Developer
13.27.080: Design Standards
13.27.090: Soil Erosion/Blowing Dust As A Public Nuisance
13.27.100: Guarantee For Improvements Required
13.27.110: Reports And Construction Requirements And Procedures
13.27.120: Prohibitions And Exemptions
13.27.130: Appeals
13.27.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum requirements for grading,
filling, and excavation work, and the procedures by which these requirements
may be complied with and enforced.
Compliance with the regulations of this chapter in no sense excuses the
developer from the applicable requirements outlined elsewhere in this code, the
international building code (IBC), the international residential code (IRC), or
any more restrictive provisions of covenants, agreements, or other ordinances
or laws, or from obtaining any easements or authorization for grading on
property not owned by the developer. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.27.020: APPLICATION FOR GRADING AND EXCAVATING PERMIT:
   A.   Applications for a grading and excavating permit shall be filed in
writing by the property owner or legally authorized agent thereof with the
director.
   B.   The application shall include grading, cutting, filling, and excavating
plans submitted by a professional engineer licensed by the state of Utah. The
plans shall be stamped, signed, and dated. In addition, any required fees, as
adopted by the city council, must be paid.
   C.   A separate application and permit are required for work to be done on
each individual project site. If grading, filling, or excavation occurs prior
to obtaining a permit, it shall be subject to penalties and abatement
procedures, except as otherwise specified.
   D.   In granting any permit, the director or his representative may attach
conditions deemed necessary to prevent creation of a nuisance or hazard to
public or private property and to assure completion of the grading, including,
but not limited to:
      1.   Improvement of any existing grading to bring it up to the standards
of this chapter or the recommendations of the city engineer.
      2.   Requirements for fencing or protection of grading that would
otherwise be hazardous.
      3.   Dust, mud, erosion control, revegetation, noise control, hours of
operation, sequence of work, weather condition requirements, and haul routes.
      4.   Time allowed for the work to be completed.
      5.   Restoration of site to acceptable grade and conditions.
      6.   Construction staking.
      7.   Posting of guarantee for improvements. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.27.030: FINAL REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Submission To Director: A complete set of plans, including profiles,
cross sections, and specifications, shall be submitted to the director with
each application for a grading permit and when otherwise required by the
director for enforcement of any provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Review By City Engineer: Before a final grading permit may be issued by
the director, the final grading plans and application must be reviewed and
approved by the city engineer and any other departments or commissions deemed
necessary to ensure that all applicable engineering standards and building code
requirements have been met.
   C.   Issuance Of Permit: When the final plans have been approved as provided
and ordinance requirements met, a grading permit may be issued by the director.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.27.040: DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF APPROVED PLANS:
The applicant shall supply reproductions of approved, stamped, and dated plans
for use by the project work crew. One or more sets of approved plans shall be
retained on the site at all times during the work. If work is performed without
the latest revised set of approved, stamped, and dated plans at the work site,
a stop work order may be issued by the city engineer or building official
causing work to cease. The stop work order will remain until such time as
approved, stamped, and dated plans are obtained, and the order is released.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.27.050: COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND PLANS:
The developer shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and all applicable laws, codes, and standards. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.27.060: MODIFICATION OF APPROVED PLANS:
   A.   Proposed modifications that substantially change the location or scope
of grading shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the director and
city engineer prior to modification.
   B.   All necessary soils and geological information and design details shall
accompany any proposal to modify the approved grading plans.
The modification shall be compatible with any subdivision plat or land use
requirements. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.27.070: RESPONSIBILITY OF THE DEVELOPER:
   A.   Protection Of Utilities: The developer shall be responsible for the
prevention of damage to any public utilities or services.
   B.   Protection Of Adjacent Property: The developer shall be responsible for
the prevention of damage to adjacent property.
   C.   Notice To Proceed: The developer shall notify the director and city
engineer at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the start of work.
   D.   Temporary Erosion Control: The developer shall put into effect and
maintain all precautionary measures necessary to protect adjacent watercourses
and public or private property from damage by water erosion, blowing dust,
flooding, or deposition of mud or debris originating from the site. For all
projects that are 1.0 acre in size or larger, a Utah pollutant discharge
elimination system (UPDES notice of intent) permit from the Utah department of
environmental quality water division and evidence of the notice of intent shall
be provided to the city engineer.
   E.   Permit To Work In Public Right Of Way: The developer shall obtain a
separate permit from the city for any work performed within a city right of
way. Permits for work in other public rights of way shall be obtained from the
appropriate authority.
   F.   Traffic Control And Protection Of Streets: The developer shall submit a
traffic control plan that complies with all applicable city ordinances, state
laws, and the current edition of the "Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and provide flagmen, signs, barricades, etc., to ensure adequate
safety when working in or near public streets.
   G.   Hazards From Existing Grading: Whenever the director and city engineer
determine that any existing excavation, cut, or fill has become a hazard to
persons or property, or adversely affects the safety, use, or stability of a
public right of way or drainage channel, the developer/owner of the property
upon which the excavation, cut, or fill is located, or other person or agent in
control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the director
or city engineer, shall within the period specified therein repair,
reconstruct, or remove such excavations, cut, or fill to eliminate the hazard.
The director or city engineer shall have authority to cause any situation
deemed by the city to be a hazard resulting from such grading to be remedied to
the satisfaction of the director or city engineer. The party responsible for
grading shall promptly pay the city for any costs or expenses incurred by the
city for such work. If payment is not received within thirty (30) days of
notice, the city may make demand upon the guarantee that was required prior to
issuance of any grading permit.
   H.   Tracking Of Dirt Onto Public Streets: The developer shall provide for
adequate cleaning of equipment to prevent the tracking of dirt and debris onto
public streets and shall be responsible for cleaning streets in a manner and at
intervals as required by the city engineer.
   I.   Maintenance Of Waterway And Irrigation Canals: The developer shall take
all necessary measures to protect and maintain the flow of waterways and
irrigation canals. The developer shall obtain any permit required by the
jurisdictional authority for the waterway or canal.
   J.   Inspections: The developer shall schedule periodic inspections. (Ord.
12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.27.080: DESIGN STANDARDS:
The following shall be considered to be the minimum required standards for
cuts, fills, drainage, dust, mud control, erosion control, revegetation, and
maintenance unless otherwise determined by the city engineer upon review of the
plans.
   A.   Cuts:
      1.   Maximum Slope:
         a.   Cuts shall not be steeper in slope than two horizontal to one
vertical (2:1) unless a soils engineering and an engineering geology report is
filed with the director certifying that the site has been investigated and
indicates that the proposed steeper slope will be stable and will not endanger
any private or public property or result in the harmful deposition of debris on
any public or private property and any public right of way or interfere with
any existing drainage course.
         b.   The director and city engineer may require the excavation to be
made with a cut face flatter in slope than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1)
for stability and safety. Cut slopes shall be rounded into the existing terrain
to produce a contoured transition from cut face to natural ground.
      2.   Drainage Terraces: Cut slopes exceeding thirty feet (30') in
vertical height shall have drainage terraces at vertical intervals not
exceeding twenty five feet (25'). Where only one terrace is required, it shall
be at approximately mid height unless some other location is approved by the
director and city engineer. The design and construction of the drainage
terraces shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and applicable laws,
codes, or standards.
      3.   Expansive Soils: If during the grading operation expansive soil is
found within two feet (2') of the finished lot grade of any area intended or
designed as the location for a building, the expansive soil shall be removed
from such building area to a depth specified by a licensed professional civil
engineer and replaced with properly compacted nonexpansive soil. The city
engineer may approve other procedures such as footing designs or floor slab
designs certified by a professional engineer to alleviate any problem created
by such expansive soil.
      4.   100-Year Storm: No cut shall be allowed in a natural drainage course
without a mitigation plan indicating the allowable passage of a 100-year storm
that has been approved by the appropriate agency.
   B.   Fills:
      1.   Layers: Fills shall be constructed in layers and conform with
applicable laws, codes, or standards. Completed fills shall be stable masses of
well integrated material bonded to adjacent materials and to the materials on
which they rest. Fills shall be competent to support anticipated loads and be
stable at the design slopes shown on the plans. Proper drainage and other
appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure the continuing integrity of
fills.
      2.   Compaction: All fills shall be compacted throughout their full
extent and conform with applicable laws, codes, or standards. The developer
shall perform sufficient tests as determined by the city engineer to assure
compliance with the provisions of the city standards. The city engineer may
require that an investigation be made by a soils laboratory to establish the
characteristics of the soil, the amount of settlement to be expected, and the
susceptibility of the soil to erosion or slippage.
      3.   Preparation Of Ground To Receive Fill: The natural ground surface
shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill,
topsoil, or other deleterious material, and where slopes are five horizontal to
one vertical (5:1) or steeper by benching into competent material. The
lowermost bench shall be at least ten feet (10') wide, except where recommended
by the city engineer. Subdrains shall be provided under all fills placed in
natural drainage courses and in other locations where seepage is evident. Such
subdrainage systems shall be of a material and design approved by the city
engineer and acceptable to the director. No fill shall be allowed in a natural
drainage course without a mitigation plan approved by the appropriate agency.
      4.   Fill Slopes: No fill shall be made which creates an exposed surface
steeper in average slope than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1), exclusive
of benches and rounds described herein, unless permitted by the director and
city engineer after receipt of a report by a licensed professional civil
engineer based on appropriate laboratory tests certifying the steeper slope
will be stable and will support erosion control plantings, when required by the
city. The director and city engineer may require that the fill be constructed
with an exposed surface flatter than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1), or
may require such other measures as they deem necessary for stability and
safety. Fill slopes shall be rounded into existing terrain to produce a
contoured transition from fill face to natural ground and abutting cut or fill
surfaces where conditions permit.
      5.   Fill Material: No organic material shall be permitted in fills. Rock
or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than twelve
inches (12") shall not be buried or placed in fills within two feet (2') of a
finished grade. When such greater sized material is placed in fills, it shall
be done in accordance with specifications prepared by the city engineer.
      6.   Drainage Terraces: Fill slopes exceeding thirty feet (30') in
vertical height shall have drainage terraces at vertical intervals not
exceeding twenty five feet (25'). Where only one terrace is required, it shall
be at approximately mid height unless some other location is approved by the
director and city engineer. Such drainage terraces shall be at least six feet
(6') wide and shall be designed and constructed to provide a swale or ditch
having a minimum depth of one foot (1') and a longitudinal grade of not less
than four percent (4%) or more than twelve percent (12%). There shall be no
reduction in grade along the direction of flow unless the velocity of flow is
such that slope debris will remain in suspension on the reduced grade. Down
drains or drainage outlets shall be provided at approximately three hundred
foot (300') intervals along the drainage terrace or an equivalent location.
Down drains and drainage outlets shall be of approved materials and of adequate
capacity to convey the intercepted waters to the point of disposal. The
terrace, including the swale or ditch, shall be protected from erosion by a
drainageway that discharges into a safe disposal area. If the drainage
discharges onto natural ground, adequate erosion protection shall be provided.
      7.   Slopes To Receive Fill: Fill placed on the top of an existing or
proposed cut or natural slope shall be set back a minimum distance of three
feet (3') measured horizontally from the edge of the cut or slope.
   FIGURE 1
   SLOPES TO RECEIVE FILL
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3888.png]
      8.   Expansive Soils: In areas intended or designed to support buildings,
expansive soil shall not be placed within two feet (2') of the finished grade
unless recommended by a licensed professional civil engineer based on
laboratory tests and the certification that a design of footings or floor slab
or other procedure will alleviate problems created by placing the expansive
soil within such building areas as reviewed and approved by the director and
city engineer.
   C.   Drainage/Disposal Requirements: All drainage facilities shall be
designed to carry surface and subsurface waters to the nearest practical
street, storm drain, or natural watercourse as approved by the director and
city engineer. Adequate provisions shall be made to avoid damage to adjacent
and downstream properties. The following additional restrictions also shall
apply:
      1.   Water shall not pond above cut or fill slopes or on drainage
terraces. Adequate drainage facilities shall be provided to prevent such
ponding.
      2.   Areas designed for buildings shall be graded to provide for at least
a two percent (2%) slope away from the building for a minimum of six feet (6').
      3.   All drainage facilities shall be capable of handling runoff from a
10-year storm event, except retention or detention facilities which shall
handle runoffs from a 100-year storm event. In natural drainage areas, the
drainage facility shall be capable of handling runoff from a 100-year storm.
The 100-year design flow channel shall be designed to carry water in the
roadways or large natural channels where property damage will be minimized.
      4.   All provisions of the most current city stormwater ordinance shall
be complied with.
   D.   Erosion Control:
      1.   Slope Protection: Provisions shall be made to minimize damage to the
face of cuts and fills. Downslopes shall be protected from surface water runoff
from above by dikes, swales, cutoff ditches, or other facilities approved by
the director and city engineer.
      2.   Dikes, Swales, And Ditches: When required, dikes, swales, ditches,
or other methods approved by the director and/or the city engineer shall be
designed and constructed to control runoff and erosion from graded areas. Where
concentrated drainage discharges onto natural ground, effective measures shall
be taken to dissipate the energy and, where practical, release the accumulated
waters as sheet flow unless the discharge is directed into a storm sewer or
natural watercourse. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.27.090: SOIL EROSION/BLOWING DUST AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   A.   Declaration Of Nuisance: Any soil erosion caused by wind and dust
storms produced thereby and blowing of dust, soil, and sand are hereby declared
to be destructive of property and natural resources of the city and are harmful
to the health and well being of the residents of the city. The city council
does hereby declare conditions causing, allowing, or maintaining blowing dust,
soil, or sand to be public nuisances.
   B.   Duty Of Landowner: To conserve property and the natural resources of
the city and to prevent injurious effects of blowing dust, soil, or sand, it is
the duty of the owner of real property and all responsible parties to prevent
by appropriate means the blowing of dust, soil, or sand.
   C.   Action By City Engineer: When the city engineer is advised of blowing
dust, soil, or sand and is supplied with a description of such nuisance, or
when by reason of such blowing, the streets or other public property are
damaged, the city engineer is authorized to immediately inspect or cause to be
inspected the source of such blowing dust.
      1.   Should the city engineer determine that such blowing is injurious to
persons, property, streets, public property, or public health and convenience,
the city engineer shall then determine what may be done to prevent or lessen
such nuisance.
      2.   Should the city engineer determine that such blowing dust, soil, or
sand can be prevented or lessened, he is hereby authorized to issue an order to
the responsible party specifying the nature of the nuisance, the treatment
required, the extent thereof, the date by which such treatment is to be
commenced, and the date such treatment is to be completed.
      3.   Notice of such order shall be served on the responsible party.
   D.   Method Of Enforcement: If the treatment ordered by the city engineer is
not performed in a timely manner and to the extent specified in the order, and
if no appeal is made; or, if it is not performed in the manner to the extent
and within the time specified in the order or amendment thereof or within three
(3) days of any decision as a result of an appeal of an order issued by the
city engineer, the city attorney may bring an action for abatement of the
blowing condition.
   E.   Revegetation:
      1.   Vegetation Loss: The loss of trees, ground cover, and topsoil shall
be minimized on any grading project. In addition to mechanical methods of
erosion control, graded areas shall be protected to the extent practical from
damage by erosion by planting grass or ground cover plants and trees. Such
plantings shall provide for rapid, short term coverage of the areas as well as
long term permanent coverage. A plan by a landscape architect may be required
by the director and/or the city engineer.
      2.   Timing Of Planting: Weather permitting, the planting shall be
completed not more than thirty (30) calendar days after completion of the
grading or a portion thereof on large projects.
      3.   Vegetation Removal: If the project is abandoned after vegetation
removal has taken place, the area shall be planted as provided herein. If the
work is suspended for an extended period, the director and/or the city engineer
may require the developer to provide temporary planting as needed to control
wind and water erosion.
         a.   All areas on development sites cleared of natural vegetation in
the course of construction of off site improvements shall be replanted with
vegetation that has good erosion control characteristics.
         b.   No vegetation shall be removed on a continuous hillside, crest
(upslope or downslope) or a slope thirty percent (30%) or greater unless
otherwise determined by the planning commission upon recommendation of the city
engineer for uses such as trails and open space improvements. Any revegetation
of such a hillside shall have the approval of the city engineer.
         c.   All disturbed soil surfaces shall be stabilized or covered prior
to November 1. If the planned impervious surfaces, e.g., road, driveways, etc.,
cannot be established prior to November 1, a temporary treatment adequate to
prevent erosion shall be installed on those surfaces.
         d.   The property owner and/or developer shall be fully responsible
for any destruction of native or applied vegetation identified as necessary for
retention and shall be responsible for such destroyed vegetation. They shall
carry the responsibility both for employees and subcontractors from the first
day of construction until the final acceptance of improvements. The property
owner and developer shall replace all destroyed vegetation with varieties of
vegetation approved by the planning commission. The property owner shall assume
coresponsibility with the developer upon purchase of the lot.
   F.   Maintenance:
      1.   Irrigation: Areas required to be planted shall be provided with an
approved system of irrigation where needed for planting propagation and
continued maintenance. The plans shall be submitted and approved as a part of
the grading permit. If hose bibs are installed, they must be at conveniently
accessible locations where a hose no longer than fifty feet (50') is necessary
for irrigation.
      2.   Irrigation System Modification: The requirement for a permanent
irrigation system may be modified upon the recommendation of a landscape
architect based on the type of plants selected, the planting methods, and the
soil and climatic conditions at the site as approved by the director and/or the
city engineer.
      3.   Establishment Of Planting: The planting and irrigation system
required by this section shall be installed as soon as practical after rough
grading. Prior to final approval of grading and before the release of the
guarantee for improvements, the planting shall be well established.
      4.   Other Standards: The director and city engineer may adopt other
supplementary engineering standards as may be appropriate for the carrying out
of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.27.100: GUARANTEE FOR IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
A guarantee shall be required to assure performance of the work on the project.
A permit shall not be issued for grading and excavating unless the permittee
first posts a guarantee in a form acceptable to the city in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of the required work as determined by the city
engineer. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.27.110: REPORTS AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Reports:
      1.   Soils Engineering Report: The city engineer may require a soils
engineering investigation and a report by a qualified engineer based on the
most recent grading plan. Such report shall include laboratory tests and data
regarding the nature, distribution, and strength of existing soils; conclusions
and recommendations for grading procedures; and design criteria for corrective
measures.
      2.   Engineering Geologic Report: Based on the proposed grading and land
use plan(s) and geologic hazard maps, the director and/or city engineer may
require an engineering geologic investigation prior to issuing the permit. When
required, the engineering geologic report shall include an adequate description
of the geology of the site and conclusions and recommendations regarding the
effect of geologic conditions on the proposed grading and land use. Reports may
include fault studies, rockfall studies and other studies as needed.
      3.   Reports Approved By The City Engineer: All reports shall be subject
to the approval of the city engineer, including supplemental reports and data
as may be required by the city engineer. Recommendations included in the
reports and approved by the city engineer shall be incorporated in the grading
plans or specifications.
      4.   Final Reports: The city engineer may require final reports
including, but not limited to, certification of slope stability and soil
bearing capacity, summaries of field and laboratory tests, locations of tests,
recommendations regarding building restrictions or foundation setbacks, and
other information determined to be necessary by the director and/or the city
engineer. The final soils or engineering geologic report shall be based on the
"as built" grading plan and shall specifically contain approval of the grading
as affected by soils or geologic factors. A revised geologic map and cross
sections may be required.
   B.   Construction Requirements And Procedures:
      1.   Authorization Of Private Civil Engineer To Inspect The Work: Upon
request, the director and/or city engineer may authorize a private licensed
professional civil engineer to perform the inspection work and certify
compliance with the approved plans and render any required reports. The
permittee shall make his own contractual arrangements for such engineering
services and be responsible for payment of all costs.
      2.   Changes In Plans: The permittee shall cause the work to be done in
accordance with the approved plans and any instructions or recommendations by
the private engineer. If, during the course of construction, the engineer finds
that the work is not being done in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications, he shall immediately notify the person in charge of the work
and the director and city engineer in writing of the nonconformity and the
corrective measures to be taken. When changes in the plans are required, he
shall prepare such proposed changes and submit them to the director and city
engineer for approval.
      3.   Notification Of Work Completion: When the grading work has been
completed, the director and the city engineer shall be notified. Final approval
and release of the guarantee for improvements shall not be granted until all
the work has been completed and the "as built" grading plan and any required
reports have been submitted and approved by the director and city engineer.
      4.   Guarantee For Improvements: The city engineer, with concurrence of
the director, may release the guarantee for improvements with the exception of
that portion held for guarantee and warranty of the work upon satisfactory
completion and inspection of the approved grading or excavation. (Ord. 12-15,
7-11-2012)
13.27.120: PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   Prohibitions: No person shall do any grading, cuts, or fills, or cause
or allow the same to be done on real property that he owns or controls without
first obtaining a grading permit, unless exempt hereunder.
   B.   Exemptions: The following grading may be done without obtaining a
permit provided it meets the applicable exemption requirements, does not
endanger adjacent property, divert or impair the flow of water in a
watercourse, or cause a public nuisance. Any grading work that is done without
a permit and not conforming to these limitations and the exemption provisions
herein shall be deemed a violation subject to penalties and abatement
procedures.
      1.   Minor Projects: Minor projects which have cuts or fills, both of
which are less than four feet (4') in vertical depth at their deepest points
measured from the natural ground surface, and both of which are less than fifty
(50) cubic yards of material on any one site and do not create significantly
unstable slopes.
      2.   Government Projects: Grading on projects not requiring a building
permit to be done by or under the supervision of the city engineer or
construction control of a governmental agency (where that agency assumes full
responsibility for the work). All such grading shall be shown on the approved
plans and be inspected and approved by the city engineer.
      3.   Valid Building Permit: Grading in connection with a building,
swimming pool, retaining wall, or other structure shall be authorized by a
valid building permit. All such grading shall be shown on the approved plans
and inspected and approved by the chief building official and city engineer.
This exemption shall not affect the applicability of this chapter, nor the
requirements for, a grading permit for any excavation having an unsupported
vertical bank greater than four feet (4') in height after the completion of
such structure, or any fill that is removed from the site or not shown on
approved plans and inspected.
      4.   Agriculture: Grading done exclusively for the growing of
agricultural crops or the raising of livestock.
      5.   Excavations For Soils Or Geological Investigations By A Soils
Engineer Or Engineering Geologist: Such work shall be backfilled and shaped to
the original contour of the land under the direction of the soils engineer or
engineering geologist immediately after the investigation or within forty five
(45) days after the start of the work, whichever is sooner. All work shall
conform with applicable laws, codes, or standards.
      6.   Cemeteries: Excavation or deposition related to gravesites.
      7.   Exemption For Dumps, Mines And Quarries: Grading within the site of
a refuse disposal dump, sanitary landfill, quarry or plant for excavating and
the processing and stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay
provided that such grading or other activities are established and operated in
accordance with all laws and the requirements of all permits. Except in the
event of reclamation, all city standards must be adhered to.
      8.   Maintenance Of Existing Firebreaks And Roads: "Maintenance" shall
mean keeping the firebreak or road in substantially the same condition it has
been in previously. Prior to the first maintenance or new construction
operation for each existing firebreak or road or portion thereof, a permit
shall be obtained from the director and/or city engineer as provided herein.
   C.   Permit Denial For Geologic Or Flood Hazard: If the director and/or city
engineer determines that the land area in which grading is proposed is subject
to a geologic or flood hazard that no reasonable amount of corrective work can
eliminate or sufficiently reduce the hazard, a grading permit may be denied.
   D.   Violation Of Other Ordinances: The director and/or city engineer shall
not issue a grading permit unless all proposed land uses shown on the
application or the grading plans for the site will comply with all provisions
of the development code and all other applicable ordinances. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012)
13.27.130: APPEALS:
Any person adversely affected by a decision of the director, and/or the city
engineer, may file an appeal in writing pursuant to the provisions of this
code. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.28
FENCING/RETAINING WALLS
SECTION:
13.28.010: Purpose
13.28.020: Effect Of Chapter On Covenants, Agreements, Etc.
13.28.030: Fences; Residential Standards
13.28.040: Fencing; Lots Within A Sensitive Area Overlay Zone
13.28.050: Fencing; Commercial And Industrial Standards
13.28.060: Vacant Lots
13.28.070: Barbed Wire
13.28.080: Retaining Walls
13.28.090: Walls Along Arterial And Collector Streets
13.28.100: Exceptions
13.28.110: Fencing Along Canals
13.28.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to create minimum and maximum fencing and
retaining wall standards for residential and commercial areas within the City.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.28.020: EFFECT OF CHAPTER ON COVENANTS, AGREEMENTS, ETC.:
This chapter shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of covenants,
agreements, ordinances, or laws but shall prevail notwithstanding such
provisions which are less restrictive. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.28.030: FENCES; RESIDENTIAL STANDARDS:
Fence and retaining wall standards shall comply with the requirements allowed
herein. Requests for height variations based on unusual circumstances, e.g.,
views, landscaping, etc., shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission. In no
instance shall a fence without a retaining wall exceed eight feet (8') in
height.
   A.   Interior Lots:
      1.   Side Yards And Rear Yards: In any required side or rear yard on
lots, the height of fences shall not exceed six feet (6'), unless otherwise
allowed herein.
      2.   Front Yards: Fences in required front yards shall be allowed
provided that solid type fences shall not exceed three feet (3'), and open type
fences, e.g., wrought iron, shall not exceed four feet (4').
   B.   Visibility Triangle And Clear View Zone: In addition to the other
provisions contained in this section, fences shall be subject to the following
provisions:
      1.   Front Yard: Any fence, wall, and/or hedge on the front yard shall
not exceed three feet (3') if opaque construction or four feet (4') if open
construction.
      2.   Sight Visibility Triangle: A thirty foot (30') sight visibility
triangle shall be maintained on corner side yards located on local streets and
controlled intersections, all other intersections shall be subject to AASHTO
standards. The sight visibility triangle is the triangle created by the
intersection of two (2) points along the back edge of the right-of-way. Height
within the thirty foot (30') area shall conform to the front yard requirements.
      3.   Fences Adjacent To Driveways: A clear view zone shall be maintained
free of fencing, except a see-through fence or a view obscuring fence no higher
than three feet (3') in height when a driveway exists adjacent to the proposed
fence. The clear view zone refers to the triangle formed on either side of the
drive- way that extends ten feet (10') back from the right-of-way and ten feet
(10') along the right-of-way.
   FIGURE 1
   ILLUSTRATION OF A COMMON THIRTY FOOT
   SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3890.png]
      4.   Rear And Interior Side Yards: Fence heights in the rear yard and
interior side yard shall not exceed six feet (6').
   C.   Fences On Slopes: Fences on slopes may be a maximum of seven feet (7')
if the average height of such fence is no greater than six feet (6'), unless
otherwise allowed herein.
   FIGURE 2
   FENCES ON SLOPES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3892.png]
   D.   Fence Posts, Gateposts, Pillars, And Support Columns: Such structures
may extend twelve inches (12") above the maximum fence height when separated by
at least six (6) linear feet of fencing. Gateposts may be as close as three
feet (3') of each other with no more than one gate per fence frontage.
Structures may not exceed eighteen inches (18") in diameter or width.
   E.   Measurement Of Height: The height of a fence shall be measured from the
highest grade and the combined height of a fence and retaining wall shall not
exceed eleven feet (11').
   FIGURE 3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3894.png]
   F.   Barbed Wire Fences: Barbed wire and other security wire are not allowed
on fences on commercial, industrial, business, or civic property for the
purpose of maintaining security and preventing property loss and vandalism.
Barbed wire and other security wire are not allowed on fences on residential
properties for the purpose of maintaining security and preventing property loss
and vandalism. (Ord. 18-07, 2-28-2018)
13.28.040: FENCING; LOTS WITHIN A SENSITIVE AREA OVERLAY ZONE:
   A.   Fencing Requirements Within A Sensitive Area Overlay Zone: A fence may
be built upon a slope greater than thirty percent (30%) provided the following
conditions are met:
      1.   Usable Land: Fences shall be located only upon areas constituting
usable land unless otherwise approved by the Director.
      2.   Chainlink Fencing: Only dark brown, dark green, or black vinyl
coated chainlink fencing shall be allowed in order to blend into the native
landscaping.
      3.   Wrought Iron Or Similar Aluminum Ornamental Fencing: Only dark
brown, dark green, or black wrought iron or similar aluminum ornamental fencing
shall be allowed, in order to blend into the native landscaping. The fence
shall be built in accordance to this chapter and comply with all applicable
standards.
      4.   Three Rail Fence: Only dark brown, dark green, or black. (Ord. 12-
15, 7-11-2012)
13.28.050: FENCING; COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Front Yard Fencing:
      1.   Requirements: If a fence is desired between a building and the front
property line, decorative iron fences or a combination of decorative iron and
brick pillar fences are required. The fence may be a maximum of six feet (6')
in height and located immediately behind the front landscape area required by
the land use regulations for the particular project.
      2.   Corner Lots: All developments located on corner lots shall be
considered to have two (2) frontages. The above fencing restriction shall apply
to both frontages with the exception that fences may not encroach into the
required sight visibility triangle at the intersection of two (2) streets.
Sight visibility triangles are determined by applicable standards. For local
streets and controlled intersections a thirty foot (30') sight visibility
triangle is sufficient, all other intersections shall be subject to AASHTO
standards. Sight visibility triangles will increase significantly if the
location is on or near the inside of a horizontal curve. Fences in the sight
visibility triangle shall be no more than three feet (3') in height above the
top of curb. In most cases, said sight visibility triangle shall be measured
from the intersection of the right-of-way extended back thirty feet (30') in
both directions.
   B.   Side And Rear Property Lines: Fences along side or rear property lines
shall not exceed six feet (6') in height measured from the highest elevation on
either side of the fence and up to eight feet (8') if approved by the Planning
Commission during site plan review.
   C.   Temporary Fencing: Fencing may be allowed on a temporary basis for the
purpose of securing property prior to and during development and for special
events.
   D.   Fence Posts, Gateposts, Pillars, And Support Columns: Such structures
may extend twelve inches (12") above the maximum fence height when separated by
at least six (6) linear feet of fencing. Gateposts may be as close as three
feet (3') of each other with no more than one gate per fence frontage.
Structures may not exceed eighteen inches (18") in diameter or width.
   E.   Measurement Of Height: The height of a fence shall be measured from the
highest grade, and the combined height of a fence and retaining wall shall not
exceed eleven feet (11'). (Ord. 18-07, 2-28-2018)
13.28.060: VACANT LOTS:
For the purpose of this chapter, it shall be presumed that a vacant lot shall
contain a minimum front, side, and rear yard that are otherwise required by
ordinance. In any required side and rear yard on vacant lots, the maximum
height of fences or other similar structures shall be six feet (6'). (Ord. 12-
15, 7-11-2012)
13.28.070: BARBED WIRE:
Fences containing strands of barbed wire, concertina, or other similar fencing
is prohibited on residential, mixed use, and open space properties unless
specifically approved by the Director for agricultural uses. Barbed wire and
other security wire are not allowed on fences on commercial, office, or
industrial properties when adjacent to residential uses or within public view.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.28.080: RETAINING WALLS:
A building permit may be required for the construction of retaining walls.
Where a retaining wall protects a cut below or a fill above the natural grade
and is located on the line separating lots or properties, such retaining wall
shall not exceed five feet (5'). For cuts/fills to be retained that exceed five
feet (5'), retaining walls shall be stepped and separated horizontally by a
minimum of five feet (5'). The uppermost retaining wall may be topped by a
fence, wall, or hedge of the height that would otherwise be permitted at the
location if no retaining wall existed. The Director may grant an exception to
this criteria where it can be shown that this provision would cause an
unreasonable hardship to the property, e.g., where the stepping would eliminate
the side or rear yard leaving the property owner with a strip of unusable yard
space (less than 5 feet), or where it may not be practical due to adjoining
uses.
   FIGURE 4
   PROPER RETAINING WALL INSTALLATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3896.png]
(Ord. 18-07, 2-28-2018)
13.28.090: WALLS ALONG ARTERIAL AND COLLECTOR STREETS:
Whenever any person, firm, or corporation as a subdivider develops or builds
upon any property in the City that is part of a recorded subdivision approved
by the Planning Commission after the effective date of this Code or in any
previously approved subdivision, and which abuts any arterial or collector
street as defined below, the said person, firm, or corporation shall construct
and install at their own expense, a fence or wall as provided hereafter along
the back property line of lots abutting said arterial or collector.
   A.   An arterial or collector street is any public road having a right-of-
way, developed or undeveloped, including, but not limited to, the following
roads:
4100 South, 4700 South, 4800 South, 5400 South, 6200 South, 1300 West, 1700
(Redwood Road) West, I-215, 2200 West, 2700 West, 3200 West, 3600 West, 4015/
4000 West, Bangerter Highway
   B.   Said fence or wall shall be approved by the Director, only upon
satisfaction of the following criteria:
      1.   Durable or useful life of at least twenty (20) years' duration;
      2.   Wind load of at least eighty (80) miles per hour;
      3.   Maintenance free for at least five (5) years' duration; and
      4.   Applicable City standards, unless otherwise approved by the
Director.
   C.   In addition to the above requirements, the following shall be
satisfied:
      1.   The fence shall be interrupted at least every twenty five feet (25')
by pilasters, columns, jogs in the fence, or other variation in the
construction so as to provide a visual breaking point in construction.
      2.   Acceptable construction materials shall not include chainlink,
chainlink with slats, picket, or wood fencing.
      3.   Antigraffiti coating shall be required as approved by the City.
      4.   Specific structural design shall be reviewed and approved by the
City.
   D.   A barrier wall, six feet (6') in height (measured from the highest
elevation on either side of the wall) except where soil retention is required,
may be up to eight feet (8') in height (retaining wall and barrier wall
combined). All such walls shall meet design specifications adopted by the City.
   E.   An additional landscaped buffer, including sprinkling and water
connections, may be required by the Director between the sidewalk and barrier
wall where it is impractical for the barrier wall to abut the sidewalk. The
specific width of the buffer and landscaping specifications shall be determined
by the Director at the time of subdivision review. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.28.100: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to certain other fences such as
sports court fences, tennis court, backstops, or patio enclosures in the front,
side, or rear yards if approved by the Director. During the review of such
requests, the Director need only determine if in his opinion:
   A.   The proposed fence does not create a hazard for the subject property or
adjacent properties.
   B.   The proposed fence does not create a violation of other ordinances.
   C.   A building permit is not required. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.28.110: FENCING ALONG CANALS:
   A.   Any parcel being subdivided or developed that is adjacent to or has
within its boundaries a canal right-of-way may be required to provide along
such right-of-way a fence as determined by the Director.
As an alternative to fencing the canal and with the review and approval of the
Director, the developer may pipe the canal. If the canal is piped, the
developer must obtain written permission from the canal company and construct
the pipe according to the canal company's requirements and specifications.
   B.   All fences bordering canals shall be installed as part of the
improvements for the subdivision or other development. No occupancy permit,
whether temporary or final, shall be granted until all required fencing is
installed in the subdivision or development. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.29
ADDRESSING, STREET NAMING, AND DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
13.29.010: Purpose
13.29.020: Street Naming
13.29.030: Street Numbering
13.29.040: Property Numbering
13.29.050: Building Identification
13.29.060: Recordkeeping
13.29.070: Procedures
13.29.010: PURPOSE:
This chapter is established to provide a standard system for consecutive and
logical numbering of streets and properties to avoid the duplication of street
names within the city and Salt Lake County and to avoid similar sounding names
or confusing designators. This chapter shall establish standard procedures for
changing existing street names or adding names to existing numbered streets,
keeping addressing numbers clearly identifiable, and provide a complete current
listing of all streets and addresses within the city. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.29.020: STREET NAMING:
The following standards shall be applied to the naming of streets in the city:
   A.   Duplication: Proposed street names that duplicate existing street names
in the city or elsewhere in Salt Lake County shall be prohibited.
   B.   Confusion: Proposed street names that sound very similar to existing
names or street names that have unconventional spellings shall be prohibited.
   C.   Continuity: Proposed street names are encouraged to have the following
characteristics:
      1.   Historic significance.
      2.   Local flavor and sense of place.
      3.   Overall theme.
      4.   Compatibility with adjacent streets.
   D.   Name Length: Proposed street names shall not be longer than the typical
seventeen (17) blank street sign (including spaces between words).
   E.   Required Naming: In order to minimize confusion and to facilitate
proper addressing, the following types of proposed streets shall be named:
      1.   Streets that change compass direction.
      2.   Loop or horseshoe streets.
      3.   Streets that have intersection coordinate changes.
      4.   Cul-de-sacs.
      5.   Dead end streets that will likely be extended as above.
   F.   Thoroughfare Designations: Proposed street names and street types
should be matched as follows:
      1.   Boulevard, parkway: Arterials and collectors with planted medians.
      2.   Drive, road: Streets longer than one thousand feet (1,000').
      3.   Way: Curvilinear streets longer than one thousand feet (1,000').
      4.   Streets, avenues: Straight directional streets.
      5.   Lanes: Short secondary connecting streets.
      6.   Circle, court, place, cove: Cul-de-sacs and permanent dead end
streets. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.29.030: STREET NUMBERING:
All streets and intersections shall have numbered coordinates. On streets that
do not conform to the four (4) compass directions, numbered coordinates should
be assigned from the axis that most nearly matches the principal direction of
the thoroughfare. For simplicity, street numbers shall end with the digit "0"
or "5". Private numbering systems shall be avoided. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.29.040: PROPERTY NUMBERING:
The following standards shall be applied to the numbering of properties in the
city:
   A.   Juxtaposition: Building numbers should be comparable (but not
duplicated) on parallel streets and should be in consecutive order.
   B.   Even-Odd: Building numbers should be assigned to opposite sides of the
street as determined under the Salt Lake meridian grid system.
   C.   Compass Direction: On streets that do not conform to the four (4)
compass directions, building numbers should be assigned from the axis that most
nearly matches the principal direction of the thoroughfare.
   D.   Corner Lots: Dual addresses on corner lots shall be avoided with the
exception of multi-family dwellings and multi-unit commercial buildings with
primary entrances on both streets.
   E.   Buildings Without Public Frontage: Buildings that are hidden behind
other buildings or do not have public frontage shall be numbered from the
centerline of the principal access or driveway.
   F.   Commercial, Industrial, And Multi-Family: The director shall assign
numbers to site plans before final site plan approval, based upon the above
standards.
   G.   Insufficient Numbers: Where insufficient numbers exist for proper
addressing (e.g., buildings without public frontage), a private lane may be
assigned a numbered coordinate to facilitate addressing. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012)
13.29.050: BUILDING IDENTIFICATION:
All buildings shall have approved address numbers, and such numbers shall be
identified using the following standards:
   A.   Background: Numbers shall be set on a background of a contrasting
color.
   B.   Size: Numbers shall be arabic numeral or alphabet letters. Numbers in
residential developments shall be a minimum of four inches (4") high with a
minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch.
   C.   Size In Commercial Developments: Numbers in commercial developments
shall be a minimum of six inches (6") high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5
inch.
   D.   Visibility: Numbers shall be placed in a position that is plainly
legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. When a
building is some distance from a street or when view of the building is blocked
by trees or shrubs, numbers should be displayed on a sign attached to a fence,
gate, street mailbox, or lawn stake, in addition to being placed on the
building.
   E.   Corner Lots: On corner lots, house numbers should face the street named
in the address. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.29.060: RECORDKEEPING:
The following standards should be adhered to in maintaining addressing records:
   A.   Numbers Assigned: Numbers shall be assigned by the engineer or his
designated representative.
   B.   Inventory: A complete inventory of existing street names and building
numbers shall be compiled and maintained in the community development
department. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.29.070: PROCEDURES:
All proposed street names shall be coordinated with Salt Lake County to avoid
duplication. In addition, the following procedures shall be adhered to with new
development and proposed changing of street names:
   A.   Subdivision: Street coordinates and house numbers shall be assigned by
the engineer and shall be placed on the final subdivision plat by the developer
before plat recordation.
   B.   Duplicate Street Names: The city may change duplicated street names
without a petition when it is determined that the change is in the public
interest. The following criteria should be used in eliminating street name
duplications:
      1.   Historical significance.
      2.   The number of buildings addressed on the street.
      3.   The length of time that the name has been in use.
      4.   The length of the street and the amount of traffic.
      5.   Compatibility with adjacent street names.
   C.   Changing Existing Street Names: To change an existing street name, the
process in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-609.5 for vacating or altering a
street or alley shall be followed.
   D.   Adding Names To Existing Numbered Streets: To add a name to an existing
numbered street, the process in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-609.5 for
vacating or altering a street or alley shall be followed.
   E.   Changing Existing Property Numbering: The changing of an existing
property number must be in the public interest. Requests for changes based upon
personal reasons, numerology, or superstition will not be approved. Approval of
requests for address changes may be made under the following circumstances:
      1.   The address on the plat and the building permit do not match.
      2.   The address is out of sequence or not in reasonable juxtaposition
with other addresses on the street.
      3.   The address spacing with other addresses is such that it creates
confusion.
      4.   The address has an incorrect odd/even designation.
      5.   The address conflicts with an address on a parallel street.
   F.   Street Name/Number Changes: When street name/number changes are
approved, the city will change its records to conform to the change. Property
owners are responsible for notifying other public and private entities of the
approved change. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.30
SUBDIVISION REVIEW
SECTION:
13.30.010: Purpose
13.30.020: Necessity Of Subdivision Plat Approval
13.30.030: Application And Review Process
13.30.040: Validity Of Final Plat Approval
13.30.050: Changes To Final Plat
13.30.060: Vacating Or Changing A Subdivision Plat; Process
13.30.070: Property Line Adjustments (Exchange Of Title)
13.30.080: Required Subdivision Improvements And Procedures
13.30.090: Improvements Installation Priority
13.30.100: Costs Of Improvements
13.30.110: Street Dedication
13.30.120: Penalties
13.30.130: Reasonable Diligence
13.30.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purposes of this chapter are:
      1.   To promote the health, safety, and general welfare of city
residents;
      2.   To ensure the efficient and orderly development of land;
      3.   To prevent the uncontrolled division and development of real
property;
      4.   To avoid poorly planned developments that:
         a.   Do not comply with the general plan or city ordinances;
         b.   Cannot be efficiently served by existing utilities or public
services;
         c.   May prove to be dangerous or unsafe;
         d.   May cause an undue burden on existing traffic or transportation
services;
         e.   May require the future expenditure of public funds to correct
problems caused by the development;
         f.   Restrict the ability of efficient development on adjoining
properties;
      5.   To minimize the number of boundary line disputes in the city and
eliminate existing property line gaps and property line overlaps;
      6.   To provide a mechanism requiring each developer to pay for the
public improvements associated with a particular subdivision, and provide a
mechanism for each developer to pay the cost of public facility improvements
that are roughly proportionate and reasonably related to the service demands
and needs of the development activity;
      7.   To provide design standards:
         a.   For public improvements, facilities and utilities;
         b.   For access to public rights of way;
         c.   For the dedication of land and streets deemed necessary for the
proper development of the subdivision;
         d.   For easements or rights of way that are necessary to service the
property.
   B.   This chapter is designed to inform the subdivision developer and the
public of the requirements for obtaining subdivision plat approval. To this
end, an attempt has been made to outline all subdivision requirements in this
chapter and other applicable ordinances and laws. Each parcel of real property
is unique. Also, there may be some aspects of subdivision development that
cannot easily be articulated, and it is not possible to cover every possible
contingency. Therefore, additional reasonable conditions may be imposed as
deemed necessary provided that:
      1.   The conditions are not arbitrary or capricious.
      2.   The conditions are necessary to promote the health, safety, or
welfare of the citizens of the city.
      3.   The conditions do not conflict with any applicable law. (Ord. 12-15,
7-11-2012)
13.30.020: NECESSITY OF SUBDIVISION PLAT APPROVAL:
   A.   Subdivision Approval Required: Any division of real property located
within the city which conforms to the definition of a "subdivision" as set
forth in this code is subject to the terms of this chapter and must obtain the
approval of the city before it may file or record a final subdivision plat at
the Salt Lake County recorder's office.
   B.   Parcels Previously Divided: Any parcel of property which was originally
part of a parcel now being subdivided and/or which was divided off from the
parcel being subdivided since July 1, 1996, shall be included in the
preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision unless it has already been
recorded as part of another subdivision.
   C.   Transfer Before Approval Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to transfer,
sell, convey, gift, or assign any subdivided property as defined in this
chapter before a final subdivision plat is approved and recorded pursuant to
the requirements of this chapter and applicable state law.
   D.   Approval To Amend Plat Required: It shall be unlawful to amend, vacate,
alter, or modify any plat which has already been approved and/or recorded
without first receiving city approval.
   E.   Lot Remnants Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to divide real property
in such a way that a parcel of property is created or left behind (lot remnant)
that cannot be developed according to the requirements of this code or other
applicable laws, regardless of whether or not a subdivision plat is required
for the division. Examples of this type of violation include, but are not
limited to, nuisance or protection strips (other than those allowed by law),
parcels created or left for the sole purpose of denying another property owner
access to his property, parcels with insufficient square footage, parcels with
insufficient buildable area, parcels that do not meet the sensitive area
requirements of this code, and parcels that do not abut on a dedicated street.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.30.030: APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Initial Staff Review: To help expedite review of a development
proposal, prior to submitting an application for subdivision review, persons
interested in undertaking development may meet informally with a member(s) of
the community development department to become acquainted with the substantive
and procedural requirements of this code.
   B.   Development Review: The development proposal shall be reviewed at a
development review meeting. At the meeting, the various departments will
initially assess the proposal and information submitted and make suggestions to
the prospective developer with respect to the proposal's compliance with the
provisions of the appropriate regulations of this code, building codes, and any
other applicable ordinances, codes, or standards of the city, and provide some
information concerning the city's review requirements and procedures. They will
also determine the departments and agencies that will need to review the
proposal.
   C.   Application: An application for subdivision development must be
submitted to the community development department and must contain the
information and be in the format required by the subdivision review checklist
available from the community development department. The application shall
include the following:
      1.   Application form.
      2.   Full size (24 inches x 36 inches) copies of the plat and one eight
and one-half inch by eleven inch (81/2" x 11") reduction to be determined on a
case by case basis.
      3.   All documents required in this chapter.
      4.   Payment of all applicable fees.
      5.   All necessary documents, reports, maps, etc., as required for
developments located within an overlay zone or a site-specific development zone
(SSD).
      6.   The preliminary plat shall be drawn on standard drafting medium to a
standardized scale. The scale must be indicated on each sheet but shall not be
less than one inch equals sixty feet (1" = 60').
      7.   The preliminary plat shall contain the following:
         a.   An arrow indicating north drawn on each sheet.
         b.   The proposed name of the subdivision. The subdivision name shall
be authorized by the Salt Lake County recorder's office.
         c.   The addresses of the property owner(s), the developer, and the
engineer or surveyor of the proposed subdivision.
         d.   The locations of roads and other infrastructure within three
hundred feet (300') of the boundary of the proposed subdivision and names and
addresses of current owners of all parcels immediately adjoining the proposed
subdivision and the boundary lines of such parcels as may be required by the
director.
         e.   Existing and proposed contours drawn at two foot (2') intervals.
Existing contours shall extend a minimum of twenty five feet (25') beyond the
property line.
         f.   The boundary lines of the parcel to be subdivided.
         g.   The dimensions and square footage of each lot and allocable
building area.
         h.   The dimensions and locations of existing and proposed
improvements, structures, easements, and topographical features within the
parcel to be subdivided.
         i.   The location and dimensions of existing and proposed farm or
garden irrigation systems (including ditches and canals).
         j.   Where the preliminary plat covers only a part of a larger
developable area, the plat shall show the location of the subdivision as it
forms part of the larger area. A conceptual plan may be required showing a
possible future street system and lot layout.
         k.   A stormwater drainage plan, approved by the city, which is
designed to accommodate the water generated by a 10-year storm with 100-year
routing.
         l.   The location and nature of development within and adjacent to the
preliminary plat boundaries. A notation shall be made as to whether or not the
existing structures within and adjacent to the plat will remain or be
demolished.
         m.   A copy of the preliminary grading and drainage plan.
         n.   A copy of the roadway plan and profile sheets.
      8.   Tabulations showing:
         a.   Total number of gross acres or square feet in the proposed
development and the total number of gross acres or square feet in proposed
roads, rights of way, and other property intended for public use.
         b.   Total number of lots or building sites.
         c.   Proposed gross and net density.
      9.   The following documents shall be included with the application:
         a.   An application request for a proposed change to any existing zone
boundaries or any zone classification which is necessary for approval of the
proposed subdivision.
         b.   Any other documents related to the development that the city may
require.
   D.   Preliminary Subdivision Review:
      1.   If prior to submitting the application for subdivision review it is
determined that the applicant has not attended a development review meeting,
staff may request that the applicant do so in order to expedite the orderly
review of the proposal before proceeding to the subsequent stages of review.
      2.   Upon submittal of an application and supporting information and
attendance at a development review meeting, if necessary, the preliminary
subdivision plat shall be forwarded to the reviewing departments and agencies
who shall review it preliminarily to determine if the plat, together with all
supporting information, is complete and complies with all the requirements of
this code and other applicable city and agencies' standards.
If the departments' and agencies' reviews determine that all required,
necessary, and requested information has not been submitted or that some of the
specifics of the plan or information do not comply with the requirements of
this code, the applicant shall be notified in writing and/or on the plat of any
deficiencies, comments, corrections, and requirements (including additional
information and/or studies) to be addressed. The revised plat and all required,
necessary and requested supporting information must be resubmitted after the
appropriate additions and/or corrections are made in order to complete the
application.
Upon resubmittal, the preliminary subdivision plat will again be forwarded to
the reviewing departments and agencies. The applicant shall be required to
resubmit the plan and supporting documents to the city until all departments
and agencies determine it is complete and complies with the requirements of
this code and other applicable city and agencies' standards. Failure to submit
complete information will result in written notification to the applicant that
the review cannot proceed further until all required, necessary, and requested
information is submitted.
   E.   Planning Commission Review: When the director determines that the
preliminary subdivision plat is complete and in compliance with all
requirements, the plat, together with all supporting information, will be
forwarded to the planning commission for review at a public hearing.
The planning commission shall review the plat, including all supporting
information, to determine if all appropriate impacts have been addressed and to
receive public input, concerning impacts and mitigation. The planning
commission may require additional studies/analyses to enable it to determine
what impacts should be addressed and may establish additional requirements to
address those anticipated impacts.
   F.   Validity Of Preliminary Plat Review:
      1.   Preliminary plat review is valid for two (2) years. The director may
grant two (2) 1-year extensions of the preliminary plat provided the plat still
complies with all current applicable provisions and ordinances. No person or
entity obtains a vested right to develop the property by reason of obtaining
preliminary plat review. The director may hold a public hearing or meeting to
consider the proposal prior to his decision.
      2.   If a final plat which covers only a portion of the preliminary plat
is recorded within the two (2) year time limit or extension thereof, the
validity of the unrecorded portion of the preliminary plat may be extended by
the director for one year from the date of recording that final plat.
      3.   If the developer desires to change the grade or location of streets
within the subdivision, or desires to increase the number of lots in the
subdivision, or substantially alters the original subdivision design, the
developer must apply for an amendment to the original preliminary plat.
      4.   The director may, at his discretion, approve changes to the
preliminary plat to decrease the number of lots in the subdivision, to make
minor lot boundary changes, or to make other minor changes without requiring
that it be reviewed by the planning commission.
   G.   Final Subdivision Review:
      1.   After review by the departments, agencies, and planning commission,
the applicant shall submit a final subdivision plat together with all
supporting documents which comply with all requirements, corrections,
additions, etc., required by the departments, agencies and planning commission
to the community development department.
      2.   The following documents and information shall be submitted for final
subdivision review:
         a.   Full size (24 inches x 36 inches) copy of the plat.
         b.   All documents required in this chapter.
         c.   If required to be reviewed by planning commission, the applicant
shall submit five (5) full size (24 inches x 36 inches) copies, one reduced
copy (81/2 inches x 11 inches), and an electronic copy in a format acceptable
to the city.
         d.   The final plat shall be drawn on a mylar sheet approved by the
Salt Lake County plat division.
         e.   The final plat shall be drawn with all lines, dimensions, and
markings made in waterproof black drawing ink.
         f.   The final plat shall be drawn to a standardized scale. The scale
shall be indicated on the plat and shall not be less than one inch equals sixty
feet (1" = 60').
         g.   The final plat shall contain the following:
            (1)   An arrow indicating north on each sheet.
            (2)   The name of the subdivision as approved by the Salt Lake
County recorder's office.
            (3)   The subdivision boundary lines showing the proper bearings
and dimensions, which lines shall be of heavier line weight than any other
lines on the drawing and which shall be referenced to two (2) monuments.
            (4)   The names, widths, lengths, bearings, and curve data of all
areas intended for public use.
            (5)   Lot numbers, approved street names with intersection
coordinates as determined by staff, and street addresses of which numbering
shall be in accordance with the city street numbering system, as designated by
staff.
            (6)   The bearings, dimensions, and square footage of each lot.
            (7)   The bearings, dimensions, and locations of all easements
within the subdivision and allocable building area.
            (8)   A certificate of survey with a metes and bounds description,
the signature of a land surveyor licensed in the state of Utah, and the land
surveyor's seal.
            (9)   An owners dedication with signatures from all property owners
and others who may have a financial interest in the subdivision acknowledged by
a notary public, as required by the Salt Lake County recorder's office.
            (10)   A notice of all covenants, conditions, and other
restrictions which may be relevant and applicable to the property contained
within the final plat.
            (11)   A planning commission's approval block for the signature of
the planning commission chairman.
            (12)   A Salt Lake Valley health department approval block for
appropriate signature.
            (13)   City engineer signature block.
            (14)   Community development director signature block.
            (15)   A city attorney's approval block for signature of the
Taylorsville city attorney.
            (16)   An approval block for the signatures of the mayor and
attestation by the city recorder.
            (17)   Approval blocks for owners or operators of underground and
utility facilities.
            (18)   Other signature approval blocks as may be needed.
            (19)   All requirements of the sensitive area overlay zone upon the
plat, including, but not limited to: location of known earthquake faults and
their respective zones of deformation, hillside slopes greater than thirty
percent (30%), etc.
         h.   The following documents shall be submitted with the final plat:
            (1)   Construction drawings showing existing ground and/or asphalt
elevations, planned grades and elevations of proposed improvements, and the
location of all public utilities. Improvements shown on the construction
drawings shall be in accordance with the preliminary plat. The city may adopt a
policy governing additional requirements for construction drawings. All
construction drawings shall have the designing engineer's state license seal
stamped on all submitted sheets. No final plat shall be approved by the mayor
until the construction drawings have been approved by the city engineer.
            (2)   Documents evidencing conveyances or consents from property
owners within the subdivision when such are required by law.
            (3)   Signed and notarized improvement agreement and agreement to
conditions.
            (4)   A preliminary title report dated within ninety (90) days of
submission of the final plat that coincides with owners' signatures on the
final plat.
            (5)   A guarantee for improvements (bond) to cover improvements as
required by the city engineer. Guarantees acceptable to the city include an
escrow bond, letter of credit, and cash bond.
            (6)   Any other documents the city may require.
            (7)   Evidence acceptable to the city that all taxes, interest, and
penalties owing on the property have been paid.
         i.   The property must be developed and the improvements constructed
in strict compliance with the approved final plat, approved construction
drawings, and the city specifications. Failure to note any improvement required
by this chapter on the final plat or the construction drawings shall not
eliminate the developer's responsibility to complete those improvements in the
subdivision.
   H.   Final Plat Approval:
      1.   The director shall review the final plat and all supporting
documents to determine if they are complete and comply with all the
requirements of all departments, agencies and the planning commission. When the
director makes the determination that the final subdivision plat is complete
and complies with all the requirements, the plat will be stamped and signed by
the planning commission, the city engineer, the city attorney, the mayor, and
each of those whose signature is required by state law or elsewhere in this
code.
      2.   The director shall forward the fully executed final plat to the
mayor for approval.
      3.   The mayor shall review the application for final plat approval and
consider the recommendations of the planning commission and shall approve,
modify, or deny the plat. The mayor shall approve the plat if he finds that the
final plat and documents comply with all applicable city ordinances. The mayor
shall affix his signature to the final plat upon approval of the plat, which
signature shall be attested to by the city recorder.
      4.   The developer shall pay all applicable development fees as generated
by the city engineer prior to the city releasing the mylar to be recorded.
      5.   The developer shall be responsible for plat recordation with the
Salt Lake County recorder's office. In addition, the following shall be
returned to the city prior to the issuance of any building permits:
         a.   One mylar copy of the recorded subdivision plat (full size 24
inches x 36 inches).
         b.   Four (4) full size copies of the recorded subdivision plat (full
size 24 inches x 36 inches).
         c.   One copy (11 inches x 17 inches) of the recorded subdivision
plat.
         d.   Evidence of recordation. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 20-12,
4-15-2020)
13.30.040: VALIDITY OF FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
The final plat shall expire and be void one year after approval by the mayor
unless the plat has been recorded. The director may grant two (2) 6-month
extensions of the final plat, provided the final plat still complies with all
current applicable ordinances. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.30.050: CHANGES TO FINAL PLAT:
The director may, in his discretion, approve minor changes to approved final
plats before the plat is recorded. The types of minor changes contemplated by
this section include legal description mistakes, minor boundary changes, and
items that should have been included on the original final plats. Major changes
to unrecorded approved final plats shall be reviewed by the planning commission
for approval if the director determines the changes are substantially different
from the original approval. Changes to recorded final plats shall be in
accordance with state law and any policies or procedures adopted by the city.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.30.060: VACATING OR CHANGING A SUBDIVISION PLAT; PROCESS:
   A.   Planning Commission Consideration: The planning commission may, with or
without petition, consider and resolve any proposed vacation, alteration, or
amendment of a subdivision plat, any portion of a subdivision plat, or any
street, lot, or alley contained in a subdivision plat.
   B.   Grounds For Vacating Or Changing A Plat: The planning commission may
vacate, alter, or amend the plat or any portion of the plat if it is satisfied
that:
      1.   Neither the public interest nor any person will be materially
injured by the proposed vacation, alteration, or amendment; and
      2.   There is good cause for the vacation, alteration, or amendment.
   C.   Request For Amendment By Petition:
      1.   Fee Owner May Petition: Any fee owner, as shown on the last county
assessment rolls, of land within the subdivision that has been laid out and
platted as provided in this code may, in writing, petition the city to have the
plat, any portion of it, or any street or lot contained in it, vacated,
altered, or amended as provided in this section.
      2.   Petition Contents: Each petition to vacate, alter or amend an entire
plat, a portion of a plat, or a street or lot contained in a plat shall
include:
         a.   The name and address of all owners of record of the land
contained in the entire plat.
         b.   The name and address of all owners of record of land adjacent to
any street that is proposed to be vacated, altered, or amended.
         c.   The signature of each of these owners who consents to the
petition.
      3.   Vacation Or Alteration Of Street Or Alley Included: If the petition
submitted contains a request to vacate or alter any portion of a street or
alley within a subdivision the vacation or alteration the planning commission
shall hold a public hearing after the appropriate notice is given. The planning
commission shall determine whether good cause exists for the vacation or
alteration.
If the planning commission vacates or alters any portion of a street or alley,
the plat shall be processed for recording with the Salt Lake County recorder's
office in accordance with the procedures for amending a subdivision plat.
      4.   Joining Two Or More Lots: If the petition seeks to join two (2) or
more of the owner's contiguous, residential lots, the property line(s) shall be
adjusted according to Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-103 definitions (52)(c)
(iii)(B).
   D.   Changing The Name Of A Recorded Subdivision:
      1.   The name of a recorded subdivision may be changed by amending the
plat as set forth herein and recording the amended plat making the change.
      2.   The new name shall not be a duplicate of another subdivision within
Salt Lake County.
   E.   Vacating An Entire Subdivision; City Council Review: If an entire
subdivision is vacated, the city council shall review and consider the action
at a public meeting after the planning commission has completed the processes
set forth herein, and if determined to be appropriate, adopt a city council
resolution containing a legal description of the entire vacated subdivision to
be recorded in the Salt Lake County recorder's office.
   F.   Preparing The Amended Plat:
      1.   The surveyor preparing the amended plat shall certify that the
surveyor:
         a.   Holds a license in accordance with the professional engineers and
professional land surveyors licensing act established by state law;
         b.   Has completed a survey of the property described on the plat in
accordance with state law and has verified all measurements; and
         c.   Has placed monuments as represented on the plat.
      2.   If the vacation, alteration, or amendment of the subdivision and/or
the street or alley is approved after compliance with the requirements set
forth herein, the planning commission and the mayor shall sign the amended plat
showing the vacation, alteration, or amendment.
      3.   The city shall ensure that the amended plat showing the vacation,
alteration, or amendment, and the city council resolution, where required, is
recorded in the office of the Salt Lake County recorder's office. (Ord. 12-15,
7-11-2012)
13.30.070: PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS (EXCHANGE OF TITLE):
   A.   Standards: Owners may adjust property lines between adjacent parcels
that are described by either a metes and bounds description or a recorded plat,
by exchanging title to portions of those parcels after approval if:
      1.   No new dwelling lot or housing unit results from the property line
adjustment.
      2.   The adjoining property owners consent to the property line
adjustment.
      3.   The property line adjustment does not result in remnant land that
did not previously exist.
      4.   The adjustment does not result in violation of applicable zoning
requirements.
   B.   Application: The owners shall file an application requesting a property
line adjustment together with all required documents.
   C.   Director Review: The director shall act as the land use authority and
review all the documents to determine if they are complete, and that they
comply with the requirements set forth above. If the director determines that
documents are complete and the requested property line adjustment complies with
the standards set forth above, the director will approve the property line
adjustment.
   D.   Notice Of Approval And Conveyance Of Title: After approval by the
director, the applicant shall:
      1.   Prepare a notice of approval which:
         a.   Is executed by each owner included in the exchange;
         b.   Is executed by the director;
         c.   Contains an acknowledgment for each party executing the notice as
required by state law for real property;
         d.   Recites the description of both the original parcels and the
parcels created by the property line adjustment.
      2.   Record a deed(s) which conveys title as approved.
      3.   Record the notice of approval. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.30.080: REQUIRED SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   The following improvements are mandatory in all subdivisions and shall
be installed by the developer in accordance with the city specifications:
      1.   Street paving (including proper road base).
      2.   Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks.
      3.   Drive approaches for each lot.
      4.   Culinary water systems.
      5.   Sanitary sewer systems.
      6.   Surface water runoff drainage systems.
      7.   City survey monuments.
      8.   Permanent markers to identify lot corners.
      9.   Utilities (overhead and underground as required by this development
code).
      10.   Street lighting system.
      11.   ADA ramps.
   B.   The city may also require the developer to install or provide any or
all of the following improvements according to the particular needs of the
subdivision:
      1.   Fire hydrants.
      2.   Subsurface water drainage systems.
      3.   Bridges.
      4.   Fencing and barrier walls.
      5.   Grading.
      6.   Retaining walls.
      7.   Landscaping and/or streetscape.
      8.   Public facilities.
      9.   Open space and/or trails.
      10.   Piping, relocating, or abandoning irrigation ditches.
      11.   Engineered footings.
      12.   Extending and constructing roads beyond the boundary of the
subdivision.
      13.   Flood control system.
      14.   Regulatory signs.
      15.   Any other improvements as may be required by the city based upon
approvals.
   C.   In determining the particular needs of the subdivision and in
determining whether any of the improvements specified in subsection B of this
section should be required in a particular subdivision, the city shall
consider, among other things:
      1.   The requirements of the building code, fire code, and other
applicable ordinance, code, or standards.
      2.   The topography of the property, the type of soil on the property,
the existence of subsurface water drainage systems in the vicinity of the
property, and the city's stormwater drainage master plan.
      3.   The extent to which the proposed subdivision causes or contributes
to the need for the improvement.
      4.   The need for the improvement to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of residents of the subdivision and the community at large.
      5.   The types of development and uses adjacent to the subdivision.
   D.   The developer may be required to install off site improvements when it
is shown that the proposed subdivision causes or contributes to the need for
such improvements. In cases where the proposed subdivision causes or
contributes to the need for off site improvements but the developer is not
required to install them, the city may impose an impact fee as allowed by law,
or may otherwise require financial contribution pursuant to written agreements
between the city and the developer. Whether or not the developer actually
installs the improvements, the city may require that owners of other
undeveloped properties, the development of which will also contribute to the
need for the improvements, pay impact fees, or be party to such agreements. The
fees or the monies collected pursuant to agreements shall be used toward the
costs of installing the improvements.
   E.   All required improvements shall be completed and pass city inspections
within one year of the date the subdivision is approved or at a date to be
determined by the city.
   F.   All subdivision improvements shall be completed by qualified
contractors in accordance with the city specifications. No work may be
commenced on public improvements without first obtaining approval.
   G.   Unless otherwise authorized by the director, no building permit for any
structure may be issued until the final plat has been recorded and the
following subdivision improvements have been installed:
      1.   Street paving (including proper road base).
      2.   Curb, gutter, and sidewalk.
      3.   Permanent markers to identify lot corners.
      4.   Operational fire hydrants (unless otherwise approved by the
applicable fire authority).
      5.   Water and sewer line facilities.
      6.   Storm drainage facilities.
      7.   Electric and gas service available in the subdivision.
   H.   When installing any of the subdivision improvements, the developer and
contractors shall be required to keep all paved streets, sidewalks, and gutters
within or outside the subdivision, free from any debris, trash, mud, or dirt
from the project. Upon notification by the city of a violation of this
provision, the developer and/or contractors shall have the affected areas
cleaned within twenty four (24) hours. If he fails to do so, the city may clean
the affected areas with the developer providing reimbursement to the city for
all costs incurred. Exception: Small mounds of dirt placed over the curb,
gutter, and sidewalk may be placed during the initial construction phase of the
home to protect the said improvements from damage. However, this exception does
not release the developer or his successors from the requirement to keep the
street clean and free of mud and debris. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.30.090: IMPROVEMENTS INSTALLATION PRIORITY:
   A.   Underground utilities, service lines, storm drainage facilities, water
system, sewer system including laterals, shall be installed and approved prior
to the installation of any other street improvements, unless the city engineer
or the appropriate governing body waives this requirement in writing.
   B.   All new sewer lines shall be inspected by the appropriate sewer
district.
   C.   All new water lines and/or connections shall be by the appropriate
water district.
   D.   All new storm drain facilities shall be inspected by the city.
   E.   All new streetlights shall be inspected by the city. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012)
13.30.100: COSTS OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The developer shall pay for all costs of designing, purchasing, installing,
warranting, and otherwise providing the improvements required by this chapter.
(Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.30.110: STREET DEDICATION:
Unless previously dedicated, declared a private street, or located within a
site- specific development, the developer shall dedicate to the city the full
width of all street rights of way on the final plat provided, however, that in
cases where a proposed street in the subdivision parallels undeveloped property
where no street currently exists and evidence is provided showing that the
owner of the abutting property has no intention of developing it within the
near future, and as may be recommended by the city engineer and approved by the
planning commission and mayor, the mayor may waive the full width dedication
requirement and allow the dedication of a lesser width if he finds that it
promotes the public interest. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 20-12, 4-15-
2020)
13.30.120: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any plat of a subdivision filed or recorded without the approvals
required by this chapter is voidable.
   B.   Any owner or agent of the owner of any land who transfers or sells any
land before a plan or plat of the subdivision has been approved and recorded as
required in this chapter is guilty of a violation of this chapter for each lot
or parcel transferred or sold.
   C.   The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or
other documents used in the process of selling or transferring does not exempt
the transaction from a violation or from the penalties or remedies provided in
this chapter. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.30.130: REASONABLE DILIGENCE:
The review for application completeness, substantive application review and
determination of whether improvements or warranty work meets standards shall be
done in accordance with the standards set forth in the Utah Code Annotated
section 10-9a-509.5, review for application completeness -- substantive
application review -- reasonable diligence required for determination of
whether improvements or warranty work meets standards -- money damages claim
prohibited, as amended. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.31
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
13.31.010: Purpose And Applicability
13.31.020: Application And Review Process
13.31.030: Validity Of Preliminary Plat Review
13.31.040: Final Plat Review And Approval
13.31.050: Validity Of Final Plat Approval
13.31.060: Changes To Unrecorded Final Plat
13.31.070: Convertible Space; Administrative Approval
13.31.080: Minimum Standards Required
13.31.090: Condominium Conversion Standards For Existing Occupied Buildings
13.31.100: Application And Review Process For Condominium Conversions
13.31.010: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and procedures for review
of all condominium development within the city. Such provisions shall
supplement zoning, site development, subdivision, health, building or other
ordinances which may be applicable to the project, and shall apply to the
approval of projects involving new construction, as well as projects involving
the conversion of existing structures. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.31.020: APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Development Review: To help expedite review of a development proposal,
prior to submitting an application for a condominium project, persons
interested in undertaking development may meet informally with a member(s) of
the community development department to become acquainted with the substantive
and procedural requirements of this code.
Staff may request the applicant to attend a development review meeting. At the
meeting, the various departments will initially assess the development proposal
and information submitted and make suggestions to the prospective developer
with respect to the proposal's compliance with the provisions of the
appropriate regulations of this code, the international building code and any
other applicable ordinances, codes, or standards and provide information
concerning the city's review requirements and procedures.
Staff members may request that additional studies or information, e.g.,
geotechnical studies, traffic impact analyses, market feasibility analyses, or
water needs analyses, be submitted together with the application for a
condominium project.
   B.   Application: The owner or developer who desires to build a new
residential condominium project or office/commercial/warehouse condominium
project shall first submit to the city an application which shall include, but
not be limited to, the following and shall include as many copies as the city
determines to be sufficient for its staff and the planning commission to
evaluate the project:
      1.   General development application form.
      2.   Condominium plat. A condominium plat accurately drawn to scale in
conformance with the provisions of state law, prepared by a land surveyor
registered in the state of Utah. The scale of said condominium plat shall be no
smaller than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50').
      3.   Site plan. A site plan prepared to the same scale as the condominium
plat designating the location of buildings, the intended use of the common
areas, and the location and extent of storage, recreational facilities,
parking, driveways, pedestrianways, and information showing floor plans and
elevations together with all information required by this code for site plan
review.
      4.   Subdivision requirements. All documents and information required by
this code for subdivision review.
      5.   Names and addresses. Names and addresses on mailing labels of
property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed project
obtained from the Salt Lake County recorder's office.
      6.   Property plat. A property plat from the Salt Lake County recorder's
office showing the area to be developed.
      7.   Fees. Fees according to the fee schedule as adopted by the city
council.
   C.   Preliminary Review:
      1.   Upon submittal of an application and supporting information and
attendance at a development review meeting, if necessary, the condominium plat
shall be forwarded to the reviewing departments and agencies to be reviewed
preliminarily to determine if the plat, together with all supporting
information, is complete and complies with all the requirements of this code
and other applicable city and agency standards including site plan review,
subdivision review and use requirements.
      2.   If the departmental and agency reviews determine that all required,
necessary and requested information has not been submitted or that some of the
specifics of the plat or information do not comply with the requirements of
this code, the applicant shall be notified in writing and/or on the plat of any
deficiencies, comments, corrections, and requirements (including additional
information and/or studies) to be addressed. The revised plat and all required,
necessary, and requested supporting information must be resubmitted after the
appropriate additions and corrections are made in order to complete the
application.
      3.   Upon resubmittal, the condominium plat will again be forwarded to
the reviewing departments and agencies, and to the planning commission. The
applicant shall be required to resubmit the plat and supporting documents to
the city until all departments and agencies determine it is complete and
complies with the requirements of this code and other applicable city and
agency standards.
   D.   Planning Commission Review: When the condominium plat has been
determined by the director to be complete and in compliance with all
requirements, the plat, together with all supporting information, will be
forwarded to the planning commission for review. If required by other
provisions of this code or state law, the planning commission shall review it
at a public hearing with appropriate notice preceding the review.
The planning commission shall review the plat, including all supporting
information, to determine if all appropriate impacts have been addressed and to
receive public input, when required, concerning impacts and mitigation and to
review compliance with all requirements of this code. The planning commission
may require additional studies/analyses to enable it to determine what impacts
should be addressed and may establish additional requirements to address those
anticipated impacts. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.31.030: VALIDITY OF PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW:
   A.   The preliminary plat review is valid for two (2) years. The director
may grant a two (2) year extension of the preliminary plat provided the plat
still complies with all current applicable ordinances. No person or entity
obtains a vested right to develop the property by reason of obtaining
preliminary plat review.
   B.   If a final plat which covers only a portion of the preliminary plat is
recorded within the two (2) year time limit or extension thereof, the validity
of the unrecorded portion of the preliminary plat may be extended by the
director for one year from the date of recording that final plat.
   C.   If the developer desires to change the grade or location of streets
within the condominium project, or desires to increase the number of units in
the project, or substantially alters the original condominium concept or design
as determined by the director, a revised preliminary plat must be submitted to
the planning commission for review.
   D.   The director may, in his discretion, approve changes to the preliminary
plat to decrease the number of units in the condominium project, to make minor
boundary changes, or to make other minor changes without requiring that the
revised preliminary plat be reviewed by the planning commission. (Ord. 12-15,
7-11-2012)
13.31.040: FINAL PLAT REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
   A.   After review by the departments, agencies, and the planning commission,
the applicant shall submit to the community development department a final
condominium plat and a declaration of condominium together with all supporting
documents which comply with all statutes, ordinances, requirements,
corrections, additions, etc., required by the departments, agencies, and the
planning commission. Planning commission may at its discretion delegate final
plat review and approval to the director.
The community development department, along with the other reviewing
departments and agencies, shall review the condominium plat and supporting
information to determine compliance with all requirements, corrections,
additions, etc. The owner(s) of land included on the plat, including, but not
limited to, additional land, convertible land, withdrawable land, convertible
space, and contractible land shall acknowledge the plat before an officer
authorized by law to take the acknowledgment of conveyances of real estate and
shall obtain the approval of the following agencies and officers, entered in
writing on the plat by the designated officers and agencies:
      1.   The owner or operator of the underground and utility facilities.
      2.   The city engineer, planning commission, other departments as
applicable, and city attorney's office.
      3.   The mayor for final approval which signature shall be attested to by
the city recorder.
   B.   The developer shall pay all applicable development fees according to
fee schedule as adopted by the city council prior to the city releasing the
mylar to be recorded.
   C.   The developer shall be responsible for plat recordation with the Salt
Lake County recorder's office. In addition, the following shall be returned to
the city prior to the issuance of any building permits:
      1.   One mylar copy of the recorded condominium plat (full size 24 inches
x 36 inches).
      2.   Four (4) copies of the recorded condominium plat (full size 24
inches x 36 inches).
      3.   One eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") copy of the recorded
condominium plat.
      4.   One copy of the recorded declaration of condominium.
      5.   Evidence of recordation. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.31.050: VALIDITY OF FINAL PLAT APPROVAL:
The final plat shall expire and be void one year after approval by the mayor
unless the plat has been recorded. The director may grant one year increment
extensions for the recordation of the final plat provided the final plat still
complies with the current applicable ordinances. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.31.060: CHANGES TO UNRECORDED FINAL PLAT:
The director may, in his discretion, approve minor changes to approved final
plats before the plat is recorded. The types of minor changes contemplated by
this section would include legal description mistakes, minor boundary changes,
and items that should have been included on the original final plats. Major
changes to unrecorded approved final plats shall be reviewed by the planning
commission for approval if the director determines the changes to be
substantially different from the original approval. Changes to recorded final
plats shall be in accordance with state law and any policies or procedures
adopted by the city. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.31.070: CONVERTIBLE SPACE; ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL:
The director may approve the conversion of space within an existing structure
if the space was labeled on the recorded condominium plat as "convertible
space" and it is proposed to be converted into one or more units or common
areas and facilities. The developer shall submit an amended or supplemental
condominium plat and declaration of condominium and all other documents
required by the Utah condominium ownership act. The director must determine
that the proposal is in compliance with all previously established
requirements, conditions, limitations and regulations and is in compliance with
all provisions of this code. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.31.080: MINIMUM STANDARDS REQUIRED:
The following are the minimum standards for a condominium project:
   A.   All condominium units within a development shall be separately metered
for gas and electricity.
   B.   Each unit shall be provided with readily accessible individual shutoff
valves or switches for water, gas, and electrical services.
   C.   Each condominium unit shall be equipped with its own heating system.
   D.   The water provider shall determine the appropriate number of meters.
   E.   Water service shall be coordinated with respective water improvement
districts.
   F.   Sewer service shall be coordinated with respective sewer improvement
districts.
   G.   If the condominium project contains private streets, paths, or
roadways, provisions shall be made for public utility easements over the entire
private street, path, or roadway network. The city may also require public
utility easements over other portions of the project to accommodate fire
hydrants, water meters, street furniture, storm drainage, sanitary sewers,
water and gas mains, electrical lines, irrigation systems, and similar public
improvements and utilities. The city shall also require access routes necessary
to assure that firefighting equipment can reach and operate efficiently in all
areas of the project.
   H.   Each owner and the association shall have an easement for entry upon
any privately owned unit, where necessary, in connection with construction,
maintenance, or repair for the benefit of the common area.
   I.   All other requirements for the use(s) within the project, e.g., mixed
use, PUD, commercial, office, etc. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.31.090: CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION STANDARDS FOR EXISTING OCCUPIED BUILDINGS:
An unregulated condominium conversion of existing occupied buildings may have
deleterious effects upon an occupant prior to a conversion since the seller and
the buyer may not fully appreciate or understand the implications of
condominium living and ownership. The specific purposes of this section are:
   A.   To establish the requirements for approval for a conversion of existing
occupied multi-family rental housing to residential condominiums and existing
occupied commercial office buildings to commercial use condominiums.
   B.   To establish building safety criteria for condominium conversion
projects by requiring conformance to the city's building codes and other
development standards.
   C.   To ensure that condominium developments have adequate living space,
open space, parking, and recreation areas.
   D.   To establish the standards and criteria for the geographical layout of
a condominium project. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.31.100: APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS FOR CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS:
   A.   Compliance With All Requirements For Condominium Development: Proposals
for the conversion of existing occupied residential or commercial projects
shall comply with all requirements for the development of new residential or
commercial condominium projects set forth above.
   B.   Additional Requirements: In addition to the application, review, and
approval requirements for new condominium projects, the following information
will be required for a condominium conversion.
      1.   Property Report And Plan: A property report containing the
information specified in this section shall be submitted as part of the
application, together with a plan for all proposed improvements and repairs.
Such plan and report shall be prepared and certified by a civil engineer or a
general engineering contractor licensed by the state of Utah. The owner or
developer shall submit a report of property condition which is intended to
ensure that the standards of the declaration of condominium appropriately
address existing and future conditions relating to maintenance and operation.
The property report shall contain the following information:
         a.   The age of the building or buildings.
         b.   Condition of structural elements including roof, foundation,
mechanical system, electrical system, plumbing system, and boiler or furnace.
         c.   Size of water service line from the meter to the individual unit.
         d.   Size of sewer lateral and sewer line(s) from each unit.
         e.   Capacity of electrical service for each unit (amps).
         f.   Condition of paving material on private streets.
         g.   Condition of paving or surfacing material on driveways, parking
areas, sidewalks, curbs, etc.
         h.   Condition of paint and/or exterior surfaces of all buildings and
structures.
         i.   All known conditions constituting deficiencies.
         j.   All known conditions which may require repair or replacement
within the next succeeding five (5) year period.
         k.   The report shall also contain a statement of disclosure
containing all information pertinent to any failure of the building to meet the
requirements of the then current building code, fire code, and applicable
standards.
         l.   Fire restriction components and fire suppression systems.
      2.   Report Of Building Official: At the time of submission of an
application for the conversion of any existing occupied building(s), the
appropriate fire authority shall make an inspection of the proposed condominium
project to determine compliance with the life safety provisions of the current
applicable building and fire codes, which shall be used to implement the
provisions of this subsection.
Prior to planning commission preliminary review of a condominium project
involving a conversion of existing occupied buildings, the appropriate fire
authority shall submit a property inspection report to the director specifying
any deficiencies of life safety standards of the current building and fire
codes, which are found to exist in the project. This report shall be submitted
to the planning commission as an element of the property report and plan.
   C.   Final Approval: All proposals for the conversion of existing occupied
residential or commercial projects into residential or commercial condominium
projects shall comply with all requirements set forth above for the final
review of a new condominium development project. In addition, the following
information and inspections are required prior to final review for a
condominium conversion:
      1.   Proof that all utility bills are current at the time of conversion.
      2.   Prior to any final approval for the conversion of an apartment
building or a commercial building to a condominium project, the building must
conform to current building and fire codes.
      3.   Prior to final approval, the developer shall request and the chief
building official shall cause final inspections of all buildings and structures
and work therein to be made to determine conformance with the international
building code, the international fire code and other applicable codes and
ordinances.
      4.   Payment of fees according to fee schedule as adopted by the city
council. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.32
SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION:
13.32.010: Purpose
13.32.020: Application And Review Process
13.32.030: Amendments To The Final Site Plan
13.32.040: Failure To Begin And Continue Development
13.32.050: Conformance To Transportation Engineering Standards
13.32.060: Guarantee For Improvement
13.32.070: Occupancy Of The Structure
13.32.080: Requirements For Changes To Existing Structures And Sites (Modified
Site Plan Review)
13.32.010: PURPOSE:
The purposes of this chapter are to assure that all new development proposed in
the city will comply with all zoning and development standards as provided in
this code. The general appearance of buildings and structures and the
improvement of land shall contribute to an orderly and harmonious appearance
and a safe and efficient development. Site plan approval as described in this
chapter shall also be required for issuance of a conditional use permit, where
required.
Compliance with the regulations of this chapter does not excuse the developer
from the applicable requirements outlined elsewhere in this development code,
building and fire codes, or any more restrictive provisions of covenants,
agreements, or other ordinances or laws. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.32.020: APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Requirement: Site plan review shall be required for the following:
      1.   All proposed new development except for one- and two-family
residential dwellings.
      2.   Modified site plan review shall be required as hereafter described
for all changes in existing structures or sites, except for one- and two-family
residential dwellings.
      3.   Issuance of a conditional use permit, where required.
   B.   Development Review:
      1.   Initial Staff Review: To help expedite review of a development
proposal, prior to submitting an application for site plan review, persons
interested in undertaking development may meet informally with a member(s) of
the community development department to become acquainted with the substantive
and procedural requirements of this code.
Staff may request the applicant to attend a development review meeting. At the
meeting, the various departments will initially assess the development proposal
and information submitted and make suggestions to the prospective developer
with respect to the proposal's compliance with the provisions of the
appropriate regulations of this code, the building code, and any other
applicable ordinances, codes, or standards of the city and provide information
concerning the city's review requirements and procedures.
      2.   Planning Commission Review: Planning commission review may be
required if indicated by a specific section of the development code. The
director or the development review meeting staff may require review of a site
plan by the planning commission.
      3.   Additional Information Requirements: Staff members may request that
additional studies or information, e.g., geotechnical studies, traffic impact
analysis, market feasibility analysis, or water needs analysis, be submitted
together with the application for site plan review.
   C.   Application: An application for development that requires site plan
review must be submitted to the city and must contain the information and be in
the format acceptable to the city. The application must include the following:
      1.   General development application form.
      2.   Site plan.
      3.   Landscaping and irrigation plan.
      4.   Architectural building elevations.
      5.   Grading and drainage plan.
      6.   Utility plan including a stormwater pollution prevention plan.
      7.   Road plan and profiles.
      8.   Other studies and analysis requested by staff or planning commission
that may include geotechnical studies, traffic impact analysis, market
feasibility analysis, water needs analysis, etc.
      9.   Adjacent property information.
      10.   Mailing labels with names and addresses from the Salt Lake County
recorder's office of property owners within three hundred feet (300') of
proposed project (when required by staff).
      11.   Property plat from the Salt Lake County recorder's office showing
the area to be developed.
      12.   Fees according to the fee schedule as adopted by the city council.
   D.   Preliminary Site Plan Review:
      1.   If prior to submitting an application for site plan review it is
determined that the applicant has not attended a development review meeting,
staff may request that the applicant do so in order to expedite the orderly
review of the proposal before proceeding to the subsequent stages of review.
      2.   Upon submittal of an application and supporting information and
attendance at a development review meeting, if necessary, the site plan shall
be forwarded to the reviewing departments and agencies who shall review it
preliminarily to determine if the plan, together with all supporting
information, is complete and complies with all the requirements of this code
and other applicable ordinances, codes, or standards.
If the departments' and agencies' reviews determine that all required,
necessary, and requested information has not been submitted or that some of the
specifics of the plan or information do not comply with the requirements of
this code, the applicant shall be notified in writing and/or on the plans of
any deficiencies, comments, corrections, and requirements (including additional
information and/or studies) to be addressed. The revised plan and all required,
necessary, and requested supporting information must be resubmitted after the
appropriate additions and/or corrections are made in order to complete the
application.
Upon resubmittal, the site plan will again be forwarded to the reviewing
departments and agencies, and to the planning commission, if required. The
applicant shall be required to resubmit the plan and supporting documents to
the city until all departments and agencies determine it is complete and
complies with the requirements of this code and other applicable city and
agencies' standards. Failure to submit complete information will result in
written notification to the applicant that the review cannot proceed further
until all required, necessary, and requested information is submitted.
   E.   Planning Commission Review: When preliminary review of the site plan
has been determined to be complete and in compliance with all requirements, the
plan, together with all supporting information, will be forwarded to the
planning commission for review, if required.
The planning commission shall review the plan, including all supporting
information, to determine if all appropriate impacts have been addressed and to
receive public input, when required, concerning impacts and mitigation. The
planning commission may require additional studies/analyses to enable it to
determine what impacts should be addressed and may establish additional
requirements to address those anticipated impacts.
If preliminary review is required by the planning commission and no substantial
action has occurred within two (2) years, the application shall expire.
   F.   Final Site Plan Review: After review by the departments, agencies, and
planning commission, if required, the applicant shall submit a final site plan
together with all supporting documents that comply with all requirements,
corrections, additions, etc., required by the departments, agencies, and
planning commission to the community development department.
The community development department, along with the other reviewing
departments and agencies, shall review the site plan and supporting information
to determine compliance with all requirements, corrections, additions, etc.
   G.   Site Plan Approval:
      1.   When the director makes the determination that the final site plan
is complete and complies with all the requirements, the plan will be stamped
and signed by the director, the planning staff member handling the review, and
the city engineer.
      2.   Once signed by all appropriate city departments, the site plan,
civil drawings, and landscape/irrigation plans, along with the agreement to
conditions shall be signed by the developer. All site plan sets, improvement
guarantees, improvement agreements, and the agreement to conditions must be
signed by the same person or entity.
      3.   In addition to the above, any required items not previously
submitted, including any required dedication documents, fees, improvement
guarantees, and improvement agreements must be submitted at this time before a
building or construction permit may be issued.
      4.   A copy of the approved signed site plan, civil drawings, landscape/
irrigation plans, and approved building plans shall be kept on the construction
site at all times.
      5.   A grading permit may be issued prior to the issuance of a building
permit with the approval of the city engineer together with a guarantee in an
amount to be determined by the city engineer.
      6.   Once the final site plan sets have been signed, development fees
paid, the guarantee for improvements is in place, a building permit may be
issued to begin construction. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.32.030: AMENDMENTS TO THE FINAL SITE PLAN:
   A.   After final approval of a site plan, any minor changes must be approved
in advance by the director. Further, the director is authorized to approve only
minor changes regarding the location, siting, or character of buildings and
structures that have been made necessary by technical or other circumstances
not foreseen at the time the final site plan was originally approved. All other
changes in use or rearrangement of lots, blocks, buildings, tracts or
groupings, or any changes in the provision of common open space and other
change as noted above shall be made by the director only after a recommendation
by the appropriate staff member. Such amendments may be made only if they are
shown to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the
final site plan was approved. Any changes to the final site plan must be
recorded as amendments in accordance with the procedure established for
adopting the final site plan. The director is not authorized to approve changes
that may cause any of the following:
      1.   Change in the use or character of the development.
      2.   An increase in the overall density or intensity of use.
      3.   A significant increase in the overall coverage of the site by
structures.
      4.   A reduction of approved open space or proposed amenities.
      5.   A reduction of required off street parking.
      6.   A significant alteration to pedestrian, vehicular and bicycle,
circulation, and utility networks.
      7.   A reduction in required street pavement widths. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012)
13.32.040: FAILURE TO BEGIN AND CONTINUE DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Building permits shall not be issued until final site plan approval is
granted.
   B.   If no substantial construction has occurred in a development that has
been granted final site plan approval pursuant to the provisions of this code
within one year from the date of granting of such approval, the final site plan
shall expire.
   C.   The director may extend the period during which any final site plan
approval may be valid for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months. (Ord. 12-
15, 7-11-2012)
13.32.050: CONFORMANCE TO TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING STANDARDS:
In reviewing the site plan, the city engineer shall apply engineering standards
as contained in applicable ordinances, codes, or standards. No site plan
approval shall alter, amend, or modify such engineering standards. (Ord. 12-15,
7-11-2012)
13.32.060: GUARANTEE FOR IMPROVEMENT:
A guarantee for improvement in favor of the city is required in an amount
sufficient to assure compliance by the applicant with the requirements of the
approved site plan. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.32.070: OCCUPANCY OF THE STRUCTURE:
Occupancy of the structure shall be permitted only after all final inspections
have been made to assure compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, or
standards. In addition, all requirements of the approved site plan must also be
completed prior to occupancy or a guarantee for improvement must have been
given to the city to assure completion of all required items. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012)
13.32.080: REQUIREMENTS FOR CHANGES TO EXISTING STRUCTURES AND SITES (MODIFIED
SITE PLAN REVIEW):
   A.   Requirements: Modified site plan review shall be required for the
following:
      1.   Proposed changes to an existing building, e.g., increasing the
building's exterior dimensions compared to the original approved building
footprint or height.
      2.   Proposed use change to previously developed property.
      3.   Proposed site change to previously developed property, e.g.,
additional paved areas for driveways, parking or storage, regrading and
repaving of existing paved areas, etc.
      4.   Other proposed changes to a previously developed building or
property, as determined by staff.
   B.   Review Procedure For Changes To Existing Structures And Sites:
      1.   Initial Staff Review: Prior to submitting an application for
modified site plan review and to help expedite review of a development
proposal, persons desiring to modify a previously developed building or
property, as set forth herein, may meet informally with the community
development department staff to obtain information regarding the development
standards for the zone in which the project is located and to obtain
information regarding the process of reviews and approvals.
      2.   Development Review: The development proposal shall be reviewed at a
development review meeting. At the meeting, the various departments will
initially assess the proposal and information submitted and make suggestions to
the prospective developer with respect to the proposal's compliance with the
provisions of the appropriate regulations of this code, building codes, and any
other applicable ordinances, codes, or standards and provide some information
concerning the city's review requirements and procedures. They will also
determine the departments and agencies that will need to review the proposal.
      3.   Planning Commission Review: Planning commission review may be
required if required by a specific section of the development code. The
director or the development review meeting staff may require review of a site
plan by the planning commission.
      4.   Additional Information Requirements: Staff members may request that
additional studies or information, e.g., geotechnical studies, traffic impact
analysis, market feasibility analysis, or water needs analysis, be submitted
together with the application for site plan review.
      5.   Application: An application for development that requires modified
site plan review must be submitted to the community development department and
must contain the information and be in the format required by the modified site
plan review procedures and standards available from the community development
department. The application must include the following, as determined by staff:
         a.   General development application form.
         b.   Site plan.
         c.   Landscaping and irrigation plan.
         d.   Architectural building elevations.
         e.   Grading and drainage plan.
         f.   Utility plan.
         g.   Road plan and profiles.
         h.   Other studies and analyses requested by staff or planning
commission that may include geotechnical studies, traffic impact analysis,
market feasibility analysis, water needs analysis, etc.
         i.   Adjacent property information.
         j.   Mailing labels with names and addresses from the Salt Lake County
recorder's office of property owners within three hundred feet (300') of
proposed project (when required by staff).
         k.   Fees according to the fee schedule as adopted by the city
council.
      6.   Preliminary Review Process: Upon submittal of an application and
supporting information and review at a development review meeting, the modified
site plan shall be forwarded to the reviewing departments and agencies, as
determined at the meeting, who shall review it preliminarily to determine if
the plan, together with all supporting information, is complete and complies
with all the requirements of this code and other applicable city and agencies'
standards.
If the departments' and agencies' reviews determine that all required,
necessary, and requested information has not been submitted or that some of the
specifics of the plan or information do not comply with the requirements of
this code, the applicant shall be notified in writing and/or on the plans of
any deficiencies, comments, corrections, and/or requirements (including
additional information and/or studies) to be addressed. The revised plan and
all required, necessary, and requested supporting information must be
resubmitted after the appropriate additions and corrections are made in order
to complete the application.
Upon resubmittal, the modified site plan will again be forwarded to the
reviewing departments and agencies, and to the planning commission, if
required. The applicant shall be required to resubmit the plan and supporting
documents to the city until all departments and agencies determine the
submittal is complete and complies with the requirements of this code and other
applicable city and agencies' standards. Failure to submit complete information
will result in written notification to the applicant that the review cannot
proceed further until all required, necessary, and requested information is
submitted.
      7.   Planning Commission Final Review (If Required): When the review of
the modified site plan has been determined to be complete and in compliance
with all requirements, the plan, together with all supporting information, will
be forwarded to the planning commission for review, if required. The planning
commission shall review the plan, including supporting information, to
determine if all appropriate impacts have been addressed and to receive public
input, when required, concerning impacts and mitigation. The planning
commission may require additional study/analysis to enable it to determine what
impacts are necessary to address and may establish additional requirements to
address anticipated impacts.
      8.   Final Reviews And Approval: The final modified site plan shall be
reviewed by city departments and other agencies to determine its completeness
and compliance with all requirements, corrections, additions, etc.
When the director makes the determination that the final modified site plan is
complete and complies with all the requirements, the plan will be stamped and
signed by the director, the planning staff member handling the review, and the
city engineer.
Once signed by all appropriate city departments, the site plan, civil drawings,
and landscape/irrigation plans, along with the agreement to conditions shall be
signed by the developer. All site plan sets, agreements to conditions, and
improvement guarantees must be signed by or in the name of the same person or
entity.
In addition to the above, any required items not previously submitted,
including any required dedication documents, fees, improvement guarantees, and
improvement agreements must be submitted at this time before a building or
construction permit may be issued.
A copy of the approved, signed site plan, civil drawings, and the landscape/
irrigation plans shall be kept on the construction site at all times with the
approved building plans.
A grading permit may be issued prior to the issuance of a building permit with
the approval of the city engineer together with a guarantee in an amount to be
determined by the city engineer.
      9.   Building Permit: Once the final modified site plan sets have been
signed, fees paid, the guarantee for improvements is in place, a building
permit may be issued to begin construction. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.33
ADMINISTRATIVE AND NONADMINISTRATIVE CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
SECTION:
13.33.010: Purpose
13.33.020: Application And Review Process; Administrative Conditional Use
13.33.030: Application And Review Process; Nonadministrative Conditional Use
13.33.040: General Standards For All Conditional Uses
13.33.050: Conditions
13.33.060: Determination
13.33.070: Modification Or Revocation
13.33.080: Building Permit
13.33.090: Expiration
13.33.100: Administrative Conditional Use Appeals
13.33.110: Nonadministrative Conditional Use Appeals
13.33.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of conditional uses is to allow a land use that, because of its
unique characteristics or potential impact on the municipality, surrounding
neighbors, or adjacent land uses, may be compatible only if certain conditions
are required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental impacts or, if the
detrimental impacts or effects cannot be mitigated or eliminated, to prohibit
such use. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.33.020: APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS; ADMINISTRATIVE CONDITIONAL USE:
An administrative conditional use permit is required for all uses listed as
administrative conditional uses in each zone district or elsewhere in the
development code. No person or entity shall operate or conduct a use designated
as an administrative conditional use within the applicable zone district
without first obtaining an administrative conditional use permit. Applications
for an administrative conditional use permit are required to comply with all
requirements of this title for review and approval, including the requirements
for a building permit, site plan, or subdivision approval procedures and any
other applicable requirements of this code, including, but not limited to,
guarantees.
   A.   Development Review: To help expedite review of an administrative
conditional use proposal, prior to submitting an application for an
administrative conditional use permit, interested persons may meet informally
with staff to become acquainted with the substantive and procedural
requirements of this code.
If requested by staff, persons proposing a development that requires an
administrative conditional use shall attend a development review meeting. At
the meeting, the various departments will initially assess the development
proposal and information submitted and make suggestions with respect to the
proposal's compliance with the provisions of the appropriate regulations of
this code, applicable building codes, and any other applicable ordinances,
codes, or standards of the city; suggest possible means of mitigating or
eliminating any detrimental impacts or effects; and provide information
concerning the city's review requirements and procedures.
Staff members may request that additional studies or information, such as
geotechnical studies, traffic impact analyses, market feasibility analyses, or
noise impact analyses be submitted, together with the application for
administrative conditional use review.
   B.   Application: The property owner or authorized agent thereof shall
submit the following, as determined necessary by staff:
      1.   An application together with all required information for an
administrative conditional use permit.
      2.   An application together with all information required for site plan
review (where site plan review is required); or subdivision review (where
subdivision review is required).
      3.   Sufficient information to demonstrate that the general and specific
requirements and standards of this code will be met by the construction and
operation of the proposed building, structure, or use.
      4.   Plats, plans and/or drawings drawn to scale showing the location and
dimensions of buildings, streets, and other improvements on or near the subject
property that may be affected by the proposed use and showing the nature and
extent of those effects.
      5.   Fees according to the fee schedule as adopted by the city council.
   C.   Preliminary Review: Upon submittal of an administrative conditional use
application and supporting information, it shall be reviewed by staff to
determine if it is complete and complies with all requirements of this code. If
the proposed conditional use also requires site plan or subdivision review, it
shall proceed through the preliminary review process as set forth for those
applications.
   D.   Director Review: The director shall review the application(s) including
all information to determine if the general standards have been complied with,
and/or all impacts and detrimental effects have been addressed and to receive
public input, when required, concerning detrimental impacts or effects and
their mitigation or elimination. Additional studies/analysis may be required to
enable the director to determine what detrimental impacts or effects need to be
addressed, and the director may establish additional conditions to address
them.
   E.   Final Review: If the director establishes additional requirements and
conditions, the applicant shall submit all necessary documents that comply with
all the ordinances, requirements, corrections, additions, conditions, etc., to
the director. Final review and decision of approval shall be granted by the
director. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.33.030: APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS; NONADMINISTRATIVE CONDITIONAL USE:
A nonadministrative conditional use permit is required for all uses listed as
nonadministrative conditional uses in each zone district or elsewhere in the
development code. No person or entity shall operate or conduct a use designated
as a nonadministrative conditional use within the applicable zoning district
without first obtaining a nonadministrative conditional use permit.
Applications for a nonadministrative conditional use permit are required to
comply with all requirements of this title for review and approval, including
the requirements for a building permit, site plan, or subdivision approval
procedures and any other applicable requirements of this code, including, but
not limited to, guarantees. The director shall determine when an application is
complete.
   A.   Development Review: To help expedite review of a nonadministrative
conditional use proposal, prior to submitting an application for a
nonadministrative conditional use permit, interested persons may meet
informally with staff to become acquainted with the substantive and procedural
requirements of this code.
If requested by staff, persons proposing a development that requires a
nonadministrative conditional use shall attend a development review meeting. At
the meeting, the various departments will initially assess the development
proposal and information submitted and make suggestions with respect to the
proposal's compliance with the provisions of the appropriate regulations of
this code, applicable building codes, and any other applicable ordinances,
codes, or standards of the city; suggest possible means of mitigating or
eliminating any detrimental impacts or effects; and provide information
concerning the city's review requirements and procedures.
Staff members may request that additional studies or information, such as
geotechnical studies, traffic impact analysis, market feasibility analysis, or
noise impact analysis be submitted, together with the application for
nonadministrative conditional use review.
   B.   Application: The property owner or authorized agent thereof shall
submit the following, as determined necessary by staff:
      1.   An application together with all required information for a
nonadministrative conditional use permit.
      2.   An application together with all information required for site plan
review (where site plan review is required); or subdivision review (where
subdivision review is required).
      3.   Sufficient information to demonstrate that the general and specific
requirements and standards of this code will be met by the construction and
operation of the proposed building, structure, or use.
      4.   Plats, plans and/or drawings drawn to scale showing the location and
dimensions of buildings, streets, and other improvements on or near the subject
property that may be affected by the proposed use and showing the nature and
extent of those effects.
      5.   Fees according to the fee schedule as adopted by the city council.
   C.   Initial Review: Upon submittal of a nonadministrative conditional use
application and supporting information, it shall be reviewed by staff to
determine if it is complete and complies with all requirements of this code. If
the proposed conditional use also requires site plan or subdivision review, it
shall proceed through the preliminary review process as set forth for those
applications.
   D.   Planning Commission Review: When initial review of the
nonadministrative conditional use and site plan or subdivision (if required)
has been determined to be complete and in compliance with all requirements, the
application(s) together with all supporting information, will be forwarded to
the planning commission for preliminary review at a public hearing.
The planning commission shall review the application(s) including all
information to determine if the general standards have been complied with, and/
or all impacts and detrimental effects have been addressed and to receive
public input, when required, concerning detrimental impacts or effects and
their mitigation or elimination. Additional studies/analyses may be required to
enable the planning commission to determine what detrimental impacts or effects
need to be addressed, and the planning commission may establish additional
conditions to address them.
   E.   Final Review: If the planning commission grants preliminary
nonadministrative conditional use approval and establishes additional
requirements and conditions, the applicant shall submit all necessary documents
that comply with all the ordinances, requirements, corrections, additions,
conditions, etc., to the community development department to determine
compliance. Final review and decision of approval shall be granted by the
director unless otherwise directed by the planning commission. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012)
13.33.040: GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL CONDITIONAL USES:
No conditional use may be approved unless the proposed use complies with the
applicable provisions of this code, state, and federal law; and the following
standards that apply to all conditional uses.
   A.   Equivalent To Permitted Use: Any detrimental impacts or effects from
the proposed use on any of the following shall not exceed those that could
reasonably be expected to arise from a use that is permitted in the district:
      1.   The health, safety, and welfare of the city and its present and
future inhabitants and businesses.
      2.   The prosperity of the city and its present and future inhabitants
and businesses.
      3.   The morals, peace and good order, comfort, convenience, and
aesthetics of the city and its present and future inhabitants and businesses.
      4.   The tax base.
      5.   Economy in governmental expenditures.
      6.   The state's agricultural and other industries.
      7.   The urban and nonurban development.
      8.   Access to sunlight for solar energy devices.
      9.   Property values.
   B.   Impact Burden: Any cost of mitigating or eliminating detrimental
impacts or effects in excess of those which could be reasonably expected to
arise from a permitted use shall become a charge against the development so as
not to constitute a burden on the municipality, surrounding neighbors, or
adjacent land uses.
   C.   Conform To The Objectives Of The General Plan: The proposed conditional
use shall promote and conform with the objectives of the general plan and shall
not limit the effectiveness of land use controls, promote blight, or injure
property values. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.33.050: CONDITIONS:
In order to achieve compliance with the standards set forth herein, the city
may impose conditions that address:
   A.   Size, configuration, and location of the site and the proposed site
plan layout.
   B.   Proposed site ingress and egress to existing and proposed roads and
streets.
   C.   The adequacy, provision, relocation, or protection of public facilities
and amenities, including roads and streets, culinary water, secondary water,
sanitary sewer, storm drainage, public safety and fire protections, and other
utilities.
   D.   Design, location, and amount of off street parking, loading areas and
solid waste disposal, and refuse collection areas.
   E.   Site circulation patterns for vehicular, pedestrian and other traffic.
   F.   Massing, size, number, location, design, exterior features, materials,
and colors of buildings, structures, and other facilities.
   G.   The location and design of all site features, including proposed
signage, lighting, and site furnishings.
   H.   The provision of usable open space, public features, and recreational
amenities.
   I.   Fencing, screening and landscape treatments, and other features
designed to increase the attractiveness and safety of the site and protect
adjoining property owners from noise, visual, and other impacts.
   J.   Measures directed at minimizing or eliminating possible nuisance
factors including, but not limited to, noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt,
debris, plant materials, odors, gases, noxious matter, heat, glare,
electromagnetic disturbances, and radiation.
   K.   Measures designed to protect the natural features of the site including
wetlands and drainageways, groundwater protection, soils, wildlife, and plant
life.
   L.   The regulation of operating hours for activities affecting normal
schedules and functions.
   M.   Identifying a time for regular review and monitoring, as determined
necessary, to ensure the use continues to operate in compliance with all
conditions and requirements of approval.
   N.   Measures to ensure compliance with all conditions and requirements of
approval, including, but not limited to, bonds, letters of credit, improvement
agreements, agreements to conditions, road maintenance funds, and restrictive
covenants.
   O.   Such other conditions determined reasonable and necessary by the city
to allow the operation of the proposed conditional use, at the proposed
location in compliance with the requirements of this code. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012)
13.33.060: DETERMINATION:
A conditional use permit shall be approved if conditions are proposed or can be
imposed to mitigate the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of the
proposed use in accordance with the standards set forth herein. If the
reasonably anticipated detrimental impacts or effects of the proposed
conditional use cannot be substantially mitigated or eliminated by the proposal
or the imposition of conditions to achieve compliance with the standards set
forth herein, the conditional use permit may be denied. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.33.070: MODIFICATION OR REVOCATION:
All approvals of conditional use permits are conditional upon additional
reviews, after the use has been established, to determine if the actual
detrimental impacts and effects have been mitigated or eliminated to meet the
general standards set forth herein and to evaluate whether they continue to be
effective in doing so. If the use does not meet the general standards,
additional conditions may be imposed to achieve compliance. The planning
commission, on its own motion or upon a staff recommendation or after receipt
of an applicant's request, may hold a hearing upon the question of modification
or revocation of a conditional use permit granted under or pursuant to the
provisions of this section. The planning commission may modify the conditions
under which the conditional use was granted or revoke the conditional use
permit if the commission finds:
   A.   The actual detrimental effects or impacts are greater than anticipated.
   B.   The permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud.
   C.   The use for which the permit was granted has now ceased for at least
six (6) consecutive calendar months.
   D.   One or more of the conditions of the permit have not been met.
   E.   The holder or user of the conditional use permit has failed to comply
with any city, state or federal law governing the conduct of the use.
   F.   The holder or user of the conditional use permit has failed to
construct or maintain the site as shown on the approved plan.
   G.   One or more of the general standards have not been met. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012)
13.33.080: BUILDING PERMIT:
After the community development department determines that the documents,
information, site plan (where required) or subdivision plat (where required)
comply with all the requirements established by the departments, agencies,
planning commission, and this title, the director may approve an application
for a building or other permit or business license for those uses that do not
require construction. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.33.090: EXPIRATION:
A conditional use permit shall expire and become null and void if the permit
has not been implemented by the recipient within one year of the date of
approval. The permit shall be considered implemented if the recipient either
engages or participates in the conditional use or completes substantial
construction on the project for which the permit was granted. The community
development department may grant a maximum of two (2) extensions of up to six
(6) months each if it finds that the use, with the conditions previously
imposed by the planning commission, will still be in compliance with the
general standards. If the department finds that the use no longer complies with
those standards, the recipient may request that the planning commission review
the request for an extension. The planning commission may grant a maximum of
two (2) extensions of up to six (6) months each if it finds that the use, with
the conditions previously imposed, or with the imposition of additional
conditions, will still be in compliance with the general standards. (Ord. 12-
15, 7-11-2012)
13.33.100: ADMINISTRATIVE CONDITIONAL USE APPEALS:
   A.   All appeals from decisions of the director regarding administrative
conditional use permits shall be reviewed by the appeal authority.
   B.   An appeal shall be filed in writing with the city recorder within ten
(10) calendar days of the date that the director issues his written decision.
   C.   Except as provided in subsection D of this section, review of decisions
of the director shall be confined to the record developed by the director.
   D.   The appeal authority may hold a public hearing or permit an evidentiary
review outside the record to determine whether:
      1.   An alleged procedural irregularity has occurred that does not appear
in the record; or
      2.   The proposed use would:
         a.   Influence patterns of growth adverse to the integrity of the
general plan as implemented by this code;
         b.   Have a long term detrimental impact on city resources available
for capital improvements or urban services; or
         c.   Undermine the health, safety, or welfare of the surrounding
neighborhood or community.
   If the appeal authority determines that the use does not comply with the
general standards or that the conditions proposed or imposed do not
substantially mitigate or eliminate all anticipated detrimental impacts or
effects, it shall then determine if there are additional or substitute
conditions that may be proposed or imposed.
   If the appeal authority determines that the detrimental effects of the
proposed conditional use cannot be substantially mitigated or eliminated by the
proposed or imposed conditions in order to achieve compliance with the
standards, it may deny the conditional use. The appeal authority may also
remand the appeal to the director for further consideration. The appeal
authority shall be governed by the general standards set forth herein in making
its determination.
   E.   Any decision by the appeal authority, except a remand to the director,
shall be final and subject to the conditions imposed by the director. The
development code shall not be construed to vest a right to any conditional use
except upon complete and continued compliance with the conditions finally
approved.
   F.   Ex parte communication between the appeal authority serving in an
official capacity in a proceeding regarding an administrative conditional use
appeal and any party to the appeal is prohibited. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd.
Ord. 20-13, 5-6-2020)
13.33.110: NONADMINISTRATIVE CONDITIONAL USE APPEALS:
   A.   All appeals from decisions of the planning commission regarding
nonadministrative conditional use permits shall be reviewed by the appeal
authority.
   B.   An appeal shall be filed in writing with the city recorder within ten
(10) calendar days of the date of the planning commission decision at which the
permit was approved.
   C.   Except as provided in subsection D of this section, review of decisions
of the planning commission shall be confined to the administrative record
developed by the commission.
   D.   The appeal authority may hold a public hearing or permit an evidentiary
review outside the planning commission record to determine whether:
      1.   An alleged procedural irregularity has occurred that does not appear
in the record; or
      2.   The proposed use would:
         a.   Influence patterns of growth adverse to the integrity of the
general plan as implemented by this code;
         b.   Have a long term detrimental impact on city resources available
for capital improvements or urban services; or
         c.   Undermine the health, safety, or welfare of the surrounding
neighborhood or community.
   E.   The appeal authority shall review the record of the planning
commission, together with additional evidence when received, to determine if
the decision was correct.
      If the appeal authority determines that the use does not comply with the
general standards or that the conditions proposed or imposed do not
substantially mitigate or eliminate all anticipated detrimental impacts or
effects, it shall then determine if there are additional or substitute
conditions that may be proposed or imposed.
      If the appeal authority determines that the detrimental effects of the
proposed conditional use cannot be substantially mitigated or eliminated by the
proposed or imposed conditions in order to achieve compliance with the
standards, it may deny the conditional use.
      The appeal authority may also remand the appeal to the planning
commission for further consideration. The city appeal authority shall be
governed by the general standards set forth herein in making its determination.
   F.   Any decision by the appeal authority, except a remand to the planning
commission, shall be final and subject to the conditions imposed by the appeal
authority. The development code shall not be construed to vest a right to any
conditional use except upon complete and continued compliance with the
conditions finally approved.
   G.   Ex parte communication between the appeal authority serving in an
official capacity in a proceeding regarding an appeal of a nonadministrative
conditional use appeal and any party to the appeal is prohibited. (Ord. 12-15,
7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 20-13, 5-6-2020)
CHAPTER 13.34
APPEALS AND VARIANCES
SECTION:
13.34.010: Appeals
13.34.020: Variances
13.34.030: District Court Review Of Decision
13.34.010: APPEALS:
   A.   Administrative Appeal Required: As a condition precedent to judicial
review, each adversely affected person shall timely and specifically challenge
the Land Use Authority's decision, in accordance with this title.
   B.   Authority: The Appeal Authorities set forth in this Code act in a
quasi-judicial manner and as the final arbiter of issues involving the
interpretation or application of land use ordinances.
   C.   Who May Appeal: The applicant, a board or officer of the City, or any
person adversely affected by the Land Use Authority's decision administering or
interpreting a land use ordinance may, within the time period provided in this
Code, appeal that decision to the designated Appeal Authority by alleging that
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
the Land Use Authority in the administration or interpretation of this Code.
   D.   Time For Appeal: An appeal shall be filed in writing with the City
Recorder within ten (10) calendar days of the date the Land Use Authority
decision was made.
   E.   Information To Be Presented:
      1.   An appellant must first present any and all information to the Land
Use Authority which it intends to raise before the Appeal Authority. The
appellant may not bring new information for consideration before the Appeal
Authority that had not been previously presented to the Land Use Authority
during its consideration of the matter.
      2.   An appellant must present to the designated Appeal Authority every
theory of relief that it can raise in District Court.
      3.   No new information that was not previously presented to the Land Use
Authority may be presented on appeal.
   F.   Review Of The Record Of The Land Use Authority:
      1.   The Appeal Authority's review of decisions of a Land Use Authority
shall be confined to the administrative record developed by the Land Use
Authority unless the Appeal Authority determines that the record is incomplete
or deficient.
      2.   If the Appeal Authority determines that the record is incomplete or
deficient, it may review the matter de novo.
   G.   Burden Of Proof: The appellant has the burden of proving that the Land
Use Authority erred.
   H.   Standard Of Review:
      1.   Legal Issues; Correctness Standard: The Appeal Authority shall
determine the correctness of a decision of the Land Use Authority or
administrative official in its interpretation and application of a land use
ordinance. Because no specialized knowledge is necessary to make such a
determination, no deference is given to the Land Use Authority or
administrative official. Provided, however, the Appeal Authority shall not
overrule that decision as a matter of law without the advice of its legal
counsel.
      2.   Factual Issues And Other Issues; Arbitrary And Capricious Standard:
Land Use Authorities and administrative officials have specialized knowledge in
the field of planning and land use and are charged with and are experienced in
implementing the goals and policies of the community as adopted by and under
the supervision of elected representatives of the public. Accordingly, they
should be allowed a comparatively wide latitude of discretion; and their
actions endowed with a presumption of correctness and validity which an Appeal
Authority should not interfere with unless it is shown that there is no
reasonable basis to justify the action taken, and that, therefore, the
determinations made were so unreasonable as to be arbitrary and capricious. It
is not the Appeal Authority's prerogative to substitute its judgment for that
of the Land Use Authority where the record discloses a reasonable basis for the
Land Use Authority's determinations.
      3.   Conditional Use Permits: The standard of review for appeals
concerning administrative and nonadministrative conditional use permits is set
forth in the administrative and nonadministrative conditional use permit
chapter of this Code.
   I.   Scope Of Authority: Only those decisions in which a Land Use Authority
has applied a land use ordinance to a particular application, person, or parcel
may be appealed to an Appeal Authority. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   J.   Effective Date Of Appeal Authority Decision: A decision of an Appeal
Authority takes effect:
      1.   Hearing Officer: At the meeting in which the decision is made unless
a different time is designated by the Hearing Officer at the time the decision
is made.
      2.   Other Appeal Authorities: On the date when the Appeal Authority
issues a written decision or approval of the minutes of the meeting at which
the decision was made, if applicable, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 18-09, 2-
28-2018)
13.34.020: VARIANCES:
   A.   Who May Request A Variance: Any person, authorized agent in writing, or
entity desiring a waiver or modification of the requirements of the land use
ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that he owns, leases, or in which
he holds some other beneficial interest, may apply to the Appeal Authority for
a variance from the terms of the land use ordinance.
   B.   Standards For Variances:
      1.   A variance may only be granted if:
         a.   Literal enforcement of the land use ordinance would cause an
unreasonable hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the
general purpose of the land use ordinances; and
         b.   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do
not generally apply to other properties in the same zone district; and
         c.   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same zone
district; and
         d.   The variance will not substantially affect the General Plan and
will not be contrary to the public interest; and
         e.   The spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial
justice done.
      2.   In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship under subsection B1 of this section, the
Appeal Authority may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged
hardship:
         a.   Is located on or associated with the property for which the
variance is sought; and
         b.   Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, and not from
conditions that are general to the neighborhood; and
         c.   Is not self-imposed or economic. A hardship inflicted on a
property by action of a previous owner is considered to be self- imposed and
shall not be reason for granting a variance to the current owner.
      3.   In determining whether or not there are special circumstances
attached to the property under subsection B1 of this section, the Appeal
Authority may find that special circumstances exist only if the special
circumstances:
         a.   Relate to the hardship complained of; and
         b.   Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in
the same zone district.
   C.   Burden Of Proof: The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that
all of the conditions justifying a variance have been met.
   D.   Effect: Variances run with the land.
   E.   Use Variances Not Allowed: The Appeal Authority may not grant use
variances.
   F.   Imposing Additional Requirements: In granting a variance, the Appeal
Authority may impose additional requirements on the applicant that will:
      1.   Mitigate any harmful effects of the variance; or
      2.   Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived or
modified. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.34.030: DISTRICT COURT REVIEW OF DECISION:
   A.   Any person adversely affected by a final decision made in the exercise
of or in violation of the provisions of this title may file a petition for
review of the decision with the District Court within thirty (30) calendar days
after the land use decision is final.
   B.   No person may challenge in District Court the City's land use decision
made under this title or under a regulation made under authority of this Code,
until that person has exhausted their administrative remedies as provided
herein and in Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-101 et seq., as amended, if
applicable.
   C.   The filing of a petition in the District Court and its review shall be
governed by the provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-101 et seq., as
amended. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.35
NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
13.35.010: Applicant Notice; Waiver Of Requirements
13.35.020: Third Party Notice
13.35.030: General Plan
13.35.040: Zone District Map And Land Development Code
13.35.050: Subdivision Regulations
13.35.060: Subdivision Plats And Amendments
13.35.070: Condominium Plats And Amendments
13.35.080: Street Vacations, Alterations, Amendments Or Closures (Not Within A
Subdivision Plat)
13.35.090: General Notice Requirements
13.35.100: Notice Challenge
13.35.010: APPLICANT NOTICE; WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   For each land use application the city shall:
      1.   Notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of each public
hearing and public meeting to consider the application;
      2.   Provide to each applicant a copy of each staff report regarding the
applicant or the pending application at least three (3) business days before
the public hearing or public meeting; and
      3.   Notify the applicant of any final action on a pending application.
   B.   The applicant may waive the requirements of subsection A1, A2, or A3 of
this section. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.35.020: THIRD PARTY NOTICE:
   A.   For those sections of this title that require notice to adjacent
property owners (except as provided below), the city shall:
      1.   Mail notice three (3) business days before the public hearing or
public meeting to the record owner of each parcel within three hundred feet
(300') of the property that is the subject of the hearing; or
      2.   Post notice on the property with a sign no smaller than eleven
inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17") and of sufficient durability, print
quality, and location that is reasonably calculated to give notice to
passersby.
   B.   The mailed notice to third party property owners under subsection A1 of
this section shall include both property owners within the city boundaries and
property owners within adjacent jurisdictions within three hundred feet (300')
of the subject property. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.35.030: GENERAL PLAN:
   A.   Notice Of General Plan Amendment:
      1.   The planning commission shall provide notice of the date, time, and
place of the first public hearing to consider any modification of all or any
portion of the general plan recommendation.
      2.   The city shall provide ten (10) calendar days' notice before the
public hearing of its intent to amend the general plan by:
         a.   Publishing in a newspaper of general circulation;
         b.   Publishing in the Utah public notice website;
         c.   Mailing to each affected entity;
         d.   Posting in at least three (3) public locations; and
         e.   Publishing on the city's official website.
   B.   General Plan Consideration; Notice Required:
      1.   After a proposed general plan or general plan amendment for all or
part of the city has been prepared, the planning commission shall schedule and
hold a public hearing to consider the proposed plan or plan amendment after
notice is given as set forth below.
      2.   After the planning commission has forwarded the proposed general
plan or amendment to the city council, the council shall hold a public meeting
on the proposal after notice is given as set forth below.
      3.   The city shall provide:
         a.   Notice of the date, time, and place of the first public hearing
to consider the original adoption or any modification of all or any portion of
a general plan; and
         b.   Notice of each public meeting on the subject.
   C.   Notice For Public Hearings: Each notice of a public hearing to consider
the original adoption or any modification of all or any portion of a general
plan shall be at least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing and
shall be:
      1.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area;
      2.   Mailed to each affected entity; and
      3.   Posted in at least three (3) public locations within the city or on
the city's official website.
   D.   Notice For Public Meetings: Each notice of a public meeting to consider
the original adoption or any modification of all or any portion of a general
plan shall be at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting and shall be:
      1.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area; and
      2.   Posted in at least three (3) public locations within the city or on
the city's official website. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.35.040: ZONE DISTRICT MAP AND LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE:
   A.   Zone District Map And Land Development Code Consideration:
      1.   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing to consider and
make recommendations to the city council on a proposed land development code,
zone district map or amendment thereto after notice is given as set forth
below.
      2.   After the planning commission has forwarded the proposed zone
district map or land development code or amendment and its recommendation to
the city council, the council shall consider each proposed land development
code, zone district map or amendment thereto at a public meeting after notice
is given as set forth below.
   B.   Notice Required: The city shall provide notice of the date, time and
place of the first public hearing to consider the adoption or any modification
of the land development code or zone district map and shall give notice of each
public meeting on the subject.
   C.   Public Hearing Notice: Each notice of a public hearing to consider the
adoption or amendment of a land use ordinance or zone district map shall be:
      1.   Mailed to each affected entity at least ten (10) calendar days
before the public hearing;
      2.   Posted in at least three (3) public locations within the city or on
the city's official website; and
      3.   Published or mailed:
         a.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area at
least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing; or
         b.   Mailed at least three (3) days before the public hearing to:
            (1)   Each property owner whose land is directly affected by the
code or zone district map change; and
            (2)   Each adjacent property owner within three hundred feet (300')
of the land directly affected.
   D.   Public Meeting Notice: The city shall provide notice for each public
meeting on the subject at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting and
shall post the notice:
      1.   In at least three (3) public locations within the city; or
      2.   On the city's official website. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.35.050: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Subdivision Regulations Consideration:
      1.   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing to consider and
recommend to the city council proposed ordinances regulating the subdivision of
land or amendments thereto after notice is given as set forth below.
      2.   After the planning commission has forwarded the proposed ordinances
regulating the subdivision of land or amendments thereto and its recommendation
to the city council, the council shall consider each proposed ordinance
regulating the subdivision of land or amendment thereto at a public meeting
after notice is given as set forth below.
   B.   Notice Required: The city shall give notice of the date, time and place
of the first public hearing to consider the adoption or modification of
subdivision ordinances and shall give notice of each public meeting on the
subject.
   C.   Public Hearing Notice: Each notice of a public hearing to consider
ordinances that regulate the subdivision of land within the city or amendments
shall be:
      1.   Mailed to each affected entity at least ten (10) calendar days
before the public hearing;
      2.   Be posted:
         a.   In at least three (3) public locations within the city; or
         b.   On the city's official website; and
      3.   Published or mailed:
         a.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area at
least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing; or
         b.   Mailed at least three (3) days before the public hearing to:
            (1)   Each property owner whose land is directly affected by the
subdivision ordinance change; and
            (2)   The mailed notice to third party property owners under
subsection
13.35.020A1 of this chapter shall include both property owners within the city
boundaries and property owners within adjacent jurisdictions within three
hundred feet (300') of the subject property.
   D.   Public Meeting Notice: Each notice of a public meeting to consider
ordinances that regulate the subdivision of land within the city or amendments
shall be at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting and shall be
posted:
      1.   In at least three (3) public locations within the city; or
      2.   On the city's official website. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.35.060: SUBDIVISION PLATS AND AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Subdivision Plat Consideration:
      1.   The planning commission shall hold a public hearing to consider a
preliminary subdivision plat or an amendment to a preliminary subdivision plat
after notice is given as set forth below.
      2.   If an entire subdivision is vacated, the city council shall consider
the matter at a public meeting and pass a resolution containing a legal
description of the entire vacated subdivision to be recorded in the county
recorder's office.
   B.   Public Hearing Notice: The city shall give notice of the date, time,
and place of a public hearing as follows:
      1.   Mailed not less than ten (10) calendar days before the public
hearing and addressed to the record owner of each parcel within the subdivision
plat and the record owner of each parcel within three hundred feet (300') of
the property proposed for subdivision or an amendment to a subdivision; or
      2.   Posted not less than ten (10) calendar days before the public
hearing on the property proposed for subdivision or amendment, in a visible
location, with a sign of sufficient size, durability, and print quality that is
reasonably calculated to give notice to passersby; and
      3.   If a proposed amendment involves the vacation, alteration,
amendment, or closure of a street, the city shall:
         a.   Publish the notice once a week for four (4) consecutive weeks
before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation; and
         b.   Mail notice to each affected entity.
      4.   If a preliminary plat is being considered that describes a multiple-
unit residential development or a commercial or industrial development, notice
shall be mailed not less than three (3) calendar days before the public hearing
to each affected entity.
   C.   By Petition: If a petition has been filed to amend a subdivision
pursuant to 10-9a-608 Utah Code Annotated, the public hearing shall be within
forty five (45) days after the petition has been filed if:
      1.   An owner within the plat notifies the city of their objection to a
proposed vacation, alteration, or amendment of a subdivision plat, in writing,
within ten (10) calendar days of mailed notification; or
      2.   All the owners in the subdivision have not signed the revised plat.
   D.   Public Meeting Notice: Each notice of a public meeting to consider the
vacation of an entire subdivision shall be at least twenty four (24) hours
before the meeting and shall be posted:
      1.   In at least three (3) public locations within the city; and
      2.   On the city's official website. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.35.070: CONDOMINIUM PLATS AND AMENDMENTS:
If required by other provisions of this code or state law, the planning
commission shall consider a condominium plat at a public hearing and comply
with the noticing requirements therein. If a public hearing is not required,
the planning commission shall consider the condominium plat at a public
meeting. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.35.080: STREET VACATIONS, ALTERATIONS, AMENDMENTS OR CLOSURES (NOT WITHIN A
SUBDIVISION PLAT):
   A.   Consideration Of Public Street Vacations, Alterations, Amendments, Or
Closures:
      1.   Consideration of vacation, alteration, amendment or closure of
public streets that are within a subdivision plat shall comply with the hearing
and notice provisions set forth for subdivision plat amendments above.
      2.   For consideration of the vacation, alteration, amendment, or closure
of public streets that are not within a subdivision plat, the planning
commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the vacation, alteration,
amendment, or closure.
   B.   Public Hearing Notice: The planning commission shall give notice of the
date, place, and time of a public hearing before it to consider a vacation,
alteration, amendment, or closure of a public street as follows:
      1.   Mailing notice not less than ten (10) calendar days before the
hearing addressed to the record owner of each parcel adjacent to the portion of
the public street proposed to be vacated, altered, amended or closed and the
record owner of each parcel within three hundred feet (300') of the portion of
the public street which is proposed to be vacated, altered, amended, or closed
and to each affected entity. The mailed notice to third party property owners
under subsection
13.35.020A1 of this chapter shall include both property owners within the city
boundaries and property owners within adjacent jurisdictions within three
hundred feet (300') of the subject property; and
      2.   Publish notice once a week for four (4) consecutive weeks before the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality in which the
land subject to the proposal is located. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.35.090: GENERAL NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
For those sections of this title which require public hearings or public
meetings for which the notice requirements are not specified, notice shall be
as follows:
   A.   Application Concerning Specific Parcel Of Property; Notice Of Public
Hearing: For an application that concerns a specific parcel of property, the
city shall provide notice of the date, time, and place of a public hearing that
is:
      1.   Posted not less than ten (10) calendar days before the public
hearing in at least three (3) public locations within the city or on the city's
official website;
      2.   Mailed not less than ten (10) calendar days before the public
hearing and addressed to the record owner of each parcel directly affected by
the application and of each parcel within three hundred feet (300') of that
property. The mailed notice to third party property owners under subsection
13.35.020A1 of this chapter shall include both property owners within the city
boundaries and property owners within adjacent jurisdictions within three
hundred feet (300') of the subject property; or
      3.   Posted not less than ten (10) calendar days before the public
hearing, on the property to which the application pertains, in a visible
location, with a sign of sufficient size, durability, and print quality that is
reasonably calculated to give notice to passersby.
   B.   Application Not Concerning Specific Parcel Of Property; Notice Of
Public Hearing: For an application that does not concern a specific parcel of
property (i.e., text change), the city shall provide notice of the date, time,
and place of a public hearing that is posted not less than ten (10) calendar
days before the public hearing in at least three (3) public locations within
the city or on the city's official website.
   C.   Notice For Public Meetings: The city shall provide notice of a public
meeting at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting that shall be posted
in at least three (3) public locations within the city or on the city's
official website. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.35.100: NOTICE CHALLENGE:
If notice given under authority of this chapter is not challenged pursuant to
the provisions of this code within thirty (30) calendar days after the meeting
or action for which notice is given, then notice is considered adequate and
proper. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.36
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
13.36.010: General Definitions And Terms
13.36.020: "A" Definitions
13.36.030: "B" Definitions
13.36.040: "C" Definitions
13.36.050: "D" Definitions
13.36.060: "E" Definitions
13.36.070: "F" Definitions
13.36.080: "G" Definitions
13.36.090: "H" Definitions
13.36.100: "I" Definitions
13.36.110: "J" Definitions
13.36.120: "K" Definitions
13.36.130: "L" Definitions
13.36.140: "M" Definitions
13.36.150: "N" Definitions
13.36.160: "O" Definitions
13.36.170: "P" Definitions
13.36.180: "Q" Definitions
13.36.190: "R" Definitions
13.36.200: "S" Definitions
13.36.210: "T" Definitions
13.36.220: "U" Definitions
13.36.230: "V" Definitions
13.36.240: "W" Definitions
13.36.250: "X" Definitions
13.36.260: "Y" Definitions
13.36.270: "Z" Definitions
13.36.010: GENERAL DEFINITIONS AND TERMS:
This chapter provides definitions of all land uses and general terms used
throughout this development code for which a definition is considered
necessary. All land uses allowed by right or by conditional use permit are
defined herein. Some land uses shown on the tables and in the definitions are
categorical, and many potentially allowable specific land uses are assumed to
be included in the categorical definitions. In the event of a question as to
which category an undefined land use may fall, the director shall make a final
determination.
For the purposes of this code, certain terms and words are hereby defined as
follows: Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; words in the singular
includes the plural; the plural includes individuals, partnerships,
corporations, clubs, or associations. The following words or terms, when
applied in this code, shall carry full force when used interchangeably: lot,
plot, parcel, premises or site; used, arranged, occupied, or maintained; sold
or dispensed; construct, reconstruct, erect, alter (structurally or otherwise),
but not the term maintenance. The word "used" shall be deemed also to include
designed, intended, or arranged to be used. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.36.020: "A" DEFINITIONS:
AASHTO: American Association Of State Highway And Transportation Officials.
ADA: Americans with disabilities act (42 USC section 12101 et seq.).
ABANDONED WELL: A well the use of which has been permanently discontinued or is
in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be used for its intended purpose or
for observation purposes.
ABUTTING:
   A.   Having a common border with, contiguous to or being separated from,
such a common border by a right of way, alley, or easement.
   B.   Contiguous to. For example, two (2) adjoining lots with a common
property line are considered to be abutting, including cases where two (2) or
more lots adjoin only on a corner or corners.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT: A housing unit which is self-contained but incorporated
within an existing structure that is designed as a single-family dwelling and
will not substantially alter the structure or the appearance of the structure.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY BUILDING: A detached, incidental subordinate
building customarily incidental to and located upon the same lot occupied by
the main use or building. Detached garages, sheds, workshops, and barns are
examples of accessory structures.
ACCESSORY USE: A use conducted on the same lot as the primary use of the
structure to which it is related; a use which is clearly incidental to and
customarily found in connection with such primary use.
ACREAGE:
  Gross: Overall total exclusive of deductions.
  Net: Remaining after all deductions are made.
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE (ALJ): A hearing officer who presides over an
administrative hearing.
ADMINISTRATIVE STANDARDS: The set of rules, procedures, and requirements set
forth in a landscape ordinance associated with making permit application,
assembling materials for public review, meeting the requirements of the
landscape ordinance, seeking approvals, enforcement, conducting site
inspections, and filing reports.
ADULT DAYCARE: See definitions of Human Services Programs Or Facilities and/or
Daycare, Adult.
AFFECTED ENTITY: A county, municipality, local school district, special service
district under Utah Code Annotated title 17D, chapter 1, special service
district act, school district, interlocal cooperation entity established under
Utah Code Annotated title 11, chapter 13, interlocal cooperation act, specified
public utility under Utah Code Annotated title 10, chapter 9a, municipal land
use, development, and management act, a property owners' association, or the
Utah department of transportation, if:
   A.   The entity's services of facilities are likely to require expansion or
significant modification because of an intended use of land;
   B.   The entity has filed with the city a copy of the entity's general or
long range plan; or
   C.   The entity has filed with the city a request for notice during the same
calendar year and before the city provides notice to an affected entity in
compliance with a requirement imposed under this title.
AGRICULTURE: The tilling of the soil, raising of crops, horticulture,
gardening, and beekeeping, but not including the keeping or raising of animals
or fowl and not including any agricultural industries or businesses, packing
plants, fur farms, animal hospitals, plant nurseries, or similar uses or sale
of farm or garden products not produced on the premises. (See definition of
farm animals.)
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND LICENSES:
  Bar Establishment License: A type of liquor license for "adult only" social
drinking, i.e., bars, nightclubs, cabarets, etc. A bar establishment license
allows the storage, sale, service, and consumption of alcoholic beverages on
the premises. Bar establishment licenses may be located in equity and/or
fraternal clubs which require memberships. Minors are prohibited on the
premises of the lounge or bar area of any fraternal or equity club or in a bar
or nightclub. Alcohol beverage service in a bar does not require that you order
food, though food must be available. Bars may sell all types of alcohol -
liquor, wine, flavored malt beverages, heavy beer, and beer may be served from
ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M.
  Hotel Alcohol License: A license that allows a hotel to have three (3) or
more "sublicenses" within its premises boundaries.
  Off Premises Beer Retailer License: A license that entitles the licensee to
sell beer in the original container for consumption off the premises.
  On Premises Banquet And Catering License: A license that allows the storage,
sale, service, and consumption of liquor, wine, heavy beer, and beer for
contracted banquet activities on the premises of a hotel, resort facility,
sports center, or convention center. It also allows for room service in hotels
and resorts.
  On Premises Beer Retailer License - Recreation: A license that allows the
sale of beer at retail for on-premises consumption for establishments that are
tied to a "recreational amenity". The "recreational amenity" must be on or
adjoining the beer retailer's business.
  Package Agency License: A license to operate a liquor store that offers a
modest selection of products. They may be located in hotels, in a winery,
distillery, or brewery, or in other limited situations as permitted by the
State. These businesses operate on a contract basis with the Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
  Reception Center License: A reception center license allows the storage,
sale, service, and consumption of liquor, wine, heavy beer, and beer for
private banquet or event functions on the premises of smaller venues that want
to sell, offer for sale, or furnish alcohol on their premises. The reception
center must be at least five thousand (5,000) square feet and have culinary
facilities on the premises, or under the control of the center, which is
adequate to prepare full meals. Its primary purpose must be leasing its
facility to a third party for their private event. Alcoholic beverages at a
reception center may be sold on any day from ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. until one
o'clock (1:00) A.M.
  Restaurant - Beer Only License: A license that permits the storage, sale,
service, and consumption of 3.2 percent beer on the premises of a restaurant
that is engaged primarily in serving meals to the general public. Patrons may
only purchase beer in conjunction with an order for food that is prepared, sold
and served at the restaurant. Each restaurant must maintain at least seventy
percent (70%) of its total restaurant business from the sale of food.
  Restaurant - Full Service License: A license that permits the storage, sale,
service, and consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a restaurant
that is engaged primarily in serving meals to the general public. Patrons may
only purchase alcoholic beverages in conjunction with an order of food that is
prepared, sold, and served at the restaurant. Each restaurant must maintain at
least seventy percent (70%) of its total restaurant business from the sale of
food.
  Restaurant - Limited Service License: A license that permits the storage,
sale, service, and consumption of wine, heavy beer, and beer on the premises of
a restaurant that is engaged primarily in serving meals to the general public.
Patrons may only purchase alcoholic beverages in conjunction with an order of
food that is prepared, sold, and served at the restaurant. Each restaurant must
maintain at least seventy percent (70%) of its total restaurant business from
the sale of food.
  Single Event Permit: Single event permits are available for a group that
wants to sell liquor, wine, beer or heavy beer (over 3.2 percent) at a
temporary event. These are available to a bona fide partnership, corporation,
limited liability company, church, political organization, or incorporated
association or to a recognized subordinate lodge, chapter or other local unit
thereof that is conducting a civic or community enterprise or convention. The
organization must have been in existence as a bona fide organization for at
least one year prior to the date of application. The permit allows for cash
bars and the sale of alcoholic beverages to the general public, or to the
organization's own invited guests for the duration of the event. Permits are
issued by the DABC Director contingent on review of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Commission. To ensure adequate processing and approval, complete
applications should be submitted thirty (30) days prior to the event.
Applications submitted outside of these guidelines risk non-issuance of a
permit. Additionally, due to statutory restrictions, applications received less
than seven (7) business days prior to the event will not be considered. (When
counting days, realize that there must be 7 business days between the day the
application is received and the date of the event.)
  Special Use Permit: Special use permits are issued for the purchase, sale,
storage, use, consumption, or manufacture of alcoholic products in limited
types and quantities, and for limited purposes. Permits may be granted as
follows: religious wine permits to religious organizations, industrial or
manufacturing use permits to persons or organizations involved in industrial or
manufacturing pursuits, scientific or educational use permits to persons or
organizations involved in scientific or educational pursuits, and public
service permits to operators of airlines, railroads or other public
conveyances.
  State Liquor Store: A State operated establishment that sells packaged
liquor, wine, and heavy beer (over 3.2 percent) for consumption off the
premises.
  Temporary Beer Event Permit: Temporary beer event permits for the sale of
beer (3.2 percent) are issued by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission for
on-premises consumption at a temporary event that does not last longer than
thirty (30) days. Permits are issued by the DABC Director contingent on review
of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission. To ensure adequate processing and
approval, complete applications should be submitted thirty (30) days prior to
the event. Applications submitted outside of these guidelines risk non-issuance
of a permit. Additionally, due to statutory restrictions, applications received
less than seven (7) business days prior to the event will not be considered.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV): Any motorized, off road vehicle fifty inches (50")
or less in overall width, having a dry weight of eight hundred (800) pounds or
less, designed to travel on three (3) or more low pressure tires.
ALLEY: A public or private way permanently reserved as a secondary means of
access to abutting property not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATION: Any change, addition, or modification in construction, or type of
occupancy of a building or structure, or any change in the structural members
of a building or structure such as walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders,
or exits.
ALZHEIMER'S FACILITY: A nursing care facility or assisted living facility whose
primary purpose is to provide living accommodations and services to residents
who have been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease or other type of dementia.
AMBULATORY SURGICAL FACILITY: See definition of healthcare facilities.
ANCILLARY COMMERCIAL: A commercial use conducted on the same lot as the primary
commercial use of the structure or property to which it is related; a
commercial use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in
connection with such primary commercial use.
ANCILLARY USE: A use conducted on the same lot as the primary use of the
structure to which it is related; a use which is clearly incidental to and
customarily found in connection with such primary use.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL, VETERINARY OFFICE: An establishment at which small, medium, or
large farm animals or household pets are treated or boarded within a completely
enclosed building, and the boarding of animals is limited to short term care
incidental to the animal hospital/veterinary office use.
ANIMAL KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: An establishment for the boarding, breeding,
raising, grooming, treating, selling, or training of small, medium, or large
farm animals or household pets for commercial gain.
APARTMENT: See definition of dwelling, multiple-family.
AQUARIUM: An establishment where aquatic collections of living organisms are
kept and exhibited.
ARCADE ENTERTAINMENT: An establishment offering five (5) or more amusement
devices including, but not limited to, coin operated electronic games, shooting
gallery, table games, and similar recreational diversions within an enclosed
building.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within the City
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
ART GALLERY: An establishment engaged in the exhibition and sale of artworks.
It does not include the sale of art supplies or other raw materials used in the
creation of artwork.
ARTIST'S STUDIO: The location where artwork is created. Examples include, but
are not limited to, painting, clay sculpting and firing, engraving, etc.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY:
   A.   A residential facility, licensed by the State of Utah, with a homelike
setting that provides an array of coordinated supportive personnel and
healthcare services, available twenty four (24) hours per day, to residents who
have been assessed under Utah Department of Health or Utah Department of Human
Services rules to need any of these services. Each resident shall have a
service plan based on the assessment, which may include:
      1.   Specified services of intermittent nursing care.
      2.   Administration of medication.
      3.   Support services promoting residents' independence and self-
sufficiency.
   B.   An assisted living facility does not include:
      1.   A "residential facility for persons with a disability" (defined
elsewhere in this chapter).
      2.   Adult daycare provided in conjunction with a residential facility
for elderly persons or a residential facility for persons with a disability.
   C.   Assisted living facilities are broken down into two (2) classes:
      1.   Limited capacity assisted living facility: A facility accommodating
not more than four (4) residents, excluding staff. All residents must be
ambulatory which means a person who is capable of achieving mobility sufficient
to exit a structure without the assistance of another person. Adult daycare
shall not be provided as part of the facility (see definition of human services
programs or facilities).
      2.   Large capacity assisted living facility: A facility accommodating
more than four (4) residents, excluding staff. Adult daycare may be approved
separately as provided elsewhere.
ASSISTED LIVING UNIT: A dwelling unit varying in square footage that provides a
residential living environment assisted by congregate meals, housekeeping and
personal services for persons age fifty five (55) or older, who have temporary
or periodic difficulties with one or more essential activities of daily living,
such as feeding, bathing, dressing or mobility. An assisted living unit shall
include accessory uses, including dining rooms, bathing areas, common areas,
offices and other necessary to provide the above services.
ATHLETIC CLUB: See definition of recreation, indoor or recreation, outdoor.
AUTO, TRUCK, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, AND EQUIPMENT SALES OR RENTAL: Sales or
rental of both new and used motor vehicles and equipment from indoor or outdoor
areas, but not to include nonserviceable or junk vehicles or equipment.
AUTO, TRUCK, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE, AND EQUIPMENT STORAGE: Temporary outside
storage of both new and used motor vehicles and equipment awaiting
distribution. Such storage may include an impound lot but is not to include
nonserviceable, junk, or dilapidated vehicles or equipment.
AUTOMOBILE RENTAL FACILITY: A building or a tenant space in a multi-tenant
building that provides automobile rental services. The facility may have on
site or off site storage of vehicles to be rented. No automotive repair of
vehicles shall occur on site. This definition does not include rental of
recreational vehicles, vehicle sales, the rental of equipment, car washes,
vehicle maintenance facility, inoperable vehicle storage, or impound lot.
AUTOMOTIVE SELF-SERVICE STATION: An establishment for the retail sale of
automobile fuels and lubricants at which the customer provides the service to
his own vehicle, and no vehicle repair or maintenance service is offered. Such
an establishment may offer for sale at retail other convenience items as a
clearly secondary activity and may also include a freestanding automatic car
wash.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE AND REPAIR, MAJOR: An establishment primarily engaged in the
repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers, and similar large mechanical
equipment, including paint, body and fender, and major engine and engine parts
provided it is conducted within a completely enclosed building.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE AND REPAIR, MINOR: An establishment primarily engaged in the
repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers, and similar mechanical
equipment, including brake, muffler, tire repair and change, lubrication, tune
ups, safety inspections and emission testing, detailing shops, windshield
repair, overhaul and transmission work provided it is conducted within a
completely enclosed building.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE, NONMECHANICAL: An establishment engaged in safety
inspections and emission testing, detailing shops, and windshield repair,
provided it is within a completely enclosed building.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION: An establishment whose primary purpose is the
selling of gasoline or other vehicle fuels and oil and lubricant services, and
no vehicle repair or maintenance service is offered. Accessory activities may
include minor automotive repair and maintenance, car wash service, and food
sales.
AVERAGE PERCENT OF SLOPE: The rise or fall in elevation along a line
perpendicular to the contours of the land connecting the highest point of land
to the lowest point of land within a lot.
AWNING: A rooflike covering of canvas, or the like, often adjustable, over a
window, door, etc., to provide protection against the sun, rain, snow, and
wind. Said awning is attached to the vertical wall and has an architecturally
compatible color and design with the structure. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd.
Ord. 12-27, 10-17-2012; Ord. 15-08, 10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017; Ord. 16-05, 6-
1-2016; Ord. 17-11, 4-19-2017; Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.36.030: "B" DEFINITIONS:
BACK LOADED GARAGE: A "subservient" (secondary or deemphasized) detached
parking structure designed for access from an approved alleyway or private
street.
BALCONY: A covered or uncovered platform usually projecting from a wall or an
entrance to a building, sometimes being surrounded by a railing, balustrade, or
parapet.
BAR: See definition of Alcoholic Beverage Establishments: Tavern or Alcoholic
Beverage Establishments: Social Clubs.
BASE FLOOD: A flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade.
BASEMENT HOUSE: A one-story dwelling where more than twenty five percent (25%)
of the floor area is below the finished surface grade at the front yard level.
BEACON LIGHT: See definition of Searchlight.
BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY: A limited commercial activity conducted within a
structure, which includes dining and bathroom facilities with sleeping rooms,
on a residential scale for short term guest rental. Said use will typically
provide overnight accommodations, limited food services, parking facilities,
and open space in a natural setting, and will comply with standards and
procedures as set forth in this title.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): A practice or combination of practices
determined to be the most effective practicable (including technological,
economic, and institutional considerations) means of preventing or reducing the
amount of pollution to a level compatible with water, soil, and air quality
goals.
BILLBOARD: A sign which directs the attention to a business, product, service,
or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered off premises.
BIRTHING CENTER: See definition of Healthcare Facilities.
BLOCK:
   A.   Land or group of lots surrounded by streets or other rights of way,
other than an alley, or land which is designated as a block on any recorded
subdivision tract.
   B.   One side of a street between two (2) consecutive intersecting streets.
BOARDER: A person living in a rented room in a boarding house. The boarding
house operator, or a member of his immediate family who resides on the premises
with the operator, shall not be deemed a boarder.
BOARDING HOUSE: A single-family dwelling where more than two (2), but fewer
than six (6) rooms, are provided for lodging for definite periods of times.
Meals may or may not be provided, but there is one common kitchen facility. No
meals are provided to outside guests.
BOTANICAL GARDENS: A public or private facility for the demonstration and
observations of the cultivation of flowers, fruits, vegetables, or ornamental
plants.
BUBBLER: An irrigation head that delivers water to the root zone by flooding
the planted area, usually measured in gallons per minute. Bubblers exhibit a
trickle, umbrella, or short stream pattern.
BUILD-TO LINES: Setback distances which bring structures adjacent to streets
and sidewalks in order to encourage pedestrian activity and safety.
BUILDABLE AREA: The portion of a lot or site, exclusive of required setbacks,
or landscaping, within which a structure may be built.
BUILDING: Any structure, whether permanent or temporary, including, but not
limited to, dwelling units which are designed, intended, or used for occupancy
by any person, animals, possessions, or for storage of property of any kind.
BUILDING CODE: Either the international building code, the international
residential code, or other applicable code (as applicable to the type of
construction) which covers the fire, life, and structural safety aspects of all
buildings and related structures (as adopted and amended by the state of Utah).
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average finished grade surface
of the building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the top
of a mansard roof, or the top of the ridge for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4018.png]
BUILDING LINE: The line circumscribing the buildable area of a lot.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which the principal use of the site is conducted.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: A building used for the storage of construction materials
and equipment incidental and necessary to on site construction of houses,
utilities, or other community facilities, or used temporarily in conjunction
with the sale of property within a subdivision under construction. Permit
required from building inspector.
BUSINESS LICENSE ADMINISTRATOR: The individual who performs regulatory
administration of the city business license ordinance and any applicable
federal, state, county and local laws.
BUSINESS LICENSE SECTION: The business license office of the community
development department.
BUSINESS OR FINANCIAL SERVICES: An establishment intended for the conduct or
service or administration by a commercial enterprise, or offices for the
conduct of professional or business service, but not including medical, dental,
chiropractor or other arts. Uses intended by this definition would include, but
not be limited to, business offices, depository institutions, other
establishments performing financial services (including outside drive-up
facilities). This definition shall not include businesses that are defined as a
nondepository institution nor businesses in which goods or merchandise are sold
or stored.
BUSINESS, TEMPORARY: See definition of Temporary Business. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012; amd. Ord. 16-05, 6-1-2016)
13.36.040: "C" DEFINITIONS:
CANOPY: A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material placed so as
to extend outward from the building providing a protective shield for doors,
windows, and other openings supported by the building or by supports extending
to the ground directly under the canopy.
CAR WASH: The use of a site for the washing and cleaning of passenger vehicles,
recreational vehicles, or other light duty equipment.
CARPORT: A roof structure open on at least two (2) sides and subject to all the
zoning regulations prescribed for a private garage.
CATERING TRUCKS: See definition of Food Trucks/Catering Trucks As Mobile
Businesses.
CEMETERY, COLUMBARIUM, MAUSOLEUM: Land or buildings used for the burial or
interment of the dead or cremated remains but not including facilities for
embalming or cremation. Other uses that may be offered are clearly accessory
to, and supply services to the principal use including a facility for the
manufacture of cement vaults and sale and engraving of grave markers, a retail
floral shop, and live plant nursery.
CHECK CASHING:
   A.   A person or business that for compensation engages in cashing a check
for consideration or extending a deferred deposit loan. "Check cashing
business" does not include depository institutions, as defined by the state of
Utah. "Check cashing business" also does not include a retail seller engaged
primarily in the business of selling goods or services to retail buyers that
cash checks or issue money orders for a minimum flat fee not exceeding one
percent (1%) of the check or one dollar ($1.00) as a service fee that is
incidental to its main purpose or business.
   B.   Cashing of checks for consideration or extending a deferred deposit
loan and shall include any other similar types of businesses by the state
pursuant to the check cashing registration act.
See also definition of Nondepository Institution.
CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL: The individual who acts as the city authority on
interpretation and enforcement of all building and development codes applying
policy directives of the city.
CHILD PLACING: See definition of Human Services Programs Or Facilities.
CHURCH:
   A.   A building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and
which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain
public worship, together with all accessory buildings, parks, athletic fields,
and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose. Includes synagogue,
temple, mosque, or other such place for worship and religious activities.
   B.   Any building set apart for worship, in which religious services are
held, clergy is associated, and that is tax exempt under the laws of Utah.
CITY:
   A.   Taylorsville, Utah.
   B.   The governmental entity of the city of Taylorsville and includes each
office, department, division, authority, board, commission of the city.
CITY TREES: See definition of Tree, City.
CLEAR VIEW AREA: See definition of Sight Visibility Triangle.
CLOSURE (Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance): The cessation of
operation of a facility or any portion thereof, and the act of securing such
facility or portion thereof to ensure protection of groundwater in accordance
with the appropriate state, federal, and local regulations applicable to the
specific facility and within the provisions of this title.
CLUB: See definition of Alcoholic Beverage Establishments.
CLUSTERED SUBDIVISION: A residential use that divides land into not more than
the number of lots permissible in a conventional subdivision of the same
property in the same zone, but where the size of the individual lots may be
reduced in order to gain common open space.
CODE: The development code of the city, as revised from time to time.
CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER, CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, CODE INSPECTOR: Any
authorized agent or employees of the city whose duty it is to assure code
compliance.
COLLECTION AREA (Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance): The area
surrounding a groundwater source which is underlain by collection pipes, tile,
tunnels, infiltration boxes, or other groundwater collection devices.
COLUMBARIUM: See definition of Cemetery, Columbarium, Mausoleum.
COMMERCIAL, HEAVY: An establishment or business which generally uses open sales
yards, outside equipment storage, or outside activities that generate noise or
other impacts considered incompatible with less intense uses. Typical
businesses in this definition are lumberyards, construction specialty services,
heavy equipment suppliers, or building contractors.
COMMERCIAL MIXED USE: Development within a building, which incorporates retail
commercial or individual offices on the ground level and office and/or
residential use on upper levels.
COMMERCIAL PARKING GARAGE: A building, other than a private garage, used for
the temporary parking of vehicles with or without a fee.
COMMERCIAL REPAIR SERVICES: Establishments which engage principally in the
repair of large or heavy duty household goods such as washers and
refrigerators; the reupholstery of automobiles, boats, and similar vehicles;
small engine repair; or other similar services which exceed the smaller scale
classification intended under commercial retail sales and services, but which
can still be performed within an enclosed building. For large scale repair
facilities or allowance for outdoor storage or activity, see definition of
Commercial, Heavy or Industry, Heavy.
COMMERCIAL RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES: Establishments which engage in the sale
of general retail goods and accessory services. Businesses within this
definition include those which conduct sales and service entirely within an
enclosed structure (with the exception of occasional outdoor on site
promotions); businesses that specialize in the sale of general merchandise or
convenience goods. Services include laundromats with coin operated self-
service machines, self-service and full service car washes, repair services for
small household appliances or equipment. Work conducted on the premises
includes handicraft production such as pottery, jewelry, picture frames, or
leather goods. Goods assembled or produced on the premises must be for sale on
the premises.
This is a broad definition which is intended to include all retail sales and
services (including personal services, except for cosmetic services,
barbershops, salons, nail salons, makeup services, etc.) generally associated
with commercial districts which are not specifically covered by other
definitions in this chapter.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A vehicle designed and/or used for business, transportation
of commodities, merchandise, produce, freight, animals, passengers or other
transports including tow trucks or trailers used for the movement of equipment
regardless of length. This definition also includes construction vehicles such
as a bulldozer, backhoe, and similar vehicles.
COMMISSION: The Taylorsville City Planning Commission.
COMMUNITY BASED PROGRAM: See definition of correctional facility.
COMMUNITY CORRECTIONAL FACILITY: See definition of correctional facility.
CONDITIONAL USE: Administrative and nonadministrative conditional uses are land
uses that, because of their unique characteristics or potential impact on the
Municipality, surrounding neighbors or adjacent land uses, may not be
compatible in some areas or may be compatible only if certain conditions are
required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental impacts.
CONDOMINIUM: A single unit in a multi-unit project or structure which is
separately owned which may be combined with an undivided interest in the common
areas and facilities of the property.
CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY: A housing development of five (5) or more dwelling
units which is planned, designed, and managed to include facilities and common
space that maximize the residents' potential for independent living. The
facility may be occupied by elderly or persons with a disability. The direct
services that are provided or made available shall relate to the nutritional,
social, recreational, housekeeping, and personal needs of the residents and
shall be provided or made available at a level necessary to assist the
residents to function independently. Direct services include meals,
housekeeping services, transportation services, and planned recreational and
social activities which shall be provided to the residents directly by the
management of the congregate housing. Support services are social services,
daycare services and in home services which the management of the congregate
housing shall assist the residents in obtaining at the request of the
residents. A congregate care facility may only be developed as a component of a
transitional care development, and not as a stand alone development.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY: A facility which has a primary purpose of
providing housing and continuing care for people over the age of fifty five
(55) or where either the husband or wife is over age fifty five (55), consists
of independent apartment units, assisted living units, skilled care nursing
units, senior apartment units, senior cottage units, and continuing care
retirement community accessory uses all as defined herein. For purposes of this
Code "continuing care" means the provision of lodging, nursing, medical or
health related services at the same or another location to an individual
pursuant to an agreement effective for the life of the individual or for a
period greater than one (1) year, including mutually terminable contracts and
in consideration of the payment of an entrance fee with or without other
periodic charges.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY ACCESSORY USES: Any use necessary for the
operation of the facility or for the benefit or convenience of the residents
and their guests including, but not limited to, kitchen and dining facilities,
places of worship, indoor and outdoor recreational buildings and uses, retail
and banking facilities, beauty salons and barber shops, gift shops, class
rooms, security facilities, conference rooms, common areas, guest rooms,
administrative offices, medical offices, physical rehab facilities, postal
center, pharmacy, maintenance facilities, craft and music rooms, library and
television room and heating and cooling equipment structures; provided, that
the accessory use is for the primary benefit of the continuing care retirement
community and provided that there is no exterior announcement of the use.
CONTINUOUS TRANSIT: The nonstop movement of a vehicle except for stops required
by traffic laws.
CONVALESCENT HOME: See definition of nursing home.
CORRECTIONAL FACILITY: Any facility operated by the State Department of
Corrections or Division of Youth Corrections or under a contract with either to
house offenders, either in a secure or nonsecure setting including, but not
limited to: a prison, jail, juvenile detention facility or juvenile secure
facility and the following:
  Community Based Program: A nonsecure residential or nonresidential program
designated to supervise and rehabilitate youth offenders in the least
protective restrictive setting, consistent with public safety, and designated
or operated by or under contract with the division of youth corrections.
  Community Correctional Center: A nonsecure correctional facility operated by
the department of corrections or under a contract with the Department of
Corrections.
  Detention Center: See definition of correctional facility: secure detention.
  Jail: A facility established and operated by the County, either directly or
under contract with a private provider, for confinement of persons in lawful
custody.
  Juvenile Detention Facility: A facility established and operated by the State
of Utah, either directly or under contract with a private provider, for
temporary detention of delinquent juveniles.
  Juvenile Receiving Center: A nonsecure, nonresidential program established by
the division that is responsible for juveniles taken into custody by law
enforcement for status offenses or delinquent acts, but who do not meet the
criteria for admission to secure detention or shelter.
  Juvenile Secure Facility: A facility established and operated by the State of
Utah, either directly or under contract with a private provider, for
incarceration of delinquent juveniles.
  Observation And Assessment Program: A service program operated or purchased
by the Division of Youth Corrections, that is responsible for temporary custody
of youth offenders for observation.
  Secure Correctional Facility: Any prison, penitentiary, or other institution
operated by the Department of Corrections or under contract for the confinement
of offenders where force may be used to restrain them if they attempt to leave
the institution without authorization.
  Secure Detention: Predisposition placement in a facility operated by or under
contract with the Division of Youth Corrections for conduct by a child who is
alleged to have committed a delinquent act.
  Secure Facility: Any facility operated by or under contract with the Division
of Youth Corrections that provides twenty four (24) hour supervision and
confinement for youth offenders committed to the division for custody and
rehabilitation.
  Shelter: The temporary care of children in physically unrestricted facilities
pending court disposition or transfer to another jurisdiction.
COSMETIC SERVICES: Establishments that provide skin care services (peels,
microdermabrasion, facials, etc.), laser and nonsurgical cosmetic procedures
(laser hair removal, botox and fillers, laser skin resurfacing, vein treatment,
tattoo removal, etc.), cosmetic surgery services (augmentation, cosmetic facial
surgery, liposuction, etc.), and general cosmetic services, such as
barbershops, salons, nail salons, makeup services, etc.
COUNCIL: The City Council of Taylorsville City.
COURT: An open, unoccupied space, other than by a yard, on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings, and which is bounded on two (2) or more sides
by such building or buildings.
COVERAGE: The percent of the total site area covered by structures or
impervious paving other than those excepted in this Code.
CREMATORY, EMBALMING FACILITY: Building(s) used for the cremation and/or
embalming of the dead but not including facilities for burial, interment, body
viewing, or funeral services.
CRIME PREVENTION THROUGH ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN (CPTED): Guiding design
principles for creating safer built environments, incorporating natural
surveillance, access control, territorial reinforcement, sense of ownership,
management and maintenance.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street closed at one (1) end by an enlarged, circular turnaround
area where the arc exceeds at least one hundred ninety degrees (190°).
CUT: In the context of grading, hillside or slope modification shall mean
either excavated material or the void resulting from the excavation of earth
material and is measured from natural grade to finished grade. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012; amd. Ord. 15-08, 10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017; Ord. 17-11, 4-19-2017)
13.36.050: "D" DEFINITIONS:
DWSP: Drinking water source protection.
DANCE HALL: An establishment intended primarily for dancing and entertainment
within an enclosed dance floor space, using either live or electronically
produced music, either open to the public or operated as a private club open to
members only.
DANCE SCHOOL: An establishment for the instruction of the art of dance
including, but not limited to, ballet, ballroom, jazz, tap, and modern. The
standards applicable to the operation of such a facility are dependent upon the
physical location of the school. If within a home, they must comply with the
provisions of the home occupation requirements. If within a commercial
location, they must comply with the requirements of the underlying zone.
DAY TREATMENT: See definition of human services programs or facilities.
DAYCARE, ADULT: Continuous care and supervision for three (3) or more adults
eighteen (18) years of age and older for at least four (4) but less than twenty
four (24) hours a day, that meets the needs of functionally impaired adults
through a comprehensive program that provides a variety of health, social,
recreational, and related support services in a protective setting.
DAYCARE, CHILD: An establishment for the care and/or instruction, whether or
not for compensation, of twelve (12) or fewer children at any one time. Child
nurseries and overnight childcare are included in this definition.
DAYCARE, ELDERLY: Arranging for or providing the necessities of life, for
compensation, as a protective service to individuals who are at least sixty
(60) years old, and are disabled or who are experiencing a dislocation or
emergency that prevents them from providing these services for themselves.
DAYCARE, GROUP: An establishment for the care and/or instruction, whether or
not for compensation, of more than twelve (12) children at any one time. Child
nurseries and preschool facilities are included in this definition.
DAYS: In computing any time period of days prescribed or allowed by this Code,
the day of the act or event which the designated period of time begins to run
shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall include,
unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday, or legal holiday, in which event the period
runs until the next business day that is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or legal
holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than eleven (11)
days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in
the computation.
DECK: See definition of balcony.
DEPARTMENT: The public agency, division, or department designated by the City
to enforce the provisions of this title.
DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS: A bank, savings and loan association, savings bank,
industrial bank, credit union, or other institution that:
   A.   Holds or receives deposits, savings, or share accounts;
   B.   Issues certificates of deposit; or
   C.   Provides to its customers other depository accounts that are subject to
withdrawal by checks, drafts, or other instruments or by electronic means to
effect third party payments.
DETENTION CENTER: See definition of correctional facility.
DEVELOPER: Any subdivider or any person or organization that develops, intends
to develop, or sells property for the purpose of future development. Includes
the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in a
proposed development including the holder of an option or contract to purchase,
or other persons having enforceable proprietary interests in such land.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW MEETING: A meeting held by the Community Development
Department for review of development projects.
DEVELOPMENT SITE: Includes the total perimeters of:
   A.   A subdivision.
   B.   A residential site-specific development.
   C.   A tract, lot, or parcel of land intended to be used as a commercial,
public, quasi-public, utility, or other building site.
DINING CLUB: See definition of alcoholic beverage establishments: dining clubs.
DIRECTOR: The individual who supervises and directs the Community Development
Department, which includes responsibility for physical and economic
developments of the City.
DISABLED/DISABILITY: A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
one (1) or more of a person's major life activities, including a person having
a record of such an impairment or being regarded as having an impairment.
Disabled/disability does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to,
any federally controlled substances, as defined in the controlled substances
act, 21 USC 802.
DISCHARGE (Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance): Shall mean and include,
but not be limited to, spilling, leaking, seeping, pouring, injecting,
emitting, emptying, disposing, releasing, or dumping regulated substances to
the soils, air, groundwaters, or surface waters of the city. Discharge does not
include the use of a regulated substance in accordance with the appropriate use
intended or specified by the manufacturer of the substances provided that such
use is not prohibited by federal, state, or local regulations. Discharge shall
not include releases specifically authorized by federal or state permits.
DISCO, DISCOTHEQUE: See definition of Dance Hall.
DISTANCE BETWEEN RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES: The shortest distance between the
vertical walls of two (2) residential structures as herein defined.
DISTRIBUTOR: The person responsible for placing and maintaining a newsrack in a
public right of way or private property.
DISTRICT: Any district delineated on the official zoning district map under the
terms and provisions of this code (or which may hereinafter be created
subsequent to the enactment of this code) for which regulations are specified
governing the area, height, use of buildings, or use of land, and other
regulations relating to development or maintenance of existing uses or
structures.
DITCH: A manmade channel other than a modified stream constructed for drainage
purposes that is typically dug through interstream divide areas. A ditch, which
is subservient to a canal, may have flows that are perennial, intermittent, or
ephemeral and may exhibit hydrological or biological characteristics similar to
perennial streams. For purposes of this code, a ditch will typically have a
width of five feet (5') or less.
DOMESTIC STAFF: Persons employed or residing on the premises of a dwelling or
other residential facility to perform domestic services or to assist residents
in performing daily life activities.
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE TREATMENT PROGRAM: See definition of Human Services Programs
Or Facilities.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS: See definition of Lot, Double Frontage.
DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONE: An area within which certain practices
are mandated to protect groundwater flowing to public drinking water wells.
DRINKING WATER SUPPLY SPRING: A drinking water spring to supply water which has
been permitted or intended for consumptive use.
DRINKING WATER SUPPLY WELL: A drinking water well to supply water which has
been permitted or intended for consumptive use.
DRIP EMITTER: A drip irrigation fitting that delivers water slowly at the root
zone of the plant, usually measured in gallons per hour.
DRIVEWAY: A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space,
garage, dwelling, or other structure.
DWELLING: Any structure designed or used for residential purposes that has been
constructed to comply with applicable building codes, such as the national
manufactured housing construction and safety standards act (42 USC 5401 et seq.
(1976)), or the HUD code. A dwelling does not include hotels, motels, bed and
breakfast facilities, etc., or structures used for or under short term
residential leases.
DWELLING, DUPLEX: A building designed or arranged to be occupied by two (2)
families living independently, the structure having only two (2) dwelling units
in one ownership.
DWELLING, EARTH SHELTERED: A dwelling built underground and beneath a
continuous exterior surface grade for the purpose of energy conservation,
having a roof of earthen material, and having its floor at the approximate
level of some other exterior grade on one or more sides. Dwellings may be
detached, semidetached or attached.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to include three (3)
or more dwelling units, each to be occupied by one family living independently
in which they may or may not share common entrances and/or other spaces.
Individual units may be owned as condominiums or offered for rent.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-UNIT: A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy
by three (3) or more families living independently in which they may or may not
share common entrances and/or other spaces. Individual units may be owned as
condominiums or offered for rent.
DWELLING, PLANNED GROUP: Two (2) or more detached buildings used as residences
located on a lot that is in single ownership and having yards, courts, or
facilities in common.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to include only one
dwelling unit occupied by one family (see definition of Family), including
extended living areas or an accessory apartment which may be approved as
provided elsewhere in this code.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a building or portion thereof designed,
occupied, or intended as a residence for a family with complete and independent
facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation provided
within the dwelling unit. See also definition of Dwelling, Single-Family. (Ord.
12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 16-05, 6-1-2016; Ord. 20-12, 4-15-2020)
13.36.060: "E" DEFINITIONS:
EPA: The U.S. environmental protection agency.
EARTH STATION: Any apparatus or device commonly known as an earth terminal
antenna, earth terminal, satellite communication antenna, satellite antenna,
microwave dish antenna, satellite television antenna, or dish antenna which is
designed for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio, television,
satellite, microwave, or other electromagnetic energy signals, but does not
include conventional television, radio, and amateur radio antennas.
EASEMENT: That portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future use by a
person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The
easement may be for use under, on or above said lot or lots.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY WITH HOUSING: Any public, parochial, private, charitable,
or nonprofit school, junior college, or university, including instructional and
recreational uses, with living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating
plants, and other incidental facilities for students, teachers, and employees.
ELDERLY PERSON: For the purposes of this title, an elderly person, to qualify
for residence within a residential facility for elderly persons, shall mean a
person who is fifty five (55) years old or older.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER: Electronic message center signs are computerized
programmable electronic visual communication devices. They are capable of
storing and displaying multiple messages in dozens of formats and at regular or
varying intervals.
ELEEMOSYNARY: Related to and supported by charity.
EMBALMING FACILITY: See definition of Crematory, Embalming Facility.
END STAGE RENAL DISEASE FACILITY: See definition of Healthcare Facilities.
EQUESTRIAN FACILITIES: Commercial horse, donkey, and mule facilities including
horse ranches, boarding stables, riding schools and academies, horse exhibition
facilities, and park stations. This land use includes barns, stables, corrals,
and paddocks accessory and incidental to the above uses.
EQUITY CLUB: See definition of Alcoholic Beverage Establishments: Equity Clubs.
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION (ET): The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil
surfaces and transpired by plants during a specific time, expressed in inches
per day, month, or year.
EXCAVATION: The removal of earth from its natural position or the cavity
resulting from the removal of earth.
EXPANSIVE SOIL: Soil characterized by claylike material that shrinks and swells
as it dries or becomes wet and is generally found in areas that historically
were a floodplain or lake, but can occur in hillside areas also.
EXPOSITION/CONVENTION CENTER: A stand alone facility, not part of a larger
development, designed to accommodate five thousand (5,000) or more persons and
used for conventions, consumer shows, trade shows, conferences, seminars,
product displays, recreation activities and entertainment functions, along with
accessory functions including temporary outdoor displays, indoor dances,
holiday celebrations, and food and beverage preparation and service for on
premises consumption.
EXPOSITION HALL/CENTER: See definition of Exposition/Convention Center.
EXTENDED LIVING AREAS: Additional and accessory living facilities within a
dwelling structure with kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping areas designed for
temporary use by extended family members for medical or economic reasons on a
nonrental basis and in compliance with standards as set forth in this title.
Said definition also includes family "canning" kitchens and living quarters for
domestic staff or other personnel typically employed in household maintenance,
e.g., maids, butlers, gardeners.
EXTRA DROUGHT TOLERANT PLANT: A plant that can survive without irrigation
throughout the year once established, although supplemental water may be
desirable during drought periods for improved appearance and disease
resistance. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 16-05, 6-1-2016)
13.36.070: "F" DEFINITIONS:
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FACE OF BUILDING: The wall of a building fronting on a street excluding any
appurtenances, such as projecting fins, columns, pilasters, canopies, marquees,
showcases, or decorations, but including the parapet wall.
FAMILY:
   A.   Groupings: A person living alone or any of the following groups living
together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common living,
sleeping, cooking and eating facilities:
      1.   Any number of people who are all related by blood, marriage,
adoption, or court sanctioned guardianship together with any incidental
domestic or support staff who may or may not reside on the premises;
      2.   Three (3) or fewer unrelated people; or
      3.   Two (2) unrelated adults and any children related to them.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   Any group of individuals whose association is temporary in nature
lasting no more than thirty (30) days, such as out of town visitors.
      2.   Any reasonable accommodation granted by the Taylorsville planning
commission pertaining to a residential facility for elderly persons or persons
with a disability.
FARM ANIMALS: Animals other than household pets that may, where permitted, be
kept and maintained for commercial production and sale and/or for family food
production, education, or recreation. Farm animals are identified by these
categories: large animals, e.g., horses and cattle; medium animals, e.g.,
sheep, goats; small animals, e.g., rabbits, chinchillas, chickens, turkeys,
pheasants, geese, ducks, pigeons, and Vietnamese potbellied pigs. Pigs are not
permitted to be kept within the city except as specifically allowed.
FARMERS' MARKET: A consortium of three (3) or more individual produce growers,
and/or manufacturers of whole grain products who meet on a regular basis at a
central location within a structure or open area to sell farm produce.
FENCE: Any tangible barrier, an obstruction of any material, a line of
obstacles, latticework, screen, wall, hedge, or continuous growth of shrubs or
trees with the purpose of, or having the effect of, preventing passage or view
across a fence line.
FILL: Earth materials used as a manmade deposit to raise an existing grade, or
shall mean the depth or the volume of such material. The reference for a fill
shall be measured from natural to finished grade.
FINAL GRADING: The last stage of grading a soil or gravel material prior to
landscaping, the installation of concrete or bituminous paving, or other
required final surfacing material.
FINAL PLAT: A plat and supporting documents, prepared in accordance with the
provisions of this title and prepared for recording in the Salt Lake County
Recorder's Office.
FINANCIAL OFFICE: A bank, savings and loan, credit union, depository
institution, mortgage office, or automated teller machine (ATM).
FIREWORKS: Class C explosives as described in Utah Code Annotated section 53-7-
202.
FISCAL IMPACT ANALYSIS: Often used interchangeably with the term cost revenue
analysis. Fiscal impact analysis describes the current or anticipated effect
upon the public costs and revenues of a local government imposed by a
residential or commercial development.
FLAG LOT: A lot that has access to a public right-of-way by means of a narrow
strip of land.
FLEA MARKET: A market, indoors or out of doors, where any person or
aggregation, congregation, or assembly of vendors offer for sale, trade, or
barter any goods, regardless of whether they are new or used, from individual
locations, with each location being operated independently from the other
locations. The term does not include the outside display of merchandise as an
incidental part of retail activities regularly conducted from a permanent
building on sidewalks or other areas immediately adjacent to, and upon the same
lot as, such building. The term also does not include merchandise sold at
temporary events such as farmers' markets, festivals, or other special events
at which the display and sale of merchandise is incidental to the primary
cultural, informational or recreational activity.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the City.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway
map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland waters; and/or
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOODPLAIN: Land that is within the 100-year floodplain designated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency; or has not been studied or designated by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency but presents a likelihood of
experiencing chronic flooding or catastrophic flood event because the land has
characteristics that are similar to those of a 100-year floodplain designated
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN, 100-YEAR (Intermediate Regional Flood): A designated area where a
flood whose peak flow magnitude has about a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any year. The flood within a floodplain is based on
statistical analysis of stream flow records available for the watershed and
analysis of rainfall and runoff characteristics in the general region of the
watershed. The flood would have an average frequency of occurrence of about
once in one hundred (100) years.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
FLOOR AREA: The total gross floor area of the building or structure, but not
including any area within the building utilized for the required off street
parking spaces.
FOOD TRUCKS/CATERING TRUCKS AS MOBILE BUSINESSES: The use of a commercial
vehicle that is equipped in any manner for the purpose of transporting food to
be sold directly from such vehicle. The business may conduct all or part of its
operations on premises other than its own. The term "mobile business" shall not
include any business involved in construction, home or building improvement,
landscape construction, surveying or medical related activities, including
veterinary services. The simple delivery of goods shall not constitute a mobile
business.
FRATERNAL CLUB: See definition of Alcoholic Beverage Establishments: Fraternal
Clubs.
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE: A building occupied by and maintained exclusively
for students affiliated with an academic or professional college or university
or other recognized institution of higher learning, who are associated together
in a fraternity/sorority that is officially recognized by such institution and
who receive lodging and/or meals on the premises for compensation.
FRONT LOADED GARAGE: A "subservient" (secondary or deemphasized, i.e., located
behind the front line of the building) parking structure designed for access
from the street, either attached to the dwelling, or detached to the side or
rear of the dwelling.
FRONTAGE: The width of a lot or parcel abutting a public or private right-of-
way measured at the front setback line.
FUNERAL HOME: See definition of mortuary. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 15-
02, 1-21-2015; Ord. 16-05, 6-1-2016; Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.36.080: "G" DEFINITIONS:
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building or portion of a main building
for the parking or temporary storage of vehicles of the occupants of the
premises.
GARAGE SALE: Any sale, open to the public, conducted from or on a premises in
any Residential Zone for the purpose of disposing of personal property and
lasting no longer than three (3) consecutive days.
GENERAL ACUTE HOSPITAL: See definition of healthcare facilities.
GEOLOGIC HAZARD: Land that may include surface fault rupture, shallow
groundwater, liquefaction, a landslide, debris flow, unstable soil, rockfall,
or any other geologic condition that presents a risk to life; of substantial
loss of real property; or of substantial damage to real property.
GLAZING CONTRACTOR: An establishment primarily engaged in installing glass
panes in prepared openings (i.e., glazing work) and other glasswork for
buildings and produces a minimum of noise, vibration, or other potentially
disturbing effects.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building.
GRADE, HIGHEST ADJACENT: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed wall of a structure.
GRADING: Either an excavation or fill, or the act of excavating or filling.
GRAFFITI: Plural of graffito. Markings, initials, inscriptions, slogans,
drawings, etc., scratched, scribbled, painted or drawn, often crudely, on a
wall or other surface.
GRAVEL PARKING AREA: A six inch (6") gravel base complying with City
specifications may be used for the storage of recreational vehicles only.
GROSS ACREAGE: The total area of the development site, including all rights-of-
way.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA): The total floor area of a retail business designed
for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and
upper floors, expressed in square feet as measured from the centerline of joint
partitions and from outside wall faces.
GROUND COVER: Material planted in such a way as to form a continuous cover over
the ground that can be maintained at a height no more than twelve inches (12").
GROUNDWATER: Any water which may be drawn from the ground.
GROUNDWATER DISCHARGE AREA: An area where the direction of groundwater movement
is upward from the principal aquifer to the shallow unconfined aquifer.
Discharge areas, determined by the United States Geological Survey (USGS).
GROUNDWATER DIVIDE: A ridge in the water table or potentiometric surface, from
which groundwater moves away in both directions.
GROUNDWATER TOT: Time of travel for groundwater.
GROUP CHILD ACTIVITIES: An establishment for the care and/or instruction,
whether or not for compensation, of twelve (12) or fewer children at any one
time. Child nurseries, daycare, preschools, dance schools are typical examples
of a group child activity.
GUESTHOUSE: A detached living quarters located within an accessory building
that is subordinate to, and located on the same premises with, a primary
dwelling, occupied solely by members of the family and temporary guests. Such
facilities shall not be rented independently from the main dwelling unit. (Ord.
13-28, 11-6-2013; amd. Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.36.090: "H" DEFINITIONS:
HUD CODE: The National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards
Act, 42 USC section 5401 et seq.
HALF PIPE RAMP: A smooth surfaced outdoor structure shaped like a trough and
used in gravity extreme sports such as snowboarding, skateboarding, freestyle
BMX, or in-line skating. The structure is usually wood, although sometimes the
surface is made of another material. Appearance wise, it resembles a cross
section of a swimming pool, and in its most basic form, it consists of two (2)
concave ramps (or quarter pipes), topped by copings and decks, facing each
other across a transition.
HANDBILL: Any small printed sheet to be distributed (as for advertising) by
hand.
HANDICAPPED PERSON: See definition of disabled/disability.
HANDLE: To use, generate, process, produce, package, treat, store, or transport
a regulated substance in any fashion.
HARDSCAPE: Patios, decks, and paths; does not include driveways, parking lots,
and sidewalks.
HAZARD TREE: See definition of tree, hazard.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: A hazardous waste as defined by the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).
HEALTH CLUB: See definition of recreation, indoor or recreation, outdoor.
HEALTHCARE FACILITIES:
  Ambulatory Surgical Facility: A freestanding State licensed facility, which
provides surgical services to patients not requiring hospitalization.
  Assisted Living Facility: See definition of assisted living facility.
  Birthing Center: A freestanding State licensed facility with five (5) or
fewer birth rooms, receiving maternal clients and providing care during
pregnancy, delivery, and immediately after delivery.
  End Stage Renal Disease Facility: A State licensed facility which furnishes
staff assisted kidney dialysis services, self- dialysis services, or home
dialysis services on an outpatient basis.
  General Acute Hospital: A State licensed facility which provides diagnostic,
therapeutic, and rehabilitative services to both inpatients and outpatients by
or under the supervision of physicians.
  Home Health Agency: A State licensed agency, organization, or facility or a
subdivision of an agency, organization, or facility which employs two (2) or
more direct care staff persons who provide licensed nursing services,
therapeutic services of physical therapy, speech therapy, occupational therapy,
medical social services or home health aide services on a visiting basis. "Home
health agency" does not mean an individual who provides services under the
authority of a private license.
  Hospice: A program of care for the terminally ill and their families which
occurs in a home or in a healthcare facility and which provides medical,
palliative, psychological, spiritual, and supportive care and treatment.
  Nursing Care Facility: A State licensed healthcare facility, other than a
general acute or specialty hospital, constructed, licensed, and operated to
provide patient living accommodations, twenty four (24) hour staff
availability, and at least two (2) of the following patient services: a) a
selection of patient care services, under the direction and supervision of a
registered nurse, ranging from continuous medical, skilled nursing,
psychological, or other professional therapies to intermittent health related
or paraprofessional personal care services; b) a structure, supportive social
living environment based on a professionally designed and supervised treatment
plan, oriented to the individual's habilitation or rehabilitation needs; or c)
a supervised living environment that provides support, training or assistance
with individual activities of daily living. ("Activities of daily living" means
essential activities including: a) dressing; b) eating; c) grooming; d)
bathing; e) toileting; f) ambulation; g) transferring; and h) self-
administration of medication.)
  Small Healthcare Facility: A four (4) to sixteen (16) bed State licensed
facility that provides licensed healthcare programs and services to residents
who generally do not need continuous nursing care or supervision.
  Specialty Hospital: A State licensed facility which provides specialized
diagnostic, therapeutic, or rehabilitative services in the recognized specialty
or specialties for which the hospital is licensed.
HILLSIDE AREA: Any property with a slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater.
HOME HEALTH AGENCY: See definition of healthcare facilities.
HOME OCCUPATION: A business, occupation, profession, operation, managing or
carrying on of a business for the purpose of economic gain, which activity that
is clearly incidental, secondary, and subordinate to the residential use of the
dwelling and property in a Residential Zone by a bona fide resident of the
dwelling. A home occupation shall not be construed to mean an employee, working
in their own home in the service of an employer whose principal place of
business is licensed at another location within the City or elsewhere. A home
occupation shall not be construed to mean an individual making deliveries of
products which were ordered in advance.
  Home Occupation Class A: An office home occupation for phone, mail, and other
general office activities conducted entirely within a dwelling unit in which no
clients, customers, or patrons of the home occupation visit the home occupation
location for business purposes.
  Home Occupation Class B: A home occupation conducted entirely within a
dwelling unit in which no clients, customers, or patrons of the home occupation
visit the home occupation location for business purposes, but produces or
assembles a product on a small scale (other than food preparation) such as
ceramic crafts, jewelry, computer assembly, etc.
  Home Occupation Class C: A home occupation conducted entirely within a
dwelling unit in which clients, customers or patrons of the home occupation
visit the home occupation location for business purposes, such as a photo
studio, beauty salon, etc.
  Home Occupation Class D Family Childcare/Home Preschool: A home occupation
that provides for care, supervision and/or home preschool instruction of
children under fourteen (14) years of age including the caregiver's own
children under the age of six (6) and not yet in full day school within an
occupied dwelling and a secure yard for direct or indirect compensation. Class
D home occupations are further defined as follows:
• Family Childcare Class D1: A Class D home occupation that provides caregiver
services for less than five (5) children. This number includes the caregiver's
own children under the age of six (6) who are not yet in full day school.
• Family Childcare Class D2: A Class D home occupation that provides caregiver
services for five (5) to eight (8) children. This number includes the
caregiver's own children under the age of six (6) who are not yet in full day
school.
• Family Childcare Class D3: A Class D home occupation that provides caregiver
services for nine (9) to twelve (12) children with sufficient staffing required
by the State of Utah Health Department. This number includes the caregiver's
own children under the age of six (6) who are not yet in full day school.
• Home Preschool Class D4: A Class D home occupation that provides instruction
and care for twelve (12) or less preschool children ages six (6) or under or
children not in full day school. This number includes the applicant's own
children ages six (6) or under who are not yet in full day school.
HOMELESS SHELTER: Charitable lodging or sleeping rooms provided on a daily or
other temporary basis to persons lacking other safe, sanitary or affordable
shelter. May also include a kitchen and cafeteria.
HOSPICE: See definition of healthcare facilities.
HOSPITAL: An institution licensed by the State of Utah which provides
diagnostic, therapeutic, and rehabilitative services to individuals on both an
inpatient and outpatient basis by or under the supervision of one or more
physicians. Any medical clinic or professional office which offers any
inpatient or overnight care, or operates on a twenty four (24) hour basis shall
be considered to be a hospital. A hospital may include integral support service
facilities such as laboratories, outpatient units and training and central
services, together with staff offices necessary to the operation of the
hospital. Includes both general acute and specialty hospitals and must be
licensed by the Utah Department of Health pursuant to the Health Care Facility
Licensing and Inspection Act.
HOTEL: An establishment providing, for a fee, sleeping accommodations and
customary lodging services including maid service, the furnishing and upkeep of
furniture and bed linens, telephone and desk service. Related ancillary uses
may include, but not be limited to, conference and meeting rooms, restaurants,
lounge, retail, and recreational facilities.
HOUSEHOLD PETS: No more than two (2) adult dogs, cats, or ferrets of any one
species and no more than a total of four (4) dogs, cats, ferrets in any
combination on a nonnuisance basis for family use only (noncommercial) are
allowed except for fancier's permit, hobby permit, foster animals permit, or
feral cat colony permit as set forth in title 8 of the Taylorsville Code.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT: A family or group of individuals who:
   A.   Share a strong bond or commitment to a single purpose (e.g., members of
a religious order). The relationship must be of a permanent and distinct
character with a demonstrable and recognizable bond characteristic of a
cohesive unit;
   B.   Are not legally dependent on others not living with them;
   C.   Share a single household budget;
   D.   Prepare food and eat together on a regular basis;
   E.   Share in the work of maintaining the premises;
   F.   Legally share in the ownership or possession of the premises, e.g.,
tenants in common on a deed or cosigners of a single lease; and
   G.   Does not include a common living arrangement whose basis for the
establishment of the housekeeping unit is temporary or financial in nature.
HUMAN SERVICES PROGRAMS OR FACILITIES:
  Adult Daycare: Continuous care and supervision for three (3) or more adults
eighteen (18) years of age and older for at least four (4) but less than twenty
four (24) hours a day, that meets the needs of functionally impaired adults
through a comprehensive program that provides a variety of health, social,
recreational, and related support services on a protective setting.
  Child Placing: An operation licensed by the State of Utah for receiving,
accepting, or providing custody or care for any child under eighteen (18) years
of age, temporarily or permanently, for the purpose of: a) finding a person to
adopt the child; b) placing the child temporarily or permanently in a home for
adoption; or c) foster home placement.
  Day Treatment: An operation licensed by the State of Utah as "day treatment"
for specialized treatment for less than twenty four (24) hours a day for four
(4) or more persons who are unrelated to the owner or provider and who have
emotional, psychological, developmental, physical, or behavioral dysfunctions,
impairments, or chemical dependencies. Day treatment is provided in lieu of, or
in coordination with, a more restrictive residential or inpatient environment
or service.
  Domestic Violence Treatment Program: An operation licensed by the State of
Utah as a nonresidential program designed to provide psychological treatment
and educational services to perpetrators and victims of domestic violence.
  Outpatient Treatment: An operation licensed by the State of Utah as
"outpatient treatment" for individual, family or group therapy or counseling
designed to improve and enhance social or psychological functioning for those
whose physical and emotional status allows them to continue functioning in
their usual living environment.
  Residential Support:
   A.   An operation licensed by the State of Utah as "residential support" to
arrange for or provide the necessities of life as a protective service to
individuals or families who are disabled or who are experiencing a dislocation
or emergency which prevents them from providing these services for themselves
or their families. Treatment is not a necessary component of residential
support.
   B.   Arranging for or providing the necessities of life as a protective
service to individuals or families who are disabled or who are experiencing a
dislocation or emergency that prevents them from providing these services for
themselves or their families.
  Residential Treatment: An operation licensed by the State of Utah as
"residential treatment" as a twenty four (24) hour group living environment for
four (4) or more individuals unrelated to the owner or provider that offers
room or board and specialized treatment, rehabilitation or habilitation
services for persons with emotional, psychological, developmental, or
behavioral dysfunctions, impairments, or chemical dependencies. In residential
treatment, individuals are assisted in acquiring the social and behavioral
skills necessary for living independently in the community.
  Resource Family Home: An operation licensed by the State of Utah as a
"resource family home" to provide services to a child in the custody of the
State and includes a foster care home and a legal risk home.
  Secure Treatment: An operation licensed by the State of Utah as "secure
treatment" as a twenty four (24) hour specialized residential treatment or care
for persons whose current functioning is such that they cannot live
independently or in a less restrictive environment. Secure treatment differs
from residential treatment to the extent that it requires intensive
supervision, locked doors, and other security measures which are imposed on
residents with neither their consent nor control.
  Social Detoxification: An operation licensed by the State of Utah as social
detoxification for short term residential services for persons who are
intoxicated, that are provided outside of a healthcare facility licensed under
Utah Code Annotated title 26, chapter 21, Health Care Facility Licensure and
Inspection Act, and that include: a) room and board for persons who are
unrelated to the owner or manager of the facility; b) specialized
rehabilitation to acquire sobriety; and c) aftercare services.
  Support Staff: Persons employed or residing on the premises of a dwelling or
other healthcare facility to assist residents in performing daily life
activities or to provide on site treatment, rehabilitation, or habilitation
services.
  Youth Program: An operation licensed by the State of Utah as "Youth Program"
as a nonresidential program designed to provide behavioral, substance abuse, or
mental health services to minors that: a) services either adjudicated or
nonadjudicated youth; b) charges a fee for its services; c) may or may not
provide host homes or other arrangements for overnight accommodation of the
youth; d) may or may not provide all or part of its services in the outdoors;
e) may or may not limit or censor access to parents or guardians; f) prohibits
or restricts a minor's ability to leave the program at any time of his own free
will; and g) will not apply to recreational programs such as Boy Scouts, Girl
Scouts, 4-H, and other such organizations. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord.
18-26, 10-17-2018)
13.36.100: "I" DEFINITIONS:
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL: Material that is impenetrable by water.
IMPROVEMENTS: Streetscapes, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, utilities, grading,
pavings, landscaping, water and sewer systems, drainage systems, fences, fire
hydrants, streetlights, public facilities, amenities and other such
requirements of this title.
INDEPENDENT APARTMENT UNIT: A dwelling unit containing living areas, bedroom
areas, kitchen areas and bathrooms, including studio style apartments, varying
in square footage from six hundred fifty (650) square feet to two thousand
(2,000) square feet, which house one or more people over the age of fifty five
(55) in a manner in which they may live independently while receiving one or
more meals per day in congregate setting.
INDUSTRY, HEAVY: A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of
materials or products, predominantly from extracted or raw materials; or a use
engaged in the storage of or manufacturing processes using flammable or
explosive materials; or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially
involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
INDUSTRY, LIGHT: The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling,
packaging, or testing of goods or equipment or research activities entirely
within an enclosed structure, with no outside storage, serviced by a modest
volume (less than 12 trips in 24 hours) of trucks or vans and imposing a
negligible impact upon the surrounding environment by noise, vibration, smoke,
dust or pollutants.
INDUSTRY, MEDIUM: The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling,
packaging, or testing, of goods or equipment within an enclosed structure or an
open yard that is capable of being screened from neighboring properties,
serviced by a modest volume of trucks (less than 12 trips in 24 hours), or
other vehicles, and whose environmental impact is within the industrial
performance standards.
INSTITUTIONAL BUILDINGS: Shall include, but not be limited to: churches,
schools, hospitals, public and quasi-public buildings.
INSTITUTIONAL CARE DEVELOPMENT/FACILITY: A facility constructed, licensed and
operated to provide long term or permanent living accommodations, twenty four
(24) hour staff availability, and at least two (2) of the following services:
   A.   A selection of resident care services, under the direction and
supervision of a registered nurse or other health or human services licensed
professional, ranging from continuous medical, skilled nursing, psychological,
or other professional therapies to intermittent health related or
paraprofessional personal care services;
   B.   A structured, supportive social living environment based on a
professionally designed and supervised treatment plan, oriented to the
individual's needs; or
   C.   A supervised living environment that provides support, training, or
assistance with individual activities of daily living.
The facility must be licensed by either the Utah Department of Health or the
Utah Department of Human Services and be operated in accord with all
regulations established for licensure.
This definition includes assisted living facilities, hospices, small healthcare
facilities, transitional care developments, nursing homes, convalescent homes,
rest homes, congregate care facilities, Alzheimer's facilities, and nursing
care facilities.
This definition does not include facilities licensed or operating as general
acute or specialty hospitals, adult daycare, day treatment, domestic violence
treatment program, residential support, residential treatment, secure
treatment, youth program, community correctional center, correctional facility,
secure correctional facility, rehabilitation/treatment facility, transitional
housing facility, protective housing facility or similar facilities.
IRRIGATED LANDSCAPED AREA: All portions of a development site to be improved
with planting and irrigation. Natural open space areas shall not be included in
the irrigated landscaped area.
IRRIGATION AUDIT: An on site survey of the irrigation system, conduct of a
catch-can test to measure system efficiency, and the generation of an
irrigation schedule and recommendations to improve irrigation efficiency.
IRRIGATION CONTRACTOR: A person who has been certified by the Irrigation
Association to install irrigation systems or as otherwise approved by the
Public Utilities Department.
IRRIGATION DESIGNER: A person who has been certified by the Irrigation
Association to prepare irrigation system designs, or a landscape architect, or
as otherwise approved by the Public Utilities Department.
IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY: The measurement of the amount of water beneficially
applied, divided by the total amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is
derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system hardware
characteristics and management practices.
IRRIGATION PLAN: The plan that shows the components of the irrigation system
with water meter size, backflow prevention, rain shutoff device, precipitation
rates, flow rate and operating pressure for each irrigation zone, and
identification of all irrigation equipment. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord.
15-08, 10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017)
13.36.110: "J" DEFINITIONS:
JAIL: See definition of correctional facility.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLANDS: Those areas (within the City) that are inundated or
saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands
generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
JUVENILE DETENTION FACILITY: See definition of correctional facility.
JUVENILE RECEIVING CENTER: See definition of correctional facility.
JUVENILE SECURE FACILITY: See definition of correctional facility. (Ord. 12-15,
7-11-2012)
13.36.120: "K" DEFINITIONS:
KENNEL:
   A.   A commercial establishment having three (3) or more dogs for the
purpose of boarding, breeding, buying, grooming, letting for hire, training for
a fee, or selling said dogs.
   B.   Any premises, except where accessory to an agricultural use, where
domestic animals, such as dogs and cats, are boarded, trained, or bred.
KIOSK:
   A.   A freestanding structure upon which temporary information and/or
posters, notices, and announcements are posted.
   B.   A freestanding building with one or more open sides from which
commercial activities are conducted, such as the sale of food, flowers,
newspapers, or other goods approved by the City.
KITCHEN: Any room or portion of a room designed, built, used, or intended to be
used for food preparation and dishwashing, but not including a bar, butler's
pantry, or similar room adjacent to or connected with a kitchen. The presence
of a range or oven, or utility connections suitable for servicing a range or
oven in conjunction with a sink shall normally be considered as establishing a
kitchen. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.36.130: "L" DEFINITIONS:
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A person who holds a certificate to practice landscape
architecture in the State of Utah.
LANDSCAPE DESIGNER: A person who has been certified by the Utah Nursery and
Landscape Association to prepare landscape plans or as otherwise approved by
the Public Utilities Department.
LANDSCAPE EDUCATION PACKAGE: A package of documents that is intended to inform
and educate water users in the City about water efficient landscapes. The
package includes the principles of water efficient landscape design, a listing
of water conserving plants, a listing of certified landscape designers,
landscape architects, certified irrigation designers, certified irrigation
contractors, an information packet about various area demonstration projects,
city's water rates, billing format for water use, and the economics of
installing and maintaining a water efficient landscape.
LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDITOR: A person who has been certified by the Irrigation
Association to conduct a landscape irrigation audit or as otherwise approved by
the public utilities department.
LANDSCAPE PLAN: A plan showing the proposed location, type and size of all
trees, shrubs and ground covers to be planted on the site as well as a complete
water efficient irrigation system plan.
LANDSCAPE PLAN DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE: The preparation of graphic and written
criteria, specifications, and detailed plans to arrange and modify the effects
of natural features such as plantings, ground and water forms, circulation,
walks, and other features to comply with the provisions of this title. The
landscape plan documentation package shall include a project data sheet, a
planting plan, an irrigation plan, a grading plan, a soils report, a landscape
water allowance, and an irrigation schedule.
LANDSCAPE WATER ALLOWANCE: For design purposes, the upper limit of annual
applied water for the established landscaped area. It is based upon the local
reference evapotranspiration rate, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of
the landscaped area.
LANDSCAPED ZONE: A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar
water needs, areas with similar microclimate, i.e., slope, exposure, wind,
etc., and soil conditions and areas that will be similarly irrigated. A
landscape zone can be served by one irrigation valve or a set of valves with
the same schedule.
LANDSCAPING: Any combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs, vines,
ground covers, flowers, turf or ornamental grass; natural features such as
rock, stone, or bark chips; and structural features, including, but not limited
to, fountains, reflecting pools, outdoor artwork, screen walls, fences, or
benches.
LANDSCAPING, DRY: The finishing and adornment of yard areas solely by use of
rocks, fountains, lanterns, benches, decorative paving, etc., and not including
growing or planted materials.
LANE, PRIVATE: A right of way or easement in private ownership, not dedicated
or maintained as a public street, that serves one or two (2) lots, or is less
than one hundred fifty feet (150') in length.
LICENSE REVIEW BOARD: Persons appointed by the mayor, or his designee, to serve
as a review board for category II home occupation licenses and as a board of
appeals for denied, suspended or revoked home occupation licenses. It shall be
convened by the community development director when necessary for review or
appeal as set forth in this title. Board members are comprised of two (2)
members from each of the following departments: the fire department, police
department, and community development department and three (3) city residents.
There must be at least five (5) attending board members and a majority of
concurring votes to approve or deny any measure set before the license review
board.
LIQUOR: Alcohol, or any alcoholic, spirits, vinous, fermented, malt or other
liquid or combination of liquids, a part of which is spirits, vinous, or
fermented and all other drinks or drinkable liquids, which contain more than 1/
2 of 1% of alcohol by volume which is suitable to use for beverage purposes;
except that the term liquor shall not include any beverages defined as beer,
malt liquor, or malted beverage that has an alcohol content of less than four
percent (4%) alcohol volume.
LIVE/WORK UNITS: Mixed use development within a building, which incorporates
retail commercial or individual offices on the ground level, residential use on
upper levels, with direct access between uses and levels.
LOT: A legal parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main building or
group of main buildings and accessory buildings together with such yards, open
spaces, frontage, lot width, and lot area as are required by ordinance.
   TYPES OF LOTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3898.png]
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets,
where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed one
hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a lot covered by a building, structure, accessory
building, accessory structure, or impervious surface.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3900.png]
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets,
as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, IRREGULAR: A building lot whose rear property line is not generally
parallel to the front property line such as a pie shaped lot on a cul-de-sac,
or where the side property lines are not parallel to each other.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this title. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-
2012; amd. Ord. 16-05, 6-1-2016)
13.36.140: "M" DEFINITIONS:
MAINTENANCE FACILITY: Any building, premises, or land upon which a private
business, service, industry or unit of government (other than police or fire
agencies): a) services or maintains motor vehicles; or b) stores vehicles or
equipment used for servicing off site facilities or infrastructure.
MAJOR SPORTS VENUE: A stadium or similar building, with at least twenty
thousand (20,000) fixed seats, in which a professional sporting competition,
concert, or other similar event is held.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A transportable factory built housing unit constructed on or
after June 15, 1976, according to the HUD Code, in one or more sections, which:
a) in the traveling mode, is eight feet (8') or more in width or forty (40)
body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is four hundred (400) or
more square feet; and b) is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems. Manufactured homes shall be identifiable by the
manufacturer's data plate bearing the date the unit was manufactured and a HUD
label attached to the exterior or the home certifying the home was manufactured
to HUD standards.
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARK: A residential development in which owners of
mobile homes may rent, lease, or own a lot on which to place their home. Such
developments may provide all of the amenities and improvements typical of site-
specific developments.
MARKET STUDY: A study or related aggregate data review to establish the number
of potential users of a commercial facility or the size of a market area.
MARQUEE: A permanent roofed structure over the entrance to a building often
bearing an advertising sign. This structure is designed to meet all provisions
of the current International Building Code and other specifications as outlined
in this title. Where specifications in this title and the International
Building Code as adopted by the City differ, the more restrictive shall apply.
MASSAGE THERAPY: See definition of soft tissue and physical therapy.
MAUSOLEUM: See definition of cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum.
MEDICAL AND HEALTHCARE OFFICE: A building used exclusively by physicians,
dentists, and other healthcare personnel for the treatment and examination of
patients on an outpatient basis.
MIXED USE, COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT: A development consisting of
a mixture of residential and commercial uses with an approved ratio, developed
according to a master site plan. The development of the uses is of sufficient
size and physical improvement to protect surrounding areas and the general
community, and to assure a harmonious integration into the neighborhood.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT: A residential development project that includes one or
more of the following land uses: retail, service, commercial, or office; and
which, vertically or horizontally, integrates critical massing of physical and
functional components into a coherent plan that promotes walkability through
uninterrupted pedestrian connections, and reduces traffic and parking impacts.
MIXED USE, HORIZONTAL: Commercial and residential uses, etc., which are in
close proximity to each other and designed in a pedestrian scale, but not
necessarily within the same building structures.
MIXED USE, RESIDENTIAL AND OFFICE USE: A development consisting of a mixture of
residential and office uses with an approved ratio, developed according to a
master site plan. The development of the uses is of sufficient size and
physical improvement to protect surrounding areas and the general community,
and to assure a harmonious integration into the neighborhood.
MIXED USE STRUCTURE: A building which comprises a mixture of two (2) or more
land uses within a single building. Buildings in this definition include mixed
use commercial/residential, mixed use commercial/office, and mixed use office/
residential with the commercial and office uses being located on the ground
floor with one or more stories of residential or office above.
MIXED USE, VERTICAL: Commercial, office, or residential uses, etc., designed in
a manner which uses are within close proximity to each other within the same
building structure.
MOBILE HOME: A transportable factory built housing unit built prior to June 15,
1976, in accordance with a State Mobile Home Code which existed prior to the
HUD code.
MODEL HOME: A dwelling temporarily used as a sales office for a residential
development under construction; said home being used for on site sales and not
for general real estate business.
MODULAR HOME/UNIT: A structure built from sections which are manufactured in
accordance with the construction standards adopted in the Utah Uniform Building
Standards Act and transported to a building site, the purpose of which is for
human habitation, occupancy, or use.
MONUMENT, SURVEY: A permanent survey marker established by the Salt Lake County
Surveyor and/or a survey marker set in accordance with the City Engineer's
specifications and referenced to Salt Lake County survey monuments.
MORTUARY: An establishment in which the dead are prepared for burial or
cremation. The facility may include such uses as are associated with, clearly
accessory to and supply services to the principal use: a chapel for the conduct
of funeral services and spaces for informal gatherings and/or display of
funeral equipment, and may also include a retail floral shop, live plant
nursery, a facility for the manufacture of cement burial vaults and the sale
and engraving of grave markers.
MOTEL: A building or series of buildings in which lodging is offered for
compensation, and which is distinguished from a hotel primarily by reason of
typically providing direct independent access to, and adjoining parking for,
each rental unit.
MULCH: Any material such as bark, wood chips, rocks/stones, or other similar
materials left loose and applied to the soil. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord.
17-11, 4-19-2017; Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018; Ord. 20-12, 4-15-2020)
13.36.150: "N" DEFINITIONS:
NATURAL ACCESS CONTROL: Physical design which guides the mobility of people and
which decreases crime opportunity and increases perception of risk to potential
offenders.
NATURAL STATE: The condition of land which has not been graded, disturbed, or
built upon.
NATURAL SURVEILLANCE: Physical design which keeps potential intruders under the
perception of continual watch, using "eyes on the street" and visual
permeability in architecture, lighting, and landscaping.
NATURAL VEGETATION: Shall include, but not be limited to: orchards, trees,
shrubs, lawn, grass and perennial growth.
NATURAL WATERWAYS: Those areas, varying in width along rivers, streams, creeks,
springs, gullies, or washes which are natural drainage channels as determined
and identified by the City.
NET RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE: All land within a development site devoted exclusively
to a residential use.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on
or after the effective date of the original ordinance, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEWSRACK:
   A.   Any self-service or coin operated box, container, or other dispenser
installed, used, or maintained for the display, distribution and/or sale of
newspapers or news periodicals.
   B.   Any self-service or coin operated box, container, storage unit, or
other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale or free
distribution of newspapers or other news periodicals or publications.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building or structure or portion thereof lawfully
existing at the time this Code became effective, which was designed, erected,
or structurally altered that does not conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is located, or a building or structure that does not
conform to all the height and area regulations.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot whose width, area, or other dimension does not conform
to the regulations when this Code became effective. However, proposed
structures for such lots shall meet the required setbacks under this Code
unless otherwise stipulated by the Hearing Officer.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the time
this Code became effective and which does not now conform with the use
regulations.
NONDEPOSITORY INSTITUTION: A financial business, other than a depository
institution such as a bank, credit union, mortgage lender or savings and loan
association, that is registered by the State of Utah pursuant to the Check
Cashing Registration Act or the Title Lending Registration Act. Specifically
included are the following:
   A.   Check Cashing Business:
      1.   A person or business that for compensation engages in cashing a
check for consideration or extending a deferred deposit loan. "Check cashing
business" does not include depository institutions, as defined by the State of
Utah. "Check cashing business" also does not include a retail seller engaged
primarily in the business of selling goods or services to retail buyers that
cash checks or issue money orders for a minimum flat fee not exceeding one
percent (1%) of the check or one dollar ($1.00), whichever is the lesser, as a
service fee that is incidental to its main purpose or business.
      2.   Cashing of checks for consideration or extending a deferred deposit
loan and shall include any other similar types of businesses by the State
pursuant to the Check Cashing Registration Act.
   B.   Payday Loan Business: An establishment providing loans to individuals
in exchange for personal checks or assignment of wages as collateral.
   C.   Title Loan Business: An establishment providing short term loans to
individuals in exchange for the title of a motor vehicle, motor home, or
motorboat as collateral.
   D.   Deferred Deposit Lender: A business that conducts transactions where a
person presents to a check casher a check written on that person's account or
provides written or electronic authorization to a check casher to effect a
debit from that person's account using an electronic payment and the check
casher provides the maker an amount of money that is equal to the face value of
the check or the amount of the debit less any fee or interest charged for the
transaction and agrees not to cash the check or process the debit until a
specific date.
   E.   Other: Also included are any other business that offers deferred
deposit loans, title loans, check cashing services and loans for payment of a
percentage fee exceeding one percent (1%) of the check or one dollar ($1.00),
whichever is the lesser, as a service fee that is incidental to its main
purpose or business.
NONDROUGHT TOLERANT PLANT: A plant that will require regular irrigation for
adequate appearance, growth, and disease resistance.
NURSING CARE FACILITY: See definition of healthcare facilities.
NURSING HOME: An intermediate care/nursing facility or a skilled nursing
facility, licensed by the State of Utah, for the care of individuals who due to
illness, advanced age, disability, or impairment require assistance and/or
supervision on a twenty four (24) hour per day basis. A nursing home,
convalescent home or rest home does not include:
   A.   A residential facility for persons with a disability;
   B.   A residential facility for elderly persons;
   C.   An adult daycare facility; or
   D.   Adult daycare provided in conjunction with a residential facility for
elderly persons or a residential facility for persons with a disability. (Ord.
12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 18-09, 2-28-2018)
13.36.160: "O" DEFINITIONS:
OBSCENE: Material which depicts or describes sexual conduct that is
objectionable or offensive to accepted standards of decency which the average
person applying contemporary community standards would find, taken as a whole,
appeals to prurient interests; or material which depicts or describes, in a
patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by applicable State
law, and taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific value.
OBSERVATION AND ASSESSMENT PROGRAM: See definition of correctional facility.
OFF SITE IMPROVEMENTS: Any improvements that may be required which are not
located within the area of the property to be subdivided or developed.
OFFICE:
   A.   A place which is utilized for the conduct of business or of a
profession, as distinguished from residential buildings, commercial or retail
space, industrial buildings, or recreational facilities. Office buildings can
be either single-tenant structures (occupied primarily by a single tenant) or
multi- tenant structures containing a variety of tenants.
   B.   Professional or governmental office such as real estate, insurance,
accounting, auditing, bookkeeping services; advertising agencies;
architectural, engineering, planning, surveying services; attorneys; counseling
services; court reporting services; detective agencies; educational,
scientific, research organizations; employment, stenographic, secretarial, word
processing services; government offices including agency and administrative
office facilities; management, public relations, consulting services;
photography, commercial art studios; or similar services. Professional office
may include medical and healthcare offices.
See also definition of business or financial services.
OFFICE CALL CENTER: A concentrated and centralized office space used for
receiving or transmitting a large volume of inbound and/or outbound telephone
calls.
OFFICE PARK: A development on a tract of land that contains a number of
separate office buildings, supporting uses, and open space designed, planned,
constructed, and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis.
OFFICE RESEARCH FACILITY: A building or group of buildings in which office uses
are combined with facilities for research, testing, experimentation, assembly,
production, manufacturing, processing, packaging, and/or ancillary distribution
activities entirely within an enclosed structure, with no outside storage and
imposing a negligible impact upon the surrounding environment by noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, smell or pollutants.
OFFICIAL STREET MAP: A map drawn by City authorities that shows actual and
proposed rights-of-way, centerline alignments, and setbacks for highways and
other transportation facilities; provides a basis for restricting development
in designated rights-of-way or between designated setbacks to allow the
government authorities time to purchase or otherwise reserve the land; and has
been adopted as an element of the General Plan.
OPEN SPACE: Land areas that are not occupied by buildings, structures, parking
areas, streets or alleys. Open space may be devoted to landscaping,
preservation of natural features, forests, and recreational leisure areas and
facilities.
OPERATING PERMIT (Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance): A permit to
operate a facility handling regulated substances under this title.
ORDINARY REPAIR: The painting or replacement of existing building materials on
or within a structure, provided that such replacement consists of materials
which do not alter the integral structure and design of the building. Ordinary
repairs do not include changing the building's exterior space/dimension.
OUTDOOR ROOMS: Physical design of buildings, parking lots, open space areas,
etc., which breaks up expansive areas and creates the feeling of ownership and
safety.
OUTPATIENT TREATMENT: See definition of human services programs or facilities.
OVERLAY ZONE: An area where certain additional requirements are superimposed
upon a base zoning district and where the requirements of the base or
underlying district may or may not be altered.
OVERSIZED VEHICLE: A motor vehicle, trailer, or boat which by itself or
together with another trailer(s) or vehicle(s) attached to exceeds twenty four
feet (24') in length, or eight feet (8') in width, or eight feet (8') in
height, or is greater than one ton, exclusive of appurtenances such as
antennas, air conditioners, luggage racks, and mirrors. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012;
amd. Ord. 14-01, 1-22-2014; Ord. 16-14, 11-2-2016)
13.36.170: "P" DEFINITIONS:
PAMPHLET: An unbound printed publication with no cover or with a paper cover.
PAN CHANNEL LETTERING/PAN CHANNEL SIGN:
   A.   Consisting of a metal "pan" that is shaped like a letter. The "pan"
houses the electrical and lighting components of the letter and can mount
directly to a building's fascia. A plastic face is then attached to the letter
pan using trim cap material. The face is typically colored and translucent,
enabling the sign to be seen at great distances during the day and light up at
night.
   B.   A dimensional letter that has no face and, if illuminated, with the
light source visible. A clear face for physical protection of internal
components may be used.
PARK AND RIDE FACILITIES: Parking lots or structures located along public
transit routes designed to encourage transfer from private vehicles to mass
transit or to encourage car pooling for purposes of commuting, or for access to
recreation areas. Said facilities shall be appropriately developed and
landscaped to City standards, with special attention paid to buffers adjacent
to residential properties. Facilities approved as part of existing shopping
centers shall have authorization from property owners and shall not adversely
impact existing parking ratios.
PARK, PRIVATE: A park, playground, swimming pool, golf course or athletic field
available for recreational, educational, cultural, or aesthetic use, which is
under the control, operation, or management of private entity not associated
with any unit of a government.
PARK, PUBLIC: A park, playground, swimming pool, golf course or athletic field
available for recreational, educational, cultural, or aesthetic use, which is
under the control, operation, or management of the State, a State agency, the
County, or the City.
PARK STRIP:
   A.   The landscape area within a public right-of-way located between the
back of the street curb and the sidewalk, or, in the absence of a sidewalk,
located between the back of the street curb and the property line. Park strip
shall also include tree well sites located within the public right-of-way.
   B.   The area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where
there is no sidewalk, the area between the edge of the roadway and the property
line adjacent thereto. Park strip shall also include any area within a road
right of way that is not open to vehicular travel.
PARKING AREA, RESTRICTED: The area within the front yard of a lot within which
the parking of recreational and commercial vehicles is regulated.
PARKING LOT: An open area, other than a street, used for the parking of
vehicles.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE: Space within a building or private or public parking
area, exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office and work areas, for the
parking of an automobile.
PARKING STRUCTURE/TERRACE: Parking spaces and adjacent access drives, aisles,
and ramps that are located in a structure with two (2) or more levels.
PAWNSHOP: Any person, firm, corporation, or business which loans money on
deposit of personal property, or deals in the purchase, exchange or possession
of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger
or depositor, or loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel
mortgage security thereon, and takes or receives such personal property.
PEDESTRIAN STREET: A street designed for the use of pedestrians, restricting
vehicular use to service and emergency vehicles, particularly in areas where
retail commercial is on both sides of the street.
PERMANENT MAKEUP: The application of pigments to or under the skin of a human
being for the purpose of permanently changing the color or other appearance of
the skin. This includes, but is not limited to, permanent eyeliner, eye shadow,
lip color, or areola color. This type of land use is typically an ancillary use
to a beauty salon. This does not include "tattoo" as defined herein.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, joint
venture, governmental entity or other legal entity, and shall include the
plural as well as singular.
PETROLEUM PRODUCT: Includes fuels (gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, and
mixtures of these products), lubricating oils, motor oils (new and used),
hydraulic fluids, and other similar petroleum based products.
PLANNED CENTER: An area or group of commercial or mixed-use structures built on
a site that is planned, developed, and managed as a unified and contiguous
operating unit subdivided into multiple parcels.
PLANT NURSERY: A facility used for the growing and the wholesale or retail sale
of trees, shrubs, flowers, ground covers, etc. Said use may also include sales
of related products, including fertilizers, mulch, landscape decoration, etc.
PLANTING PLAN: A plan which clearly and accurately identifies and locates new
and existing trees, shrubs, ground covers, turf areas, driveways, sidewalks,
hardscape features, and fences.
PLAYGROUND: A facility designed for use by children, which may include, but is
not limited to, a slide, swing set, climbing bars, one or more basketball
standards, hard surface for play, and tether ball. A playground does not
include a golf course, full size athletic fields, tennis courts, volleyball
court, swimming pool and other similar in size outdoor activities.
PLOT PLAN: A plat of a lot, drawn to scale, showing the actual measurements,
the size and location of any existing buildings or buildings to be erected, the
location of the lot in relation to abutting streets, and such other information
as may be required.
PORCH: See definition of Balcony.
POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCE (PCS): Any physical, chemical, biological, or
radiological substance that enters the hydrological cycle through human action
and may cause a deleterious effect on ground or surface water sources; it shall
include, but is not limited to, hazardous waste, limiting nutrients, and
sanitary sewage.
POTENTIAL GEOLOGIC HAZARD AREA: An area that is designated by a Utah geological
survey map, county geologist map, or other relevant map or report as needing
further study to determine the area's potential for geologic hazard; or has not
been studied by the geological survey or a county geologist but presents the
potential of geologic hazard because the area has characteristics similar to
those of a designated geologic hazard area.
PRACTITIONER: A medical doctor (surgeon, general practice, orthopedic, midwife,
nurse practitioner, etc.) or those who perform dental care (dentist,
orthodontist, endodontist, etc.). A practitioner does not include nursing
staff, receptionists, dental assistants, rehabilitation specialists and other
similar support staff.
PRECIPITATION RATE: The rate at which water is applied per unit of time,
usually measured in inches per hour.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A plat prepared in accordance with this title, showing the
design of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around the
subdivision.
PRESCHOOL: An establishment for the instruction of children prior to entrance
into kindergarten. The standards applicable to the operation of such a facility
are dependent upon the zone in which it is located. If within a home, the
preschool must comply with the provisions of the home occupation requirements.
If within a commercial location, the preschool must comply with the
requirements of the underlying zone.
PRIMARY RECHARGE AREA: The areas depicted on the drinking water source
protection map on file in the city.
PRISON: A facility for incarceration of persons convicted of crimes,
established and operated by the state of Utah or by private provider pursuant
to the provisions of the private correctional facilities act, Utah Code
Annotated, as amended.
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT: Any improvements that are proposed to be maintained other
than by the city.
PRIVATE TREE: See definition of Tree, Private.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE: Professional or governmental office such as real estate,
insurance, accounting, auditing, bookkeeping services; advertising agencies;
architectural, engineering, planning, surveying services; attorneys; counseling
services; court reporting services; detective agencies; educational,
scientific, research organizations; employment, stenographic, secretarial, word
processing services; government offices including agency and administrative
office facilities; management, public relations, consulting services;
photography, commercial art studios; or similar services. Professional office
may include medical and healthcare offices.
PROTECTION ZONE: The delineation zones of the drinking water source protection
zone map.
PROTECTIVE HOUSING FACILITY: A facility operated, licensed or contracted by a
governmental entity, or operated by a charitable, nonprofit organization,
where, for no compensation, temporary, protective housing is provided to:
   A.   Abused or neglected children awaiting placement in foster care;
   B.   Pregnant or parenting teens;
   C.   Victims of sexual abuse; or
   D.   Victims of domestic abuse.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any improvements that are proposed to be maintained by the
city, such as curb and gutter, drive approaches, waterways, sidewalks, trails,
bike paths, raised medians, asphalt paving, road base, geotextile fabric,
painting and striping, and may also include the following:
   A.   Survey monuments.
   B.   Survey rivets.
   C.   Any water system facilities that are proposed to be maintained by the
city, such as water main lines, service laterals, meter boxes, fire hydrants,
pressure reducing valve stations, and other appurtenances.
   D.   Irrigation and flood control systems.
   E.   Streetlights.
   F.   Landscaping and sprinkling systems.
   G.   Streetscape (trees, benches, etc.).
   H.   Fencing and walls.
   I.   Retaining walls.
   J.   Any other required improvements determined by the city engineer or
community development director.
PUBLIC/PRIVATE PARK: An open space, playground, swimming pool, golf course, or
athletic field available for recreational, educational, cultural, aesthetic
use, or natural areas including, but not limited to, conservation areas,
wilderness areas, watershed areas, wildlife refuges, and wetlands which are
under the control, operation, or management of a government agency or private
entity.
PUBLIC SERVICE: Uses which may be housed in separate buildings or which may
occupy a space within a building that are operated by a unit of government to
serve public needs such as a library, museum, police (with or without jail),
fire service, ambulance, judicial court or government office, but not including
public utility stations or maintenance facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY STATION: A structure or facility, other than a wireless
telecommunications facility, used by a public or quasi- public utility agency
to store, distribute, generate electricity, gas, telecommunications, and
related equipment, or to capture, pump, and to otherwise engage in all aspects
of treating and distributing water or effluent. This definition shall not
include storage or treatment of solid waste, or hazardous waste.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM (PWS): A water system that serves the public. (Ord. 12-15,
7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 17-07, 4-12-2017; Ord. 19-09, 8-7-2019; Ord. 20-12, 4-15-
2020)
13.36.180: "Q" DEFINITIONS:
QUAD HOMES: Residential use structures which comprise four (4) dwelling units,
but are designed to architecturally appear as large single-family homes. Design
elements include, but are not limited to, back loaded garages, porches,
entrances, and sidewalks oriented to the street.
QUASI-PUBLIC: Essentially a public use, although under private ownership or
control. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.36.190: "R" DEFINITIONS:
RAIN SHUTOFF DEVICE: A device wired to an automatic controller that shuts off
the irrigation system when it rains.
REAR LOADED GARAGE: A "subservient" parking structure designed for access from
a private street, alley, or driveway, that is either attached or detached, to
the rear of the dwelling.
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION: A change in a rule, policy, practice, or service
necessary to afford a person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. As
used in this definition:
   A.   "Reasonable" means a requested accommodation will not undermine the
legitimate purposes of existing zoning regulations notwithstanding the benefit
that the accommodation would provide to a person with a disability.
   B.   "Necessary" means the applicant must show that, but for the
accommodation, one or more persons with a disability likely will be denied an
equal opportunity to enjoy housing of their choice.
   C.   "Equal opportunity" means achieving equal results as between a person
with a disability and a nondisabled person.
RECEPTION CENTER: A building, together with its accessory buildings and
premises, which is a place of assembly with the predominant purpose of hosting
single events either occurring alone or as part of another activity or
business. The noise ordinance shall be enforced as provided in section 26A-1-
114 of the Utah Code Annotated. Typical uses include wedding receptions,
birthday parties, bar mitzvahs, quinceañeras, conventions, and other similar
events, etc. Consecutive or repeated similar events shall not be held by the
same applicant.
RECIPROCAL ACCESS: Where commercial uses share a property line, off street
parking lots servicing the properties are made accessible to each other.
RECONSTRUCTED LANDSCAPING: Any existing approved landscaping and irrigation
that is removed and replaced as part of new construction.
RECREATION CENTER: An establishment providing a variety of recreation
activities including activities that are enclosed within a structure along with
outdoor recreational activities on the same premises. Activities may include
those identified with indoor recreation, as well as such outdoor activities as
miniature golf, amusement rides, slides and swimming pools.
RECREATION, FITNESS CENTER: An establishment providing completely enclosed
fitness related activities. Accessory uses may include the preparation and
serving of food and/or the sale of equipment related to the enclosed use. This
definition may include such uses as swimming pool, aerobics, weight training,
diet counseling, indoor running track, etc.
RECREATION, INDOOR: An establishment providing completely enclosed recreation
activities. Accessory uses may include the preparation and serving of food and/
or the sale of equipment related to the enclosed uses. Included in this
definition shall be bowling, roller or ice skating, billiards, swimming pools
and related amusements.
RECREATION, OUTDOOR: An area free of buildings except for restrooms, dressing
rooms, equipment storage, maintenance buildings, and open air pavilions, and
used primarily for recreation activities not involving motor vehicles, animals,
or overnight use. This definition shall include semiprivate swimming pools.
This definition shall not include ancillary outdoor open space or plazas within
a commercial, office, industrial or mixed- use development.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit, other than a mobile home, primarily
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use,
which is either self-propelled or is mounted on or pulled by another vehicle.
In addition, boats, jet skis, snowmobiles, four-wheelers, etc., shall also be
considered as recreational vehicles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK (TRAVEL TRAILER PARK): Any tract of land where the
lots or spaces are rented to recreational vehicle owners or users for a period
of time not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days, and where related services
are provided.
RECYCLING MATERIALS COLLECTION/DROP OFF: A facility that collects recyclable
materials for transport to a separate location for processing and recovery.
Recyclable materials include glass, plastic, paper, cloth and other materials
collected for recovery and reuse.
REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION RATE OR ET0: A standard measurement of
environmental parameters that affect the water use of plants. ET0 is expressed
in inches per day, month, or year and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration
of a large field of four inches (4") to five inches (5") tall, cool season
grass that is well watered. The average growing season ET0 for the Taylorsville
City area is 31.18 inches.
See also definition of evapotranspiration (ET).
REGRADING AND REPAVING: Changing of the established grades of an existing
parking lot or paved area which significantly alters the existing grade that
was constructed according to an approved site plan.
REGULATED SUBSTANCES (Drinking Water Source Protections Ordinance): Substances
(including degradation and interaction products) which because of quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical (including ignitability, corrosivity,
reactiveness and toxicity), infectious characteristics, radiomutagenicity,
carcinogenicity, teratogenicity, bioaccumulative effect, persistence
(nondegradability) in nature, or any other characteristics relevant to a
particular material that may cause significant harm to human health and/or
environment (including surface and ground water, plants, and animals).
REHABILITATION/TREATMENT FACILITY: A facility licensed by or contracted by the
State of Utah to provide temporary occupancy and supervision of adults or
juveniles in order to provide rehabilitation, treatment, or counseling
services. Without limitation, such services may include rehabilitation,
treatment, counseling, or assessment and evaluation services related to
delinquent behavior, alcohol and drug abuse, sex offenders, sexual abuse, or
mental health. Associated education services may also be provided to juvenile
occupants. A rehabilitation/treatment facility does not include a residential
facility for persons with a disability.
REIKI: A form of therapy performed on an individual through the hands of a
reiki practitioner that uses simple no touch techniques. It does not include
the examination, assessment, and evaluation of the soft tissue structures of
the body.
RELIGIOUS OR CULTURAL ACTIVITY: A building or buildings owned or maintained by
organized religious organizations and nonprofit associations for social, civic
or philanthropic purposes, or the purpose for which persons regularly assemble
for worship. Uses also included are the public nonprofit display of art,
historic or cultural artifacts or other inanimate exhibits, a building used as
a lending library or reading room, seminaries (associated with schools),
monasteries and convents. This definition shall not include temporary tents or
structures.
RENOVATION: Interior or exterior remodeling or enlargement of a structure,
other than ordinary repair.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY: A building or group of buildings in which
are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing,
experimentation, assembly, or repair; but not facilities for the manufacture or
sale of products except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
This also includes facilities for scientific laboratory research in technology
intensive fields. Examples would include biotechnology, pharmaceuticals,
genetics, plastics, polymers, resins, coatings, fibers, fabrics, films, heat
transfer, and radiation research facilities or similar uses.
RESEARCH PARK: A large tract of land that has been planned, developed, and
operated as an integrated facility for a number of separate buildings and
supporting ancillary uses with special attention to circulation, parking,
utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility.
RESIDENCE: A dwelling unit or other place where an individual or family is
actually living at a given point in time and not a place of temporary sojourn
or transient visit.
RESIDENTIAL ACTIVITY: Any building or structure or portion thereof that is
designed for or used for residential purposes and any activity involving the
use or occupancy of a lot for residential purposes. Residential activity shall
include those customary and accessory residential activities associated with
the principal permitted use of a lot for residential purposes as set out in
this title.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY: The average number of dwelling units on one acre of land
in a given area.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, GROSS: The density obtained by dividing all land in a
defined area used for residences, streets, open space, local schools, local
parks, and local shopping facilities, into the total number of dwelling units
in said area.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, NET: The density determined by dividing the total number
of dwelling units in a defined area by the total acreage of all parcels of land
within the area that are used exclusively for residential and accessory
purposes.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS: A dwelling unit owned by a resident
thereof or an immediate family member of a resident, or for which the title has
been placed in a trust for a resident; and is voluntarily occupied on a twenty
four (24) hour per day basis by six (6) or fewer elderly persons in a family
type arrangement. A "residential facility for elderly persons" does not include
any facility:
   A.   Operated as a business; provided, that such facility shall not be
considered to be operated as a business solely because a fee is charged for
food or for actual and necessary costs of operation and maintenance of the
facility;
   B.   Where persons are placed:
      1.   For alcoholism or drug abuse treatment; or as part of, or in lieu
of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional facility;
      2.   Which is a healthcare facility as defined by the Utah code, as
amended; or
      3.   Which is a residential facility for persons with a disability.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY: A dwelling unit in which
one to three (3) persons with a disability reside and, if required by state
law, is licensed or certified by:
   A.   The Utah department of human services under the Utah code, licensure of
programs and facilities; or
   B.   The department of health under the Utah code, health care facility
licensing and inspection act.
RESIDENTIAL LEASE, SHORT TERM:
   A.   The use, occupancy, rent or lease, for direct or indirect remuneration,
of a structure or any portion thereof constructed for single-family or multi-
family occupancy or of any other residential property for an effective term of
thirty (30) days or less.
   B.   The commercial use, by any person, of residential property for hotel,
inn, lodging, motel, resort or other transient lodging uses where the term of
occupancy, possession or tenancy of the property by the person entitled to such
occupancy, possession or tenancy is for thirty (30) consecutive calendar days
or less.
   For the purposes of this definition "remuneration" means compensation,
money, rent, or other bargained for consideration given in return for
occupancy, possession or use of real property.
   Short term residential leases are prohibited in all residential districts,
residential SSD districts, and residential SD districts.
RESIDENTIAL SUPPORT: See definition of Human Services Programs Or Facilities.
RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT: See definition of Human Services Programs Or Facilities.
RESOURCE FAMILY HOME: See definition of Human Services Programs Or Facilities.
REST HOME: See definition of Nursing Home.
RESTAURANT: An eating establishment in which food is prepared for either on or
off premises consumption, with service being provided in a traditional sit down
restaurant with indoor or outdoor seating style or served from a counter. This
definition also includes specialty food stores such as ice cream parlors or
delicatessens, but does not include drive-in or drive-up window service.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN/DRIVE-UP WINDOW: An eating establishment in which food is
prepared and served. May include facilities for indoor seating, takeout, drive-
up window service, or outside service provided by employees to customers in
vehicles.
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES: A commercial enterprise that provides goods and/or
services directly to the consumer where such goods are available for immediate
purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser. This also includes
retail establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general
public as well as to other retailers, contractors, or businesses, and rendering
services incidental to the sale of such goods. Retail establishments could also
involve a high volume of sales of related and/or unrelated products in a
warehouse setting and may include membership warehouse clubs (big box retail).
RETAINING WALL: A structure or combination of natural elements constructed to
hold back or support the adjacent slope, earthen berm or otherwise create a
differential in heights between two (2) or more land masses.
RIGHT OF WAY: The portion of roadway dedicated to the purpose of conveying
vehicle and pedestrian traffic, and other public use. This area shall include,
but not be limited to, all areas of pavement and sidewalk between opposing
property lines.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
RUNOFF: Irrigation water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape area to
which it is applied and that flows onto other areas. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012;
amd. Ord. 12-28, 10-17-2012; Ord. 12-29, 10-17-2012; Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018;
Ord. 20-12, 4-15-2020)
13.36.200: "S" DEFINITIONS:
SARA TITLE III: The Superfund Amendment and Reauthorization Act section found
in 40 CFR 300-302, pertaining to emergency response and right to know.
SCHOOL: Any building (public or private) used primarily for the general
education of minors.
SCHOOL, CHARTER: A public school established by a contract with a school
district governing board, the State Board of Education, or the State Board for
Charter Schools pursuant to State law.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL: A school established to provide for the teaching of
vocational, industrial, clerical, managerial, artistic skills, or similar
skills. This definition applies to schools that are owned and operated
privately for profit and that do not offer a complete educational curriculum,
e.g., beauty school, modeling school.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL (LOW IMPACT): Those commercial schools which are artistic in
nature and which have a relatively low impact on surrounding uses because they
are conducted indoors; have a limited number of students; and do not require a
large number of parking spaces because of the age of the students. Such schools
generally include smaller scale dance schools, music lessons, martial arts
schools, gymnastics schools and similar uses.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE OR QUASI-PUBLIC: A school operated by a private or quasi-public
organization, or individual, which has a curriculum similar to that provided in
any public school in the State of Utah, except that such curriculum may include
religious instruction. A private school may be a profit making or nonprofit
organization. A private school may also include laboratory and shop instruction
with the use of demonstration vehicles, products or models incidental to said
instruction; but shall not include the repair, maintenance and manufacture of
vehicles, goods or merchandise, and shall not provide direct services, other
than instruction to the general public. (Does not include commercial schools.)
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC: An educational facility operated by a school district or other
public agency of the State of Utah.
SCULPTURE PARK: A facility for the display for viewing and/or sale of
sculptures. Facility may include outdoor display. Such facility typically
includes a large expanse of landscaped green space containing an array of
gardens, fountains, and sculptural artworks.
SEARCHLIGHT: A temporary advertising device which is a stationary or revolving
light which flashes or projects illumination, single color or multicolored, in
any manner which is intended to attract or divert attention.
SECONDARY CONTAINMENT (Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance): Any system
that is used to provide release detection and release prevention, such as trays
under containers, floor curbing or other systems designed to hold materials or
liquids that may discharge from containers holding regulated substances.
Examples include a double walled tank, a double walled integral piping system,
or a single walled tank or integral piping system that is protected by an
enclosed concrete vault, liner, or an impervious containment area.
SECONDHAND GOODS STORE: Any business which is engaged in the purchase, barter,
exchange, or sale of any secondhand merchandise or which deals in secondhand
goods, excluding businesses dealing in used motor vehicles and trailers and
pawn shops. Typical businesses in this definition are thrift stores, used
clothing stores, etc.
SECURE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY: See definition of correctional facility.
SECURE DETENTION: See definition of correctional facility.
SECURE FACILITY: See definition of correctional facility.
SECURE TREATMENT: See definition of human services programs or facilities.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own
weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another
vehicle.
SENIOR APARTMENT UNITS: Single-family dwelling units within a single building
for persons age fifty five (55) and older.
SENSITIVE AREA: An area of land which contains environmental or potential
geological hazards, and which, if altered, may cause damage to the environment.
SEPTIC HOLDING TANK (Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance): A watertight
receptacle, used to contain septic waste. The contents of which are extilated
and disposed of at a waste disposal facility.
SEPTIC TANK SYSTEM (Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance): A generally
watertight receptacle connected to a drainfield that allows liquid from the
tank to enter the soil. The system is constructed to promote separation of
solid and liquid components of domestic wastewater, to provide decomposition of
organic matter, to store solids, and to allow clarified liquid to discharge for
further treatment and disposal in a soil absorption system.
SETBACK: The setback for all structures is the shortest distance between the
property line and the building or any portion thereof excluding the following:
   A.   Window awnings and unenclosed front entry and steps not protruding more
than five feet (5') into the setback area.
   B.   Uncovered patios.
   C.   Decks and balconies not greater than two feet (2') in height from
grade, and not less than four feet (4') from the rear property line and eight
feet (8') from the side property line.
   D.   Decks and balconies not greater than eight feet (8') above grade and
not less than ten feet (10') from the rear lot line.
   E.   Chimney and roof overhangs protruding no greater than two feet (2')
into the setback area.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Adult businesses, nude entertainment businesses,
seminude dancing bars, outcall services, and nude and seminude dancing agencies
as defined in title 5, chapter 5.82 of the Taylorsville Code.
SHELTER: See definition of correctional facility.
SHELTERED WORKSHOP: A nonresidential facility providing supervised educational
or vocational training facility for persons with a disability.
SHOPPING CENTER: An area or group of commercial or mixed-use structures built
on a site that is planned, developed, managed and owned by a single entity as a
unified and contiguous operating unit.
SIDEWALK:
   A.   Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
   B.   A paved surface or leveled area separated from the street and used as a
pedestrian walkway.
   C.   A paved right-of-way for pedestrians that is separate and protected
from the traveled portion of the roadway, and free from vehicular traffic.
SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLE: The triangular area formed by a diagonal line
connecting two (2) points located on intersecting street, right-of-way or
driveway.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3902.png]
SIGN: Every message, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display,
illustration, insignia, surface, or space erected or maintained in view of the
observer thereof for identification, advertisement, or promotion of the
interests of any person, entity, product, or service. The definition of a sign
shall include all flags of any type. The definition of sign shall also include
the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments
or other features used to draw the attention of observers.
SIGN, A-FRAME: Any portable sign, structure, or configuration composed of one
or two (2) sign faces mounted or attached back to back in such a manner as to
form a basically triangular vertical cross section.
SIGN, ABANDONED: A sign which no longer correctly directs or influences any
person, advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product, or activity
conducted or available on the premises where such sign is displayed.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: A sign which attracts or directs attention to a use,
product, commodity, or service either related or not related to the premises on
which the sign is located.
SIGN, ADVERTISING BENCH: A bench for public use and convenience which is
painted or otherwise covered with advertisement.
SIGN, ANIMATED: A sign which involves motion or rotation of any part by
mechanical or artificial means or displays flashing or intermittent lights.
SIGN AREA: The portion of a sign that is used for display purposes, excluding
the minimum frame and supports. In computing sign area, only one side of a back
to back or double face sign covering the same object shall be computed when the
signs are parallel or diverge from a common edge by an angle of not more than
forty five degrees (45°).
SIGN, AWNING: An awning having copy or logo, or which is backlit, externally
illuminated, or nonilluminated.
SIGN, BANNER:
   A.   A sign having characters, letters or illustrations applied to cloth,
paper or fabric of any kind, with only such nonrigid material for background.
   B.   A sign of lightweight fabric or similar nonrigid material that is
mounted with no enclosing framework.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: See definition of billboard.
SIGN, BLADE: Signs projecting perpendicular from the wall having a certain
distance from the wall and a certain clearance above the ground.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which identifies a business or use conducted, product or
commodity sold, or service performed upon the premises on which it is located.
SIGN, CABINET: A sign that contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a
single enclosed cabinet and may or may not be illuminated.
SIGN, CANOPY: Any sign attached to the underside or constructed upon a canopy.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: A sign on which the copy is changed manually or
electrically such as a message center or reader boards with changeable letters
or changeable pictorial panels, and electronically controlled time and
temperature signs. It does not include poster panels or painted bulletins.
SIGN, COMMUNITY: Temporary, on or off premises signs, generally made of a woven
material or durable synthetic materials primarily attached to or hung in a
vertical fashion from light poles or on buildings, of solely a decorative,
festive, and/or informative nature announcing activities, promotions, events,
seasonal or traditional themes having broad community interest and which are
sponsored or supported by the City or a local community based nonprofit
organization.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL OFF PREMISES: Signs containing directional information for
the purpose of facilitating or controlling the efficient or safe movement of
pedestrians or vehicles on or into public or private property, and are located
on the properties adjacent to which they pertain.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL ON PREMISES: Signs containing directional information for the
purpose of facilitating or controlling the efficient or safe movement of
pedestrians or vehicles on or into public or private property, and shall be
located on the properties to which they pertain.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3904.png]
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER/READER BOARD: See definition of electronic
message center.
SIGN, FIELD BOARDS: Nonilluminated, static graphics on a portable hard surface
inside a major sports venue.
SIGN, FLAG: Flag sign shall be made of cloth and express messages which are not
primarily commercial. Flags shall include, but not be limited to, U.S. flags,
flags of other governmental entities, or flags identifying the person,
institution, organization or corporation occupying a property.
SIGN, FLAGPOLE, ILLUMINATED: Flagpoles which are internally illuminated or have
lighting attached to the pole for purposes of drawing attention to a business
location. This shall not include poles which have lighting attached to or
directed toward a pole for purposes of illuminating the flag.
SIGN, FLASHING: A sign or parts thereof which is intermittently on and off or
which revolves in such a manner to create the illusion of being on and off,
with the exclusion of time and temperature signs.
SIGN, FLAT: A sign erected parallel to and attached to the outside wall of a
building and extending out not more than eighteen inches (18") from such wall
with messages or copy on the face side only.
SIGN, FLOODLIGHTED: A sign made legible in the absence of daylight by devices
which reflect or project light upon it.
SIGN, FREESTANDING (OR PYLON SIGN): A sign that is mounted on a support
structure so that the bottom edge of the sign is six feet (6') or more above
grade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3908.png]
SIGN, GRANDSTAND: Single face signs that are attached to fixed seats.
SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION: A sign identifying a home occupation legally existing on
the premises.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any sign directly lighted by any electrical light source,
internal or external, except light sources specifically and clearly operated
for the purpose of lighting the general area in which the sign is located
rather than the sign itself.
SIGN, INTERIOR: A sign located within a building so as to be visible only from
within the building in which the sign is located.
SIGN LOCATION: A lot, site or premises, building, wall, or any place wherever a
sign is erected, constructed, or maintained.
SIGN, MARQUEE: A sign designed to have changeable copy, either manually or
electronically. Marquee signs may be a principal identification sign, a
freestanding sign, a wall sign, or attached to a canopy.
SIGN, MENU BOARD: A sign that is used to advertise the product available at a
restaurant.
SIGN, MONUMENT SIGN: A low sign where the top edge of sign is six feet (6')
high or lower where the extent of the sign surface is attached to the ground or
a foundation in the ground, and where there are no poles, braces, or other
visible means of support other than attachment to the ground.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and/or occupation of a person or
persons residing on the premises or legally occupying the premises, or
indicating a home occupation legally existing on the premises.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING: A sign or sign structure or portion thereof lawfully
existing at the time this code became effective, which does not now conform to
all regulations prescribed in the district in which it is located.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: An advertising sign which directs attention to a use,
product, commodity, or service not related to the premises on which it is
erected.
SIGN, ON PREMISES: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
product, use, service, or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted on
the premises upon which the sign is located.
SIGN, PORTABLE: A sign that is not permanently affixed to a structure or the
ground and is movable such as A-frame or T-frame signs. This definition does
not include any signs on trailers or vehicles.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign attached to a building and extending in whole or in
part more than eighteen inches (18") beyond any wall of the building.
SIGN, PROPERTY: A temporary sign related to the property on which it is located
advertising contemplated improvements or announcing the name of the builder,
owner, designer, or developer of the project, or warning against trespassing.
SIGN, PUBLIC NECESSITY OR HAZARD: A sign informing the public of any danger or
hazard existing on or adjacent to the premises.
SIGN, PYLON: See definition of Sign, Freestanding (Or Pylon Sign).
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A temporary sign related to the property on which it is
located and offering such property for sale or lease.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign erected partly or wholly freestanding on or over the roof of
a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3910.png]
SIGN, ROTATING: A revolving sign in which all or a portion of the sign moves in
a revolving or similar manner, with the exclusion of time and temperature
signs.
SIGN, SCOREBOARD: A changeable copy sign typically used for scores, game
updates and replays located on a structure facing the playing field.
SIGN, SEASONAL OR HOLIDAY: Such signs as Christmas decorations, to include
those used for a historic holiday and installed for a limited period of time.
SIGN, SNIPE: A sign which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise
attached to ground, trees, poles, stakes, or fences, or other objects with the
message appearing thereon.
SIGN, SPONSORSHIP SCRIM PANEL: Lightweight perforated fabric with graphics
applied to the surface, attached with a tension system.
SIGN, SPOTLIGHT: See definition of Searchlight.
SIGN, STRUCTURE: The supports, uprights, bracing, cables, and framework of a
sign or outdoor display.
SIGN, SUSPENDED: A sign which is hung from a roof, pole, canopy, or other
similar structure.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed
of paper, cloth, canvas, fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other materials, with
or without frames, intended to be displayed in or out of doors for a short
period of time; shall include political signs, special events signs, special
business promotions or portable signs.
SIGN, TUNNEL: Flat, nonilluminated signs mounted above the player tunnel in a
major sports venue.
SIGN, VEHICLE: A sign that is attached to or painted on a vehicle that is
parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which is to
attract attention to a product sold or business located on the property.
SIGN, WALL: A building mounted sign, either attached to or displayed or painted
on an exterior wall in a manner parallel with the wall surface, and not
projecting more than eighteen inches (18") from such surface.
SIGN, WAYFINDING: A sign used to guide the way to a given location along the
traveled path.
SIGN, WIND: Any propeller or similar commercial device which is designed to
flutter, rotate, or display other movement under the influence of the wind, not
including pennants, flags or banners.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign either attached to a window or door or located within a
building so as to be visible through a window or door from outside of the
building.
SITE CHANGE: Changes to the existing site improvements.
SITE PLAN: A plan which outlines the use and development of any tract of land
within the City for the purposes of meeting the requirements set forth in this
Code.
SITE-SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT (SSD): A residential or commercial development guided
by a total design plan in which one or more of the zoning or subdivision
regulations, other than use regulations, may be waived or varied to allow
flexibility and creativity in site design, building design, and location, in
accordance with general guidelines as specified in this title. Units within a
SSD may be sold or offered for rent.
SKILLED NURSING CARE UNIT: A nursing bed or individual room which provides
board, shelter and twenty four (24) hour skilled nursing and medical care to
chronic or convalescent patients. A nursing unit shall include accessory uses,
including dining rooms, bathing areas, common areas, offices, clinics, therapy
areas, medical facilities and other space necessary to provide the above
services.
SLUDGE OR BIOSOLIDS (Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance): The solids
separated from wastewater during the wastewater treatment process.
SMALL HEALTHCARE FACILITY: See definition of healthcare facilities.
SOCIAL CENTER, FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS, OR SENIOR CITIZENS CENTER: A building
or group of buildings and/or uses owned or maintained by an association or
organization for the fraternal, social and/or recreational purposes of certain
groups. This may include a meeting hall, cooking and dining facilities for
large groups, but shall not provide overnight lodging. This definition shall
include, but not be limited to, fraternal organizations and senior citizen
centers.
SOCIAL CLUB: See definition of alcoholic beverage establishments: social clubs.
SOCIAL DETOXIFICATION: See definition of human services programs or facilities.
SOFT TISSUE AND PHYSICAL THERAPY: Establishments that provide manual
manipulation of soft body tissues (muscle, connective tissue, tendons and
ligaments) by licensed professionals that specialize in the assessment,
treatment and management of soft tissue injury, pain and dysfunction primarily
of the neuromusculoskeletal system, including bodywork practitioners such as
massage therapists and physical therapists.
SOILS REPORT: A report by a soils laboratory indicating soil type(s), soil
depth, uniformity, composition, bulk density, infiltration rates, and pH for
the topsoil and subsoil for a given site. The soils report also includes
recommendations for soil amendments.
SOLAR EQUIPMENT: Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary
purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar
energy for space heating, cooling, water heating, or for power generation.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY: Any solid waste management facility which is the
final resting place for solid waste, including landfills and incineration
facilities that produce ash from the process of incinerating solid waste.
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY: A site the primary purpose of which is to store
or hold solid waste for transport to a processing or disposal facility. It does
not include green boxes, compactor units, permanent dumpsters, and other
containers from which such wastes are transported to a landfill or other solid
waste management facility.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: A specific approval that has been determined to be less
intense or to have potentially minor impacts on surrounding properties than a
conditional use within the same zoning district. Special uses have specific
conditions of approval that are found within the special use chapter of this
Code.
SPECIALTY HOSPITAL: See definition of healthcare facilities.
SPRAY SPRINKLER: An irrigation head that sprays water through a nozzle.
STADIUM: A commercial structure with tiers of seats rising around a field or
court, intended to be used primarily for the viewing of athletic events. The
sports area may also be used for entertainment and other public gathering
purposes such as conventions, circuses, or concerts.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site; such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STEP BACK ARCHITECTURE: Physical design for midrise and higher buildings by
setting the building facade away from the street on successively higher
stories, and which includes expansive glass areas, balconies, terraces, and
landscape features and architectural elements.
STORAGE (MINISTORAGE) FACILITIES: A building or series of buildings for which
individual storage space is rented for storage purposes only.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of the floor and
the ceiling next above it other than the basement.
STREAM SPRINKLER: An irrigation head that projects water through a gear rotor
in single or multiple streams.
STREET:
   A.   A public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to
abutting property. The term street shall include avenue, drive, circle, road,
parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare, or any other similar term.
   B.   All the area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and
shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, park strips, alleys, and
sidewalks.
STREET, ARTERIAL; MAJOR: Providing for through traffic movement between areas
and across the City, with moderate access to abutting property subject to
necessary control of entrances, exits, and curb use. The location of this type
of street is addressed in the transportation element of the City General Plan
and designated on the official street map for the City.
STREET, COLLECTOR; MAJOR AND MINOR: Providing for traffic movement between
major arterials and local streets, and direct access to abutting property. The
location of this type of street is addressed in the transportation element of
the City General Plan and designated on the official street map for the City.
STREET, LOCAL: Providing for direct access to abutting land, and for local
traffic movements. The location of this type of street is addressed in the
transportation element of the City General Plan and designated on the official
street map for the City.
STREET, PRIVATE: A right-of-way or easement in private ownership, not dedicated
or maintained as a public street, that serves more than two (2) lots and is
greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') in length.
STREET VENDORS: A use consisting of a cart, portable stand, or trailer and any
related accessory appurtenances such as awning, canopy, or seating used for the
retail sales of goods including, but not limited to, beverages, food, and
flowers.
STREETSCAPE PLAN: The streetscape section of the growth, land use and community
identity chapter of the City General Plan.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. A
building is included in this definition. Any structure two feet (2') or above
in grade shall meet all underlying zoning requirements.
SUBDIVISION: Any land that is divided, resubdivided or proposed to be divided
into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, or other division of
land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease, or
development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms, and conditions. Subdivision includes:
   A.   The division or development of land whether by deed, metes and bounds
description, devise and testacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded
instrument; and
   B.   Divisions of land for all residential and nonresidential uses,
including land used or to be used for commercial, agricultural, and industrial
purposes.
SUBGRADE: Either the soil prepared and compacted to support a structure or a
pavement system, or the elevation of the bottom of the trench in which a sewer
or pipeline is laid.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair, reconstruction, addition, or improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure either:
   A.   Before the improvement or repair is started, or
   B.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage",
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
included either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications
which have been identified by the local Code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to
occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.
SUPPORT STAFF: Persons employed or residing on the premises of a dwelling or
other healthcare facility to assist residents in performing daily life
activities or to provide on site treatment, rehabilitation, or habilitation
services.
SWIMMING POOL: A constructed pool used for bathing or swimming, which is over
twenty four inches (24") in depth, or with a surface area exceeding two hundred
fifty (250) square feet.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE: A private swimming pool is a pool which is used or
intended to be used as a swimming pool in connection with a residence and
available only to the family of the householder and their private guests.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC: A swimming pool, admission to which may be gained by the
general public with or without payment of a fee.
SWIMMING POOL, SEMIPRIVATE: A swimming pool on the premises of, or part of, a
hotel, motel, mobile home or travel trailer park, apartment house, private
club, association or similar establishment, where admission to the use of the
pool is included in the fee, or consideration paid or given for the general use
of the premises.
SWIMMING SCHOOL: An establishment for the instruction of children or adults in
the swimming arts and sports, including diving, treading water, strokes, and
lifesaving techniques. A swimming school does not include instruction on
snorkeling, underwater swimming with breathing apparatus, or other similar
instruction. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 12-29, 10-17-2012; Ord. 14-15,
8-20-2014; Ord. 15-08, 10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017; Ord. 16-05, 6-1-2016; Ord.
17-11, 4-19-2017; Ord. 18-07, 2-28-2018; Ord. 18-26, 10-17-2018; Ord. 19-09, 8-
7-2019 ; Ord. 20-12, 4-15-2020)
13.36.210: "T" DEFINITIONS:
TATTOO: A permanent design or mark is made on the skin by pricking it and
ingraining in it an indelible pigment, or by raising scars on it.
TATTOO PARLOR: Any business establishment which operates tattoo equipment to
inject ink or otherwise modify human skin for the purposes of decoration.
TAVERN: See definition of Alcoholic Beverage Establishments.
TEMPORARY AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT: The conduct of business from a single
designated site, without a permanent foundation or location, from which new or
used automobiles are sold on a temporary basis.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS:
   A.   The conduct of business from a single designated site or premises
without a permanent foundation or location, from which goods or services are
sold on a temporary or seasonal basis and includes a concert, fair, rally,
bazaar or festival from which goods or services are nonfood items, other than
fireworks, Christmas trees, and automobiles are sold on a temporary basis.
   B.   Licenses for temporary merchants shall expire thirty (30) days from
issuance. A licensee may reapply for subsequent licenses at the same location
but may not exceed sixty (60) days at the same location. For the purposes of
this definition, any location within two hundred fifty (250) linear feet is
considered the same location. Temporary merchants who are properly licensed at
a given location will have the right of first refusal for subsequent temporary
license renewals provided the licensee has not reached the maximum permissible
license duration. The business license or land use fee shall be waived with
subsequent licenses in the sixty (60) day period at the same location by the
same applicant as referenced above.
TEMPORARY CHRISTMAS TREE LOT: The conduct of business from a single designated
site, without a permanent foundation or location, from which Christmas trees
are sold on a temporary basis.
TEMPORARY FIREWORKS SALES: The conduct of temporary retail sales of fireworks
from an existing retail store currently licensed by the city to perform retail
sales.
TEMPORARY FIREWORKS STAND: The conduct of business from a single designated
site, without a permanent foundation or location, from which fireworks are sold
on a temporary basis.
TEMPORARY FOOD VENDOR: The conduct of business from a single designated site,
without a permanent foundation or location, from which prepared food and/or
beverages are sold on a temporary basis.
TEMPORARY FRUIT OR VEGETABLE STAND: The conduct of business from a single
designated site, without a permanent foundation or location, from which fresh
fruit and/or vegetables are sold on a temporary basis.
TEMPORARY MERCHANT: The conduct of business from a single designated site,
without a permanent foundation or location.
10-YEAR STORM: A storm having a ten percent (10%) chance of annual occurrence.
TENNIS CLUB: See definition of Recreation, Indoor or Recreation, Outdoor.
TERRITORIAL REINFORCEMENT: Physical design which encourages users of property
to develop ownership over it, developing space with an easily discernable
purpose, using symbolic barriers such as low lying fences/wall, landscaping and
signage, eliminating ambiguous spaces, encouraging easy maintenance, and
discouraging crime.
THEATER: A building used primarily for the presentation of movies projected
upon a screen. May include ancillary uses such as arcades. Theater also
includes a building used primarily for the presentation of live stage
productions or performances or open air theater for performing arts.
TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS:
   A.   A commercial establishment in which:
      1.   The sale of tobacco products accounts for more than thirty five
percent (35%) of the total annual gross receipts for the establishment;
      2.   Food and beverage products, excluding gasoline sales, is less than
forty five percent (45%) of the total annual gross receipts for the
establishment; and
      3.   The establishment is not licensed as a pharmacy under title 58,
chapter 17b, pharmacy practice act (Utah Code Annotated); or
   B.   An establishment providing retail sales and services which exclusively
or primarily involve the sale of tobacco products and related goods.
TOPPING: The internodal cutting back (between existing stem and/or branch
nodes), dehorning or pollarding of stems or branches of a tree or shrub,
resulting in the severe alteration of the species' genetic structural
characteristics.
TOWNHOUSE: A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three (3) or
more attached units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with
open space on at least two (2) sides.
TRADE OR VOCATIONAL SCHOOL: A post-high school educational or vocational
training facility.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT (TND): Physical design, mixed use or stand
alone, which promotes pedestrian activity by incorporating guidelines
controlling architectural elements, entrances and sidewalks oriented to the
street, walkways, driveways, landscaping, street design and streetscape, and
other pedestrian elements.
TRANSIENT LODGING: A room or suite of rooms within a residential dwelling which
is occupied by persons for periods of less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
TRANSITIONAL CARE DEVELOPMENT: A cohesive development created primarily for the
care and housing of the elderly and/or persons with a disability. To qualify
under this definition, the development must contain at least two (2) of the
following land use classifications to qualify under this definition:
   A.   Single-family unit development (either detached or attached, such as a
traditional home or twin home development).
   B.   Congregate care facility.
   C.   Assisted living facility.
   D.   Nursing home/convalescent home/rest home.
   E.   Hospice.
   F.   Small healthcare facility.
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING FACILITY: A facility owned, operated, or contracted by a
governmental entity or a charitable, nonprofit organization which provides free
temporary housing to homeless persons for no more than thirty (30) days while
they obtain work, job skills, or otherwise take steps to stabilize their
circumstances. A transitional housing facility does not include:
   A.   A homeless shelter.
   B.   A dwelling unit provided to a family for its exclusive use as part of a
transitional housing program for more than thirty (30) days; and
   C.   A residential facility for persons with a disability.
TRAVEL TIME CONTOUR (Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance): The locus of
points that form a line of any configuration in space from which groundwater
particles on that line theoretically take an equal amount of time to reach a
given destination, such as a well or a wellfield, as predicted by the Refined
Salt Lake Valley MODFLOW/MODPATH model copyrighted.
TREE, CITY: All trees and shrubs located in a city owned park strip or on other
city owned and/or maintained property.
TREE, HAZARD: Any tree determined to be a public nuisance, which may include,
but is not limited to, the following:
   A.   Any tree that is host to a communicable disease, destructive disease or
other pestilence.
   B.   Any tree, the roots or any other portion of which, causes the surface
of a public street, curb, gutter, or sidewalk to be upheaved or otherwise
disturbed creating a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
   C.   Any tree or portion thereof which, by reason of location and/or
structural defect, increases the chance of failure of the tree and increases
the risk to the health, safety or well being of the public.
   D.   Any tree or portion thereof which, by reason of location and/or
condition, impedes a public right of way or may cause a threat to the public
health, safety or welfare, including any tree adjacent to any sidewalk used as
a public right of way which is not pruned from either edge of the right of way
vertically to a height of seven feet (7') above the surface of sidewalk or any
tree adjacent to a roadway which is not pruned to a height of thirteen feet
(13') vertically from back of curb or is not pruned as is deemed necessary by
the city engineer.
   E.   Any tree or portion thereof which interferes with adequate streetlight
coverage of public rights of way.
TREE, PRIVATE: Any and all trees and shrubs now and hereafter growing on
private property within the city and which are not defined or designated herein
as city trees.
TREE STEWARDSHIP PROGRAM: The ongoing and shared responsibility between public
and private parties for the protection, care and renewal of trees.
TRUCK STOP: A facility intended to provide services to the trucking industry,
including, but not limited to, the following activities: dispensing of fuel,
repair shops, automated washes, overnight parking, etc., all as part of the
facility. A truck stop may also include overnight accommodations, showers, or
restaurant facilities primarily for the use of truck crews.
TURF: A surface layer of earth containing mowed grass with its roots.
TWIN HOME: A residential structure composed of two (2) dwellings set side by
side and sharing a common wall and separation wall. Each dwelling is
constructed on its own building lot and is sold separately from the adjoining
attached dwellings. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 12-27, 10-17-2012; Ord.
14-06, 4-16-2014)
13.36.220: "U" DEFINITIONS:
UAC: The Utah administrative code.
UFA: The unified fire authority or any successor entity providing fire and
emergency service protection to the city.
USGS: The United States geological survey.
URBAN FOREST: Vegetation on the city's public lands.
URBAN FORESTER: The designated person or entity to carry out work duties
associated with the urban forest.
URBAN FORESTRY: The planning, design and management of vegetation on public
lands in and around communities to maximize their visual, economic and
environmental contributions to the well being of the community.
URBAN WILDLAND INTERFACE: A geographical area where structures and other
development meets or intermingles with wildland or vegetative fuels.
USABLE LAND: That contiguous parcel of natural land and/or compacted
(engineered) fill, as permitted by this title or the international building
code, included within the lot (including setbacks), no part of which has a
slope exceeding thirty percent (30%).
USE: The activities occurring on a lot or parcel for which land or a building
is arranged, designed, or intended, or for which land or a building is or may
be occupied including all accessory uses.
USE CHANGE: Changing the use of the property from that which was intended by
the original site plan to another use that will require changes to the original
approved site plan.
USE, CHANGE OF BUSINESS: Change within the classified use of a structure, or
any portion of multi-tenant structure such as from one retail business to
another which does not increase the size or occupancy capacity of the
structure.
USE, TEMPORARY: A use that is to be conducted for a fixed period of time with
intent to discontinue such use upon expiration of the time period. Temporary
uses are characterized by such activities as the sale of agricultural products
produced on the premises on which they are sold, contractor's offices and
equipment sheds, Christmas tree and firework sales, carnivals.
UTILITIES: Includes natural gas, electric power, cable television, telephone,
telecommunication services, storm system, sewer system, irrigation facilities,
culinary water, streetlights and other services deemed to be of a public
utility nature by the City.
UTILITY EASEMENT: The area designated for access to construct or maintain
utilities on privately or publicly owned land. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.36.230: "V" DEFINITIONS:
VARIANCE: A legal divergence from the Land Development Code granted by the
Appeal Authority.
VETERINARY CLINIC, SMALL ANIMAL: An establishment at which household pets are
treated by a veterinarian licensed by the State of Utah; if boarding is
included as part of such treatment the boarding must be within a completely
enclosed building. For purposes of this section, household pets include dogs,
cats, birds, rodents (hamsters, mice and rats), snakes and ferrets, and
excludes livestock, horses and other similar large farm animals. Small animal
veterinary clinic must use an acceptable sanitary method to collect and dispose
of animal excrement. Small animal veterinary services do not include the
boarding of animals not under direct clinical care. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.36.240: "W" DEFINITIONS:
WAREHOUSE, WHOLESALE: A building in which goods, merchandise or equipment are
stored for eventual distribution. No outside storage is permitted.
WASTE OF WATER: Shall include, but not be limited to:
   A.   The use of water for any purpose, including landscape irrigation, that
consumes or for which is applied substantial amounts of excess water beyond the
reasonable amount required by the use, whether such excess water remains on the
site, evaporates, percolates underground, goes into the sewer system, or is
allowed to run into the gutter or street. Every water consumer is deemed to
have under his control at all times the water lines and facilities, other than
water utility facilities, through which water is being supplied and used to his
premises, and to know the manner and extent of his water use and excess runoff.
   B.   The excessive use, loss, or escape of water through breaks, leaks, or
malfunctions in the water user's plumbing for any period of time after such
escape of water should reasonably have been discovered and corrected. It shall
be presumed that a period of forty eight (48) hours after the water user
discovers such break, leak, or malfunction or receives notice from the City of
such condition, whichever occurs first, is a reasonable time to correct such
condition.
   C.   Washing sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or
other paved areas except to alleviate immediate fire, health, or safety
hazards.
WATER CHECK: See definition of irrigation audit.
WATER CONSERVING PLANT: A plant that can generally survive with available
rainfall once established although supplemental irrigation may be needed or
desired during the growing season.
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING: A set of garden design and landscape maintenance
principles that promote good horticultural practices and efficient use of
water. Water conserving, drought tolerant landscaping.
WATER USE EFFICIENT REVIEW: An on site survey and measurement of irrigation
equipment and management efficiency and the generation of recommendations to
improve efficiency.
WELL: Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug,
jetted, or otherwise constructed when the intended use of such excavation is
for the location, acquisition, development, or artificial recharge of
groundwater.
WELLFIELD (Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance): An area of land which
contains one or more drinking water supply wells.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM: Any device, such as a wind charger, wind turbine
or windmill, that converts wind power to another form of energy.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: The following definitions are specific
to wireless telecommunications and small wireless facilities:
   A.   Antenna: Any system of wires, poles, rods, arms, reflecting disks, or
similar devices of various sizes, materials, and shapes, including, but not
limited to, solid or wire mesh dish, horn, spherical, or bar configuration used
for the transmission or reception of radio signals. Types of antennas include:
mounted directly to the fascia or outside wall of a structure, existing parapet
walls, penthouses, or mechanical equipment rooms, with no portion of the
antenna extending above the roofline of such structures.
      1.   Wall Mounted Antenna: Any antenna mounted directly to the fascia or
outside wall of a structure, existing parapet walls, penthouses, or mechanical
equipment rooms, with no portion of the antenna extending above the roofline of
such structures.
      2.   Roof Mounted Antenna: An antenna mounted directly to the roof of a
building, mechanical penthouse or parapet enclosure wall which is on the
rooftop of a building.
      3.   Top Hat Antenna: A spatial array of antennas, generally located on a
freestanding structure, where the visible width of antennas and antenna
mounting structures are more than three feet (3') in width as viewed looking
directly at the structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3910.png]
      4.   Whip Antenna: An antenna that is cylindrical in shape. Whip antennas
can be directional or omnidirectional and vary in size depending upon the
frequency and gain for which they are designed.
      5.   Utility Pole Antennas: Any antenna mounted directly to a streetlight
pole. This definition shall not include poles carrying electrical lines,
telephone lines or any other type of utility not specifically included above.
   B.   Antenna Support Structure: A structure the principal purpose of which
is for location of antennas. Types of antenna support structures include:
      1.   Monopole: A freestanding antenna support structure placed directly
on the ground used to support one or more antennas.
      2.   Lattice Tower: A self-supporting multiple sided, open steel frame
structure used to support one or more antennas.
   C.   Collocation: A telecommunications facility comprising more than one
telecommunications provider's antennas.
   D.   Equipment Facility: Any building, shelter or cabinet used by
telecommunication providers to house switching, backup or other equipment at a
telecommunications facility.
   E.   Nonstealth Design: Any antenna or equipment facility not camouflaged in
a manner to blend with surrounding land uses, features or architecture. The
design does not conceal the intended use of the telecommunications facility. A
monopole with equipment facilities above ground and unscreened would be
considered nonstealth.
   F.   Residential Institutional Use: A school, church, clubhouse or public
building in a residential zone where stealth antennas may be permitted. This
definition does not include residences or multi-family structures containing
one or more residential units.
   G.   Stealth: Antennas, antenna support structures and equipment facilities
camouflaged or designed to blend with surrounding land uses, features, and
architecture, thus minimizing the aesthetic impact on adjacent uses, thereby
concealing the intended use and appearance of the telecommunications facility
such as heavy landscaping, installing telecommunications facilities within
existing buildings, or placing equipment facilities underground. A flush wall
mount antenna painted the same color as the background, located on a building
where the equipment facility is located inside said building would be
considered stealth design.
   H.   Telecommunications Facility: An unmanned structure which consists of
equipment, including antennas, antenna support structures and equipment
facilities as defined herein, that transmit and/or receive voice and/or data
communications through radio signals such as "cellular" or "PCS" (personal
communications system) communications and paging systems.
   I.   Small Wireless Facility (SWF): A wireless facility on which each
wireless provider's antenna could fit within an enclosure of no more than six
(6) cubic feet in volume and for which all associated equipment whether mounted
on the pole or the ground is cumulatively no more than twenty eight (28) cubic
feet in volume.
      1.   Node: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network.
      2.   H-Frame: A utility pedestal associated with an SWF, that contains a
shut-off switch.
      3.   Consolidated Or Concealed Design: An SWF or pole that is covered,
blended, painted, disguised or camouflaged such that the SWF blends into the
surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive. A consolidated SWF will
have equipment contained within the pole, shut-off switch mounted to the pole
or inside the pole, painted to match surrounding streetscape, and minimal radio
attachments.
      4.   Provider: A wireless infrastructure provider is a person that builds
or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, a wireless facility
or a wireless support structure; or a wireless service provider that provides
wireless services or infrastructure.
      5.   Utility Pole: A pole or similar structure in the public right- of-
way which is used to support power lines, telephone lines, street lights,
traffic signs and signals, signage or other utilities and which could support
the collocation of an SWF.
      6.   Design District And Historic Resources Overlay Zone: A group of
buildings, streetscapes or corridors that have designated status under City,
State or Federal law. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012; amd. Ord. 18-17, 8-1-2018)
13.36.250: "X" DEFINITIONS:
XERISCAPE: A landscaping method developed especially for arid and semiarid
climates that utilizes water conserving techniques such as the use of drought
tolerant plants, mulch, and efficient irrigation.
XERISCAPING: Landscaping characterized by the use of vegetation that is drought
tolerant or of low water use in character. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
13.36.260: "Y" DEFINITIONS:
YARD: An open, unoccupied space on a lot, other than a court, which is
unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings or structures except as
otherwise provided in this Code.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3912.png]
YARD, FRONT: "Front yard" shall mean:
   A.   Interior lots: An open, unoccupied space between the front line of the
main building and the street right-of-way or front property line, whichever
distance is the shortest, and extending across the entire width of the lot.
   B.   Corner lots: An open, unoccupied space between the front line of the
main building and the street right-of-way or front property line, whichever
distance is shortest, and extending across the entire width of the lot, also
between the side of the building adjacent to the secondary street and the side
street right-of-way or front property line and extending from the corner of the
intersecting streets to the rear yard.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the most
rear main building and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building and
between the side line of the building and the side lot line, and extending from
the front yard to the rear yard; or the shortest distance across said space
from the main building to the side lot line. (Ord. 16-18, 12-14-2016)
13.36.270: "Z" DEFINITIONS:
ZERO LOT LINE DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Single-family dwellings arranged on individually owned lots as either
detached structures with one side wall of the main building on a side property
line (or as twin homes with the separation wall on the property line).
   B.   Twin home, attached (see definition of twin home).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3914.png]
ZONE CHANGE: The legislative act of rezoning one or more lots or parcels.
ZONING DISTRICT: See definition of district.
ZOOLOGICAL GARDENS: An area, building, or structure(s) which contain wild
animals on exhibition for viewing by the public. (Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.37
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
13.37.010: Building Standards
13.37.010: BUILDING STANDARDS:
Standards are adopted by reference and are on file in the city. (Ord. 12-15, 7-
11-2012)
CHAPTER 13.38
SSD-X-BENNION POINT ZONING DISTRICT
SECTION:
13.38.010: Purpose
13.38.020: Applicability
13.38.030: Land Use And Density
13.38.040: Architectural Design
13.38.050: Site Planning
13.38.060: Grading And Drainage
13.38.070: Vehicular Circulation And Parking
13.38.080: Pedestrian Mobility, Bicycle Circulation And Parking
13.38.090: Screen Walls And Fences
13.38.100: Sign Design
13.38.110: Exterior Site Lighting
13.38.010: PURPOSE:
The Site Specific Development Mixed Use Bennion Point (SSD-X- Bennion Point)
District is established to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the
community by facilitating the creation of an integrated senior community in a
campus setting of sufficient size to provide a variety of housing types serving
seniors, including independent living units and residential units for seniors
requiring a range of health care services, as well as health care support and
appropriate ancillary and accessory uses. It is the purpose of this chapter to
encourage flexibility of design and development of land in a manner that suits
the unique needs of a retirement community but will also contribute to orderly
traffic circulation and compatibility with surrounding land uses. All new or
future development within the SSD-X-Bennion Point Zoning District shall be in
conformity with a site-specific Master Plan approved by the Planning
Commission. Specifically, this zone intends to:
   A.   Enhance and protect the quality of life and community image of the City
of Taylorsville through clearly articulated development design policies and
minimum design standards;
   B.   Protect and promote Taylorsville's long-term economic vitality through
design standards which encourage and reward high quality development and
discourage less attractive and less enduring alternatives;
   C.   Minimize adverse impacts of vehicular circulation to existing
neighborhoods and to the surrounding physical environment;
   D.   Enhance and protect the security, health, safety, and welfare of all
residents of the City of Taylorsville; and
   E.   Facilitate an understanding of the City's expectations and notify and
assist developers in compiling a complete and efficient application. (Ord. 15-
08, 10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017)
13.38.020: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions in this chapter shall apply to all new development,
redevelopment, exterior remodels, additions to existing structures, refacing,
and accessory structures within the SSD-X-Bennion Point Zoning District. This
chapter includes minimum development standards and will be used by City staff
and the Planning Commission to review development applications. The policies
established in these provisions shall be met through actual compliance with
each design standard.
   A.   Boundary Descriptions: The SSD-X-Bennion Point Zoning District is
limited to a specific area in the City as illustrated in figure 1 of this
section, which is described as:
A tract of land, situated in the Southeast Quarter of Section 17, Township 2
South, Range 1 West, Salt Lake Base and Meridian:
Beginning on the Northerly right of way line of 6200 South Street at a point
59.83 feet North 89°57'49" West along the section line and 45.96 feet North
00°02'11" East from the Southeast corner of said Section 17 and running thence
along said Northerly right of way line the following nine (9) courses (1) North
89°57'49" West 140.40 feet; (2) South 29°27'10" East 14.89 feet; (3) North
89°57'56" West 70.17 feet; (4) North 29°27'10" West 14.89 feet (5) North
89°57'49" West 861.44 feet; (6) North 45°15'21" West 35.14 feet; (7) South
89°44'39" West 63.00 feet; (8) South 44°44'39" West 34.33 feet and (9) North
89°57'49" West 578.90 feet to the East Boundary line of Prairie View
Condominiums, a condominium development in Taylorsville City, Salt Lake County
Utah; thence North 00°16'50" East 987.04 feet along said East Boundary line and
the East Boundary line of Stonewood Subdivision, a residential development in
Taylorsville City, Salt Lake County Utah, to the Northeast corner of said
subdivision; thence North 89°57'49" West 110.00 feet along the North Boundary
line of said subdivision to the East right of way line of 3500 West Street;
thence North 00°16'50" East 363.00 feet; thence North 89°57'49" West 321.00
feet; thence South 00°16'50" West 363.00 feet to said North Boundary line;
thence North 89°57'49" West 247.33 feet along said North Boundary line to the
East right of way line of Bangerter Highway; thence three (3) courses along
said East right of way line as follows: (1) North 14°07'22" West 84.43 feet to
the point of curve of a non-tangent curve whose center point bears South
84°03'56" West; (2) Northerly along the arc of a 2,600.67 foot radius curve to
the left a distance of 553.16 feet (Central Angle equals 12°11'12", and Long
Chord bears North 12°01'40" West 552.12 feet); and (3) North 18°07'16" West
1,040.81 feet to the South Boundary line of Wildwood Estates No. 2, a
residential development in Taylorsville City, Salt Lake County Utah; thence
North 89°56'25" East 297.76 feet along said South Boundary line to the
Southeast corner of said subdivision; thence North 00°06'28" West 527.77 feet
along the East Boundary line of said Whitewood Estates No. 2, to the South line
of Willow Bay No. 4, a residential development in Taylorsville City, Salt Lake
County Utah; thence North 89°57'17" East 467.91 feet along said South Boundary
line to the point of curve of a non-tangent curve whose center point bears
North 89°56'53" East; thence Southerly along the arc a 110.00 foot radius curve
to the left a distance of 41.09 feet (Central Angle equals 21°24'06", and Long
Chord bears South 10°45'10" East 40.85 feet) to the point of curve of a non-
tangent curve whose center point bears South 68°32'45" West; thence Southerly
along the arc a 140.84 foot radius curve to the right a distance of 52.74 feet
(Central Angle equals 21°27'13", and Long Chord bears South 10°43'39" East
52.43 feet); thence due South 25.50 feet; thence due East 10.00 feet to the
West Boundary line of Willow Bay No. 5, a residential development in
Taylorsville City, Salt Lake County Utah; thence due South 409.75 feet along
said West Boundary line to the Southwest corner of said Willow Bay No. 5;
thence North 89°57'26" East 1,073.01 feet along the South Boundary line of said
Willow Bay No. 5, and the South Boundary line of Willow Bay No. 6, a
residential development in Taylorsville City, Salt Lake County Utah to the West
Boundary line of Willow Bay No. 7, a residential development in Taylorsville
City, Salt Lake County Utah; thence due South 800.00 feet along said West
Boundary line to the Southeast corner of said Willow Bay No. 7; thence North
89°57'26" East 1,054.11 feet along the South Boundary line of said Willow Bay
No. 7, and the South Boundary line of Willow Bay No. 9, a residential
development in Taylorsville City, Salt Lake County Utah to the West right of
way line of 3200 West Street; thence South 00°06'34" East 390.85 feet along
said West right of way line; thence South 89°53'26" West 396.32 feet to a point
of curvature; thence Southwesterly along the arc of a 205.00 foot radius curve
to the left a distance of 321.62 feet (Delta Angle equals 89°53'26" and Long
Chord bears South 44°56'43" West 289.64 feet); thence due South 48.62 feet to a
point of curvature; thence Southerly along the arc of a 230.00 foot radius
curve to the right a distance of 63.86 feet (Delta Angle equals 15°54'26" and
Long Chord bears South 07°57'13" West 63.65 feet); thence South 00°05'56" East
230.85 feet to the point of a non- tangent curve, of which the radius point
lies South 89°54'01" West; thence Southwesterly along the arc of a 50.00 foot
radius curve to the right a distance of 83.55 feet (Delta Angle equals
95°44'28" and Long Chord bears South 47°46'15" West 74.16 feet); thence South
00°06'17" East 258.58 feet to the point of a non-tangent curve, of which the
radius point lies South 00°30'26" West; thence Southeasterly along the arc of a
40.00 foot radius curve to the right a distance of 45.32 feet (Delta Angle
equals 64°55'10" and Long Chord bears South 57°01'59" East 42.94 feet); thence
South 24°34'23" East 336.79 feet to a point of curvature; thence Southeasterly
along the arc of a 20.00 foot radius curve to the left a distance of 22.83 feet
(Delta Angle equals 65°23'26" and Long Chord bears South 57°16'06" East 21.61
feet); thence South 89°57'49" East 249.10 feet to the West line Extended of the
Jordan Valley Water Conservancy property; thence due South 213.61 feet along
said West line Extended and the West line of said Property to the South line of
said Property; thence South 89°57'49" East 56.00 feet along said South line the
Northerly right of way line of 6200 South Street; thence South 29°27'10" East
14.89 feet along said Northerly right of way line to the Point of Beginning.
Containing 105.5681 acres, more or less.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3916.png]
There exists two (2) subdistricts within the SSD-X-Bennion Point Zoning
District which are referred to in this chapter as "Retirement Community
Property" and "Future Development Parcel":
      1.   Retirement Community Property is hereby defined as illustrated in
figure 2 of this section:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3918.png]
      2.   Future Development Parcel is hereby defined as illustrated in figure
3 of this section:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3920.png]
   B.   Conflicts: Where a provision in this chapter is in conflict with any
other provision of the City Code, the most restrictive requirement shall take
precedence and shall apply. Building and Life Safety Codes take precedence over
the standards in this chapter in cases where the requirements or this chapter
require action in direct conflict with those codes. Any development within the
SSD-X-Bennion Point Zoning District shall meet the requirements of the
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA).
   C.   Desirable Elements Of Project Design: The City considers the following
design features to be desirable elements of development within the SSD-X-
Bennion Point Zoning District. The standards set forth in this section intend
to facilitate the incorporation of the following features into development
projects:
      1.   Harmonious arrangement of buildings, site landscaping, open space,
development amenities, parking, and access driveways with clear visibility of
entrances;
      2.   Quality exterior building materials, colors, surfaces, textures,
lighting, and architectural landscape forms;
      3.   Architectural design treatments, including articulated building
footprints to reduce massing and to promote architectural definition and
interest;
      4.   Efficient vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle circulation by way of
pedestrian friendly design of interior drives, parking areas, pathways, and
sidewalks;
      5.   Landscaped and screened parking, storage, loading, and service
areas;
      6.   Significant landscape, streetscape and hardscape elements;
      7.   Structures placed to create opportunities for plazas, courtyards, or
gardens/patio areas which can be utilized as pedestrian gathering places and
common employee gathering areas with appropriate site furniture and lighting;
      8.   Enhanced view corridors to open areas and mountain vistas;
      9.   Site design and site improvements which anticipate the potential re-
use of the building(s) for other purposes; and
      10.   Site and building design which complements the public realm.
   D.   Unacceptable Elements Of Project Design: The City considers the
following design features to be unacceptable elements of development including:
      1.   Poorly defined site access points;
      2.   Disjointed parking areas, or confusing or unsafe circulation
patterns;
      3.   Square, "box-like" structures with large, blank, unarticulated wall
surfaces;
      4.   Highly reflective surfaces or repetitious and continuous glazing
patterns;
      5.   Metal siding used as a primary exterior facade treatment;
      6.   Visible outdoor storage, loading, and equipment areas;
      7.   Signage which is redundant or out of scale with building
architecture; and
      8.   Site and building design which "turns its back" to the public realm.
(Ord. 15-08, 10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017)
13.38.030: LAND USE AND DENSITY:
   A.   Matrix Explanation: Uses permitted under this chapter shall conform to
the development standards provided elsewhere in this Development Code, the
application procedures for development, and any overlay districts as
applicable. Uses permitted as a conditional use shall comply with the
requirements for administrative conditional use permits and/or non-
administrative conditional use permits as applicable.
Future development may propose an expansion of uses pursuant to the provisions
of subsections
13.19.010C and E of this title. The approval of any additional land uses beyond
those allowed in the table below, shall require and be contingent upon the
favorable exercise of future legislative discretion by the City Council
following all required notice and public hearings before the Planning
Commission and City Council. Please refer to subsection 13.38.020A of this
chapter for definitions of these subdistricts.
   P = Permitted
   AC = Administrative conditional
   NC = Nonadministrative conditional
   S = Special use permit
   N = Not permitted
   B.   Table Of Uses:
 
Land Use
Accessory structure                                 P
Animals (household pets)                            P
Assisted living unit                                NC
Continuing care retirement community                NC
Continuing care retirement community accessory uses NC
Home occupation                                     P
Independent apartment unit                          NC
Parking, structure/terrace                          AC
Parking, underground                                P
Parks, public and private                           P
Professional office                                 NC
Senior apartment units                              NC
Skilled nursing care unit                           NC
Solar equipment                                     AC
Wireless telecommunications facility                NC
 
   C.   Density: Allowable dwelling units per acre are maximums based upon
suitable design and compliance with the standards in the City Code.
 
                     Minimum Allowable Units Per Maximum Allowable Units Per
                     Acre                        Acre
Retirement community 23                          30
property
 
(Ord. 15-08, 10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017)
13.38.040: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Architectural design seeks to add to community
character while providing flexibility to avoid rigid uniformity of design. All
elements including the scale and mass of buildings, materials, color, roof
styles, door and window openings, and details should be responsive to
functional architectural design and promote a cohesive design statement.
Property owners and developers are encouraged to employ best practices and
innovative design so buildings can be energy efficient to conserve natural
resources.
Building masses shall respond to "human scale" with materials and details that
are proportionate to human height and provide visual interest at the street and
sidewalk level. Buildings shall be reduced in apparent mass or articulated to
avoid large monolithic, box-like shapes.
   B.   Building Relationships And Compatibility: Buildings or portions of
buildings shall be oriented on a site to create a strong relationship to the
public and private right-of-way and adjacent structures, providing visual
continuity and compatibility. Buildings shall be located to minimize the view
of parking and loading areas, outside storage areas, ground mounted mechanical
equipment and trash and service enclosures from all adjoining public rights-of-
way.
   C.   Building Heights: Appropriate measures shall be taken into
consideration to ensure building heights are compatible with adjacent
development (existing or planned). Buildings over thirty five feet (35') in
height shall comply with the setback height ratios, established by measuring
the ratio of the horizontal distance between any part of a building or
structure and the nearest adjacent property line at grade:
 
Property Line Adjacent To              Height Setback Ratio Horizontal:Vertical
Residential land use (where the
building face is parallel to the
adjacent residential property line for 2.25:1 feet
a distance greater than 90 feet) (see
figures 4 and 5 of this section)
Residential land use (where the
building face is perpendicular to the
adjacent residential property line for 1.75:1 feet
a distance less than 90 feet) (see
figures 6 and 7 of this section)
Nonresidential land use                0.5:1 feet
Open space                             0.5:1 feet
Bangerter Highway                      0.5:1 feet
 
FIGURE 4
Building Face Greater Than 90 Feet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3922.png]
FIGURE 5
Building Face Greater Than 90 Feet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3924.png]
FIGURE 6
Building Face Less Than 90 Feet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3926.png]
FIGURE 7
Building Face Less Than 90 Feet
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3928.png]
      1.   The maximum height of any structure shall not exceed ninety feet
(90') or seven (7) stories above mean ground elevation around the perimeter of
the building, whichever is lower.
      2.   Where a property line is immediately adjacent to a street or public
right-of-way, the land use or zoning district of the property immediately
across said street or right-of-way will govern the height setback ratio, unless
otherwise stated in the above table. For these instances, horizontal distance
is measured from the property line across the street (see figure 6 of this
section).
   D.   Building Massing, Forms, And Pedestrian Scale: Buildings shall relate
to each other in their massing and forms. Square "boxlike" structures with
large, blank, unarticulated wall surfaces are deemed to be unacceptable.
Buildings adjacent to pedestrian walks and paths shall have features and
patterns that provide visual interest at the scale of the pedestrian which
reduces apparent mass and relates to local architectural character.
      1.   Exterior building walls shall incorporate architectural features and
treatments to diminish the building mass. Architectural design shall anticipate
the combination of the following techniques or other appropriate techniques to
be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. Each principal building
shall meet the following three (3) standards:
         a.   Horizontal Articulation: Each facade greater than fifty feet
(50') in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate architectural
features such as wall plane projections, recesses, or other building material
treatments and textures that visually interrupt the wall plane. No
uninterrupted length of any facade may exceed fifty (50) horizontal feet;
         b.   Vertical Articulation: Each principal building greater than fifty
five feet (55') in height shall have a change in cladding material or surface
plane. No single cladding material or surface plane (as applicable) may extend
for an uninterrupted vertical distance of more than fifty five feet (55'); and
         c.   Parapet Variation: All facades visible from a public street shall
include a parapet that varies in height by at least eighteen inches (18") for
each fifty (50) linear feet of facade length. This requirement does not apply
to buildings with sloped roofs.
   E.   Roof Forms And Materials: Rooftops are deemed to contribute to the
unified appearance of each development and may be observed from higher areas,
ground level, other buildings and roadways.
      1.   Sloped roofs shall provide articulation and variations a minimum of
every seventy five feet (75') in order to break up the massiveness of the roof.
Sloped roofs shall include eaves which are at least eighteen inches (18") in
width.
      2.   All parapets shall feature cornice treatments. Parapets shall
provide a cap element to demonstrate that the upper edge is the top of the
building.
      3.   Flat roofs shall be screened with parapets on all sides of the
building. If no rooftop equipment exists or is proposed, the parapet shall be a
minimum of eighteen inches (18") in height relative to the roof.
      4.   Rooftop penthouse enclosures shall be architecturally compatible and
predominately of the same material as the building.
   F.   Roof-Mounted Mechanical Units: Roof-mounted mechanical units (including
evaporative coolers, HVAC units, vents, etc.) shall be located or screened so
they are not visible from adjacent public and/or private streets as well as
from adjacent properties (unless grade differences make screening impractical).
Acceptable roof equipment screening shall be accomplished by:
      1.   Raising the parapet on all sides of the building to be as high as
the highest mechanical unit or vent on the roof; or
      2.   A secondary roof screening system (stamped and signed by a licensed
engineer) to be as high as the highest mechanical unit or vent on the roof; and
         a.   Secondary roof screens shall include a screen which encloses
groups of units rather than each unit individually and shall look like an
architectural feature of the overall building;
         b.   Screens shall be continuously maintained, and incorporated into
the design of the building;
         c.   Screens shall be made of materials and colors which are
compatible with the building; and
         d.   In no case shall wooden, vinyl fences or chain link fencing with
or without slats be used as a roof top equipment screen;
      3.   All roof top mechanical screens shall be shown to scale on all
building cross sections and/or architectural building elevations.
   G.   Building Materials: Exterior materials shall be aesthetically pleasing,
high quality, and compatible with nearby structures. Compatibility of building
materials is deemed desirable throughout a development project consisting of
multiple buildings.
      1.   Primary building materials shall be limited to no more than four (4)
types of materials per building. Stucco (EIFS) surfacing shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of each building exterior. Exterior windows or glass is included
in calculating the overall percentage of the building exterior. On surfaces
with more than thirty percent (30%) stucco (EIFS) coverage, a minimum of two
(2) colors of stucco (EIFS) shall be provided;
      2.   The use of exposed concrete, metal, or plastics for storefront
facades is not permitted (architectural concrete and metals are acceptable);
      3.   Metal siding is only permitted as a decorative and/or architectural
element;
      4.   CMU block (smooth, scored, split face, or honed) shall not exceed
twenty five percent (25%) of the front building facade and fifty percent (50%)
of the sides of buildings which are within public view; and
      5.   Building exterior materials shall be constructed of high quality
materials and shall be factory finished, stained, integrally colored, or
otherwise suitably treated.
   H.   Building Colors: Exterior colors shall be aesthetically pleasing, high
quality, and compatible with colors of nearby structures. Multiple buildings on
the same site shall share a compatible color palette to unify the development.
      1.   Color of exterior building materials (excluding accent colors) shall
be limited to no more than four (4) major colors per neighborhood within the
"Retirement Community Property".
      2.   Colors shall be composed predominately of earth tones to encourage
buildings to blend into the environment. Color tones may vary if found to be
compatible with surrounding developments; and
      3.   Roof colors shall be muted and compatible with the dominant building
color.
   I.   Building Entrances: Primary building entrances shall be easily
identifiable and relate to human scale.
      1.   The main entrance shall be located to be clearly identifiable from
primary driveways and drop-offs;
      2.   Any entrance shall be designed with one or more of the following
(see pedestrian mobility, bicycle circulation and parking, subsection
13.38.080B6 of this chapter):
         a.   Canopy, overhang or arch above the entrance (columns and
pillars);
         b.   Recesses or projections in the building facade surrounding the
entrance;
         c.   Peaked roof or raised parapet structures over the door; or
         d.   Display windows surrounding the entrance.
      3.   Any building entrance shall be well-lighted. (See section
13.38.110, "Exterior Site Lighting", of this chapter.)
   J.   Energy Conservation Measures: Local climate conditions afford the
opportunity to take significant advantage of passive and active solar energy
applications. Buildings should be designed and sited to maximize the use of
solar gain for energy savings, and shall respect the solar access requirements
of adjacent (existing and proposed) buildings. Solar equipment is permitted
subject to the standards set forth in section
13.11.200 of this title. (Ord. 15-08, 10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017)
13.38.050: SITE PLANNING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Buildings shall be located to maximize the
presentation of streetscaping and primary building entries to roadways, to
provide clear orientation and access for both vehicles and pedestrians, to
facilitate internal pedestrian circulation, and to place structures in
consideration of the existing built context, the location of adjoining uses,
and the location of roads.
   B.   Building Siting And Orientation: Buildings shall be sited so the
character of existing land forms and site features is enhanced; the
relationships between buildings are strengthened; and pedestrian and vehicular
circulation is facilitated.
      1.   Sites shall be designed to allow for safe pedestrian access from
parking areas to the building(s), from building to building, from the building
(s) to adjacent developments and from building(s) to the public sidewalk. Every
effort shall be made to minimize the need to walk within the parking lot among
cars (see section
13.38.080, "Pedestrian Mobility, Bicycle Circulation And Parking", of this
chapter);
      2.   The main entrance shall generally face the primary street and be
easily identifiable from adjoining roadways and primary access drives;
      3.   Secondary entrances may be located to the side or rear of a building
to allow access to available parking;
      4.   The rear or sides of buildings shall incorporate architectural and
landscape screening techniques to mitigate the aesthetic impacts of blank
walls, loading areas, storage areas, HVAC units and garbage receptacles (see
sections
13.38.040, "Architectural Design", and 13.38.090, "Screen Walls And Fences", of
this chapter).
   C.   Building And Parking Setbacks: A well-landscaped and pedestrian-
friendly character along streets which promotes a comfortable walkable
environment is highly desirable. To attain this objective, all buildings and
parking shall be set back from property lines and streets/right(s)-of-way a
sufficient distance to create a distinct landscape zone between buildings,
parking, and adjacent roadways. Setbacks shall be measured from the property
line:
 
Property Line Adjacent To  Building Setbacks Parking Setbacks
Residential land use       30 feet           20 feet
Nonresidential land use    10 feet           10 feet
Open space                 10 feet           10 feet
Public street/right-of-way 10 feet           10 feet
Bangerter Highway          30 feet           30 feet
 
   D.   Lot Regulations: Lots shall be of sufficient size and width to assure
compliance with all requirements of the Taylorsville City Code.
   E.   Site Coverage Requirements: Open space and landscaped areas shall be
deemed valued amenities. Building, parking, storage, and driveway site coverage
within each parcel shall be limited in the following manner:
      1.   The maximum building, parking, and driveway coverage within each
parcel is eighty percent (80%) of the total lot area;
      2.   The minimum coverage for landscape improvements, pedestrian
amenities, and bicycle amenities within each parcel is twenty percent (20%) of
the total lot area.
         a.   Pedestrian amenities include the following: hardscape plazas and
walkways and outdoor recreation areas.
         b.   Bicycle amenities include the following: Dedicated bicycle
pathways or lanes completely within the parcel, bicycle parking, bicycle
lockers, employee showering and/or changing facilities.
      3.   Stormwater detention/retention areas may be included in landscape
coverage if located fully within the lot, and when those areas are effectively
landscaped to satisfy the requirements in this Code. (See subsection F,
"Landscape Design", of this section.)
   F.   Landscape Design:
      1.   Landscaping Required: Landscaping shall be required within each
building site to:
         a.   Enhance the aesthetics of developments;
         b.   Create a pedestrian-friendly environment;
         c.   Break up the mass of buildings;
         d.   Soften architectural materials;
         e.   Provide screening of service structures, storage, and loading
areas;
         f.   Enhance the streetscape environment;
         g.   Define building and parking area entrances;
         h.   Provide shade and climate control;
         i.   Control airborne particulates;
         j.   Provide buffers between incompatible land uses or site areas; and
         k.   Filter drainage and stormwater runoff from parking areas and
streets.
      2.   Landscaping Zones: This section provides four (4) distinct
landscaping zones which correspond to the four (4) major design influences on
each site. The landscaping zones include:
         a.   Perimeter landscaping adjacent to public and private roads;
         b.   Perimeter landscaping adjacent to abutting property;
         c.   Parking lot landscaping; and
         d.   Building, loading, and service area landscaping.
      3.   Landscaping Regulations:
         a.   Water Conservation: Water conservation concepts shall be
considered in any landscaped area. Generally, the highest intensity of
materials, including variety, concentration, and interest, shall be located
along a public street and the front or main entrance to a building, while the
rear of a property, not abutting a public or private street, may receive a less
intensive landscape treatment. Drought tolerant plant species that are native
to the region or suitable to this climate are encouraged.
         b.   Perimeter Landscaping Adjacent To Public Roads: The corridors
along public streets shall provide a visually cohesive open space system.
Similar landscape treatments shall be used at all entrances and intersections
with appropriate plant materials, massing, spacing, and height characteristics
which reinforce the hierarchy of roadways. Planting and grading shall work
together to create a variety of experiences along these roadways and to call
attention to open space amenities. Perimeter edge treatments establish identity
for the project and shall convey a high quality image.
            (1)   Annual and perennial gardens shall be planted at site
entries.
            (2)   Street tree species shall vary in park strips but shall
maintain the desired rhythm of plantings by selecting trees with similar
characteristics (i.e., height and branching patterns).
            (3)   The following standards shall apply to all landscaped medians
within the public right-of-way:
               (A)   Provide a minimum of one (1) canopy tree for every twenty
five (25) linear feet of median, or space trees according to best practices.
               (B)   Flowering plants, shrubs, and ornamental grasses shall be
planted within the median at density deemed appropriate by the Planning
Commission to provide visual interest and uniformity with the adjacent
developments.
               (C)   A detailed median landscape plan shall be submitted to
City staff for review and approval by the Planning Commission (refer to figure
8 of this section for example plan).
FIGURE 8
Example Median Landscape Plan
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3930.png]
            (4)   The following standards shall apply to park strip and
sidewalks adjacent to public streets (refer to figure 9 of this section). The
Planning Commission may approve deviations from these standards if topography
prohibits the literal application of the following standards:
               (A)   Provide a minimum of one (1) tree per forty (40) linear
feet of public street frontage between the sidewalk and curb in a minimum eight
foot (8') wide strip.
               (B)   Provide durable, low growing shrubs/ornamental grasses at
a minimum ratio of one (1) shrub/ornamental grass per five (5) linear feet,
durable ground covers or a combination of the two between the curb and
sidewalk. Irrigated turf may also be placed in these areas.
               (C)   Provide an additional one (1) tree per forty (40) linear
feet of street frontage within a ten foot (10') landscape buffer outside the
sidewalk, internal to the development.
               (D)   Provide a minimum of one (1) shrub/ornamental grass per
five (5) linear feet plus ground cover or turf outside the sidewalk, internal
to the development. Turf should be limited in this area and when used shall be
planned in a manner that can be efficiently irrigated.
FIGURE 9
Landscaping Example Adjacent To A Public Street
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3932.png]
               (E)   To prevent interference with motorist visibility, parkway
trees shall be planted a minimum of three feet (3') from the back of curb.
Shrubs/ornamental grasses shall not exceed thirty inches (30") mature height.
            (5)   Provide adequate shrub plantings to create a dense visual
buffer between parking lots and perimeter roadways. Berming may be used in
conjunction with vegetation to screen parking areas. Bermed turf areas should
be avoided due to their tendency to waste irrigation water.
            (6)   Raised planters and screen walls are encouraged to provide
parking lot screening.
            (7)   Adequate sight lines shall be maintained for an effective
thirty foot (30') sight triangle formed by the intersection of straight lines
extended from the back of the curb (or future curb) and a line connecting them
at points thirty feet (30') from the intersection of the curb line, except a
reasonable number of trees pruned to permit unobstructed views to automobile
drivers. Plants and signage are allowed within the sight triangle if:
               (A)   Plants do not exceed thirty six inches (36") in height at
full maturity; and
               (B)   Signs do not exceed thirty six inches (36") in height
(measured from top of curb height) unless they are eighty percent (80%) or more
open.
            (8)   Provide a diversity of landscaping materials at entry drives
to development parcels. Therefore:
               (A)   A minimum of three (3) levels of scale shall be provided,
including: shade, evergreen, and/or ornamental trees, shrubs/ornamental
grasses, annual and perennial flowers, and ground covers. (See figure 10 of
this section.)
               (B)   Plant clusters which appear as a cohesive visual element,
and that complement the overall landscape theme and palette.
               (C)   Integrate the plant design with the entry sign. Plantings
should frame or provide a visual base for the signs.
FIGURE 10
Three Levels of Scale
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3934.png]
         c.   Bangerter Highway: For properties abutting Bangerter Highway, a
minimum thirty foot (30') wide landscape buffer area shall be provided along
property lines (refer to figure 11 of this section). The minimum number of
plants required within the landscape buffer is calculated by determining the
length (in feet) of the property line(s) for which a buffer is required,
dividing by 100 and then multiplying by the number of plants shown below:
            (1)   Canopy trees: Ten (10);
            (2)   Understory or evergreen trees: Four (4); and
            (3)   Evergreen trees and shrubs/ornamental grasses shall be
implemented into the landscape design to provide adequate screening during all
seasons.
FIGURE 11
30' Landscape Buffer Adjacent To Bangerter Highway
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3936.png]
         d.   Perimeter Landscaping Adjacent To Abutting Property: A visual
buffer shall be provided between land uses to accomplish transitions and to
mitigate potential conflicts between dissimilar uses. The provisions of this
section require the following:
            (1)   Abutting a residential land use: A minimum thirty foot (30')
wide landscape buffer area shall be provided along property lines (refer to
figure 12 of this section). Where parking areas are effectively screened and
adjacent to abutting residential property, the landscape buffer may be reduced
to twenty feet (20'). The minimum number of plants required within the
landscape buffer is calculated by determining the length (in feet) of the
property line(s) for which a buffer is required, dividing by 100 and then
multiplying by the number of plants shown below:
               (A)   Where a thirty foot (30') landscape buffer is required:
                  (i)   Canopy trees: Six (6); and
                  (ii)   Understory or evergreen trees: Six (6); and
                  (iii)   Deciduous or evergreen shrubs/ornamental grasses:
Twenty two (22).
FIGURE 12
30' Landscape Buffer Adjacent To Residential Land Use
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3938.png]
               (B)   Where a twenty foot (20') landscape buffer is required
(refer to figure 13 of this section):
                  (i)   Canopy trees: Five (5); and
                  (ii)   Understory or evergreen trees: Three (3); and
                  (iii)   Deciduous or evergreen shrubs/ornamental grasses:
Twenty two (22).
               (C)   Evergreen trees and shrubs/ornamental grasses shall be
implemented into the landscape design to provide adequate screening during all
seasons.
               (D)   Berm(s) with a maximum 3:1 slope for sod areas or 2:1 for
mulched areas shall be incorporated into the landscape buffer design.
FIGURE 13
20' Landscape Buffer Adjacent To Residential Land Use
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3940.png]
            (2)   Abutting public open space: A minimum ten foot (10') wide
landscape buffer area shall be provided along property lines (refer to figure
14 of this section). The minimum number of plants required within the landscape
buffer is calculated by determining the length (in feet) of the property line
(s) for which a buffer is required, dividing by 100 and then multiplying by the
number of plants shown below:
               (A)   Canopy trees: Four (4);
               (B)   Understory or evergreen trees: Two (2);
               (C)   Deciduous or evergreen shrubs/ornamental grasses: Eleven
(11);
               (D)   Evergreen trees and shrubs/ornamental grasses shall be
implemented into the landscape design to provide adequate screening during all
seasons.
            (3)   Abutting a nonresidential zoning district: A minimum ten foot
(10') wide landscape buffer area shall be provided along property lines (refer
to figure 14 of this section). This may not apply to internal property
boundaries within a multiple-lot development to the extent the lots are
developed under a single master plan. The minimum number of plants required
within the landscape buffer is calculated by determining the length (in feet)
of the property line(s) for which a buffer is required, dividing by 100 and
then multiplying by the number of plants shown below:
               (A)   Canopy trees: Four (4);
               (B)   Understory or evergreen trees: Two (2); and
               (C)   Deciduous or evergreen shrubs/ornamental grasses: Eleven
(11).
               (D)   Berm(s) with a maximum 3:1 slope for sod areas or 2:1 for
mulched areas shall be incorporated into the landscape buffer design.
               (E)   Evergreen trees and shrubs/ornamental grasses shall be
implemented into the landscape design to provide adequate screening during all
seasons.
FIGURE 14
10' Landscape Buffer Adjacent To Nonresidential Land Use Or Open Space
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3942.png]
         e.   Parking Lot Landscaping: Parking lots shall be designed to blend
with each building site's character using landscape plantings and grading, and
not be readily visible from public rights-of-way. The provisions of this
section require the following:
            (1)   Landscape Islands On Double Rows Of Parking:
               (A)   There shall be one (1) landscaped island a minimum of nine
feet (9') wide and equal to the length of the parking spaces on each end of the
parking rows, with an additional island every twentieth parking stall in the
same row where each island has a minimum of two (2) trees and eight (8) shrubs/
ornamental grasses per tree; and
               (B)   There shall be one (1) tree diamond (minimum 5' x 5')
every third parking stall in the same row (see figure 15 of this section); or
               (C)   A landscaped median between parking rows a minimum of
eight feet (8') wide with one (1) tree every twenty five (25) linear feet with
eight (8) shrubs/ornamental grasses per tree (see figure 16 of this section).
FIGURE 15
Parking Lot Tree Diamond Example
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3944.png]
FIGURE 16
Parking Lot 8 Foot Landscape Median Example
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3946.png]
            (2)   Landscape Islands On Single Rows Of Parking: On single rows
of parking or where parking abuts a sidewalk, there shall be one (1) landscape
island a minimum of nine feet (9') wide and equal to the length of the parking
space on each end of the parking row with an additional island every twentieth
stall in the same row where each island has a minimum of one (1) tree and eight
(8) shrubs/ornamental grasses.
            (3)   Landscape Islands At Ends Of Parking Rows:
               (A)   Landscaped islands at the ends of parking rows shall be
placed and shaped in such a manner as to help direct traffic through the
parking area; and
               (B)   There shall be a break in parking rows every thirtieth
parking stall in the same row for the purpose of facilitating traffic
circulation on the site via drive aisles.
            (4)   Landscaped Medians:
               (A)   Place landscape medians a minimum of ten feet (10') wide
between every other parking aisle in lots with one hundred (100) or more
parking stalls. Landscape medians shall include a minimum six foot (6') wide
sidewalk with a minimum two foot (2') landscaped area on either side. For
instances where parking rows are parallel with the primary building facade, a
minimum six foot (6') wide pedestrian walkway shall be provided to link the
parking area to the building entrance.
               (B)   Provide a minimum of one (1) canopy shade tree for each
twenty five (25) linear feet of median, or according to best practices.
               (C)   Each landscape median shall have either a minimum of ten
(10) shrubs/ornamental grasses per thirty (30) linear feet and/or a durable and
hardy ground cover.
            (5)   Forward Motion Parking: Where forward motion parking occurs,
all shrubs/ornamental grasses shall be located at a minimum of three feet (3')
from the edge of the parking lot curb.
            (6)   Exception: No landscaped area within a parking lot shall be
less than one hundred (100) square feet with the exception of a tree diamond.
         f.   Building Site Landscaping: The coordination of landscape design
for individual building sites is deemed essential for creating a consistent,
high-quality character, which coordinated design unifies the various buildings
and strengthens the cohesiveness of the development. It shall be required to:
            (1)   Except where features such as arcades, entry ways, or
pedestrian plazas are part of the facade, provide a six foot (6') wide planting
bed between the front facade of the building and the adjacent pedestrian
walkway.
         g.   Landscape Irrigation/Water Conservation: Reasonable effort shall
be made to conserve water by utilizing alternative means for maintaining a
suitable landscape environment. Low water use and water conservation concepts
may be incorporated into the landscape design of each development without
compromising the intent to establish significant visual amenities through
landscaping.
         h.   Landscape Standards And Plant Material Selection: Random spotting
of many different plant types is deemed inappropriate. Planting shall reinforce
the site planning concepts and complement architectural forms. The following
provisions shall govern this section:
            (1)   Any landscape plans shall be prepared by a licensed
professional.
            (2)   The installation of any landscaping shall be done by a
licensed landscape contractor.
            (3)   Artificial plants of any type, size or color are prohibited
as exterior landscaping within any lot.
            (4)   Mulching:
               (A)   Any planting bed may be mulched with wood, decorative
rock, or other ground cover approved by the Director to stabilize soils,
control erosion, and conserve water use; and
               (B)   A minimum of one (1) shrub/ornamental grass per twenty
five (25) square feet of wood mulch, decorative rock, or other approved ground
cover shall be provided; and
               (C)   Rock mulch shall vary in size and coloration, but is
restricted to less than three inches (3") in size.
            (5)   Use of landscape or weed barrier fabric shall be required
within all planter beds and mulched areas to control weeds.
            (6)   Parking is prohibited within landscaped areas on a site.
            (7)   Please contact the Taylorsville Community Development
Department for a list of recommended plant materials.
         i.   Plant Size Standards: An immediate landscape impact is deemed
desirable within any development thereby incorporating minimum plant-size
standards. Height and caliper shall be measured by ANSI Standard Z60.1.
 
Deciduous shade/canopy trees 2.0" caliper
Ornamental trees             2.0" caliper
Evergreen trees              6' - 8' height
Multi-stem ornamentals       8' - 10' height
Shrubs                       50% shall be 5 gallon container
Ornamental grasses           50% shall be 1 gallon container
Vines                        1 gallon container
Ground cover/perennials      21/4" pots
 
         j.   Landscape Maintenance And Replacement: The property owner shall
be responsible for providing, protecting and maintaining landscaping in a
healthy and growing condition. The following requirements shall be noted on the
landscape plan:
            (1)   The property owner shall remove and replace dead or diseased
plant materials within reasonable time or within one (1) month, with the same
type, size and quantity of plant material as originally installed unless
incompatible with the soil or weather conditions; and
            (2)   Landscape materials located in the public right-of-way shall
be maintained by the abutting property owner or as defined in the development
agreement.
         k.   Site Furniture And Features: Site furnishings include benches,
waste receptacles, planters, railings and bollards. Visual consistency of these
elements is desired throughout each development. All components of outdoor site
furniture should be low maintenance, highly durable and resistant to vandalism,
graffiti, and theft.
            (1)   Outdoor Seating:
               (A)   Use outdoor seating that is comfortable, attractive,
durable and easy to maintain.
               (B)   Locate benches at major building entryways, drop-off
areas, transit stops, pedestrian courtyards and plazas.
            (2)   Planters And Waste Receptacles:
               (A)   Design planters and waste receptacles to coordinate with
other furniture.
               (B)   Use materials and colors similar to those used for
benches.
            (3)   Tree Grates:
               (A)   Use of tree grates is discouraged unless used in
conjunction with structural soils. If necessary, use tree grates to prevent
excessive soil compaction and to give added interest to the pavement.
               (B)   Choose tree grates that are fabricated of a strong,
durable material. In areas which receive heavy use, tree guards may be
appropriate to give added protection to young trees.
   G.   Utilities And Mechanical Equipment: The visual and noise impacts of
utilities and mechanical equipment shall be mitigated in the following manner
and shall apply to all public and private rights-of-way and pedestrian areas
within the development:
      1.   All new permanent utility lines shall be installed underground;
      2.   Abandoned utility boxes, meters and pedestals shall be removed;
      3.   Damaged utility boxes, meters, and pedestals shall be repaired;
      4.   Utility box and pedestals shall be placed such that they do not
block pedestrian travel or required visibility triangles at street
intersections and driveways;
      5.   Utility boxes, pedestals, and meter panels shall be painted to blend
in with its immediate surroundings. All utility boxes and meter panels on walls
shall be painted to match the building walls (subject to utility company
approvals); and
      6.   All utility boxes and pedestals shall be screened from view by means
of vegetation or enclosures to minimize visual and auditory impacts. Such
enclosures or landscaping treatments shall be consistent with the design theme
of the development.
   H.   Service, Refuse, Delivery, And Storage Areas: Service, delivery, refuse
and storage areas shall not be visually obtrusive. The visual impact of such
areas shall be minimized; especially views of such areas from public or private
roadways, pedestrian walkways, and pedestrian bikeways. The following shall
apply:
      1.   Locate service, delivery, and storage areas a minimum of twenty feet
(20') from any public right-of-way in areas of low visibility, such as the non-
street side or the rear of buildings.
      2.   Such areas and other similar uses shall be oriented toward service
access and away from all adjoining roadways, pedestrian walkways, and
pedestrian bikeways unless adequately screened (see section
13.38.090, "Screen Walls And Fences", of this chapter).
      3.   Service entrances and trash dumpsters shall be screened from public
streets, pedestrian gathering areas and primary entrances with fencing, walls
and/or landscaping. If fencing or walls are used they shall be made of
materials employed elsewhere on the building or site.
      4.   Refuse collection areas shall be designed to include the screening
of large items (e.g., skids and pallets) as well as trash bin(s) to accommodate
the primary land use which they serve.
      5.   Only items which are associated with the specific operation or land
use occupying the building may be kept in refuse collection areas. (Ord. 15-08,
10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017)
13.38.060: GRADING AND DRAINAGE:
   A.   Water Quality Control Plus Drainage: All projects shall implement
appropriate measures to mitigate negative impacts on the storm sewer system and
adjacent waterways and properties. Stormwater retention is encouraged on site
when possible. Water quality control and drainage proposals shall be approved
by the City Engineer.
   B.   Site Grading And Excavation: Buildings shall be designed to relate to
existing grade conditions and to minimize cut-and-fill on-site. The following
shall apply:
      1.   Site grading designs shall allow for easy pedestrian access from
sidewalks, pathways, trails, and parking areas.
      2.   Where building foundation walls are exposed, they shall be faced
with a decorative material such as brick or stone.
      3.   Modification to existing site topography shall be permitted where
and to the extent that it contributes to good design and shall be executed in
such a manner to avoid drainage impacts (such as erosion and road damage), both
on-site and downstream. (Ord. 15-08, 10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017)
13.38.070: VEHICULAR CIRCULATION AND PARKING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The on-site vehicular circulation and parking
system is deemed a critical factor in the safety and success of any
development. The parking/access/circulation systems provide for the safe,
efficient, convenient, and functional movement of multiple modes of
transportation both on and off the site where pedestrian/bicycle/vehicle
conflicts are minimized. The site planning process shall make provisions for
alternate modes of transportation, including public transit, bicycles and
pedestrian movement.
   B.   Vehicular Access: The City shall promote the safety and mobility of
through-traffic by minimizing the number of access points to private property
from public streets, which shall include the following measures:
      1.   Driveways shall be not less than twelve feet (12') wide for one way
travel, nor more than thirty five feet (35') in width for two way travel. A
wider driveway may be required by applicable fire authority. The curb opening
or width of each driveway shall be defined as the throat width of the driveway
at the inside point of the curb transition radius at the top face of the curb.
      2.   The number of driveways per street frontage for a lot is determined
by the length of the lot frontage, as measured at the front property line. Lots
shall be permitted access onto the adjacent streets according to their
functional classification as follows:
         a.   Arterial: One (1) driveway per eight hundred feet (800') of
street frontage, not to exceed two (2) driveways; or if the lot has less than
eight hundred feet (800') of street frontage, one (1) driveway per lot;
         b.   Collector: One (1) driveway per three hundred feet (300') of
street frontage, not to exceed three (3) driveways; or if the lot has less than
three hundred feet (300') of street frontage, one (1) driveway per lot;
         c.   Local or private street: One (1) driveway per building lot, not
to exceed two (2) driveways; and
         d.   Additional driveways may be permitted when a capacity or safety
need for more than one (1) driveway opening can be demonstrated to the City
Transportation Engineer. This may be determined on a case by case basis.
      3.   No driveway shall be closer than fifty feet (50') to the point of
the intersection of two (2) property lines at any corner of two (2) local or
private streets as measured along the property line.
      4.   No driveway shall be closer than one hundred fifty feet (150') to
the point of intersection of two (2) property lines at any corner where either
street is a major collector or arterial as measured along the property line.
      5.   Driveways on the same side of a street shall be separated by a
minimum one hundred foot (100') distance.
      6.   The City Engineer shall review and may approve or deny deviations to
the driveway separation standards based upon a site visit and review of items
including, but not limited to:
         a.   Safety;
         b.   Alternative access points and potential for reciprocal/shared
access;
         c.   Sight lines; and
         d.   Impact on traffic flow.
      7.   Shared driveways located on the property line of two (2) building
lots require evidence that an access easement is in place providing for joint
use of the shared driveway.
      8.   When a development is built in phases, each phase shall include the
minimum number of parking stalls, necessary driveways, and access points
required for the uses proposed in that phase of construction.
      9.   The perimeter of all paved surfaces shall be finished with six inch
(6") high concrete curbing with handicap ramps, where necessary.
      10.   Where an entry gate or guardhouse controls vehicle access or
egress, a stacking lane shall be provided as required by the City Engineer. The
stacking lane shall not interfere with maneuvering, traffic flow of aisles,
streets, bike paths, parking spaces and sidewalks.
   C.   Vehicular Circulation: Projects with multiple building sites or parcels
shall include a hierarchy of internal roadways such as: 1) internal collector;
2) internal drives; 3) parking aisles; and 4) service drives. The street,
access and parking network shall provide for the smooth, safe, convenient and
functional movement of all modes of transportation, including vehicles, public
transit, bikes and pedestrians, which shall include the following measures:
      1.   Where dead-end pathways, sidewalks, bikeways, or "stub streets"
terminate at a property line, linkages shall be provided to connect
developments with surrounding areas. This requirement may be waived by the
Planning Commission for private developments which include a secure and gated
access entry point(s).
      2.   Truck and vehicle backing from a public street onto the site for
loading or any other purpose shall be prohibited; and
      3.   Vehicle circulation routes requiring movement onto a public street
in order to move from one area to another on the same building site shall be
prohibited.
   D.   Service/Delivery And Emergency Access: Service circulation within a
development shall be designed to provide safe movements for all anticipated
vehicles. The design of individual lots to accommodate truck access shall meet
all regulatory requirements for turning radii without sacrificing other
standards.
      1.   Lots shall include the necessary dimensions for the on-site
maneuvering of refuse vehicles and firetrucks as determined by the City
Engineer and applicable fire authority; a minimum twenty foot (20') wide,
unobstructed driveway, lane, or other access way and turnaround may be required
for this purpose;
      2.   No off site maneuvering is permitted;
      3.   At least one (1) off street loading space shall be provided and
maintained on the same lot with every building or part thereof having a gross
floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, that is to be occupied
by a commercial or industrial use, to or from which delivery of materials or
merchandise are regularly made by a motor vehicle;
      4.   Off street loading spaces may not block use of required parking
space areas of site or adjacent sites; and
      5.   Each loading area shall be not less than twelve feet (12') wide,
twenty five feet (25') long, and if enclosed or covered, fourteen feet (14')
high. Adequate turning and maneuvering space must be provided on the site.
   E.   Parking Lots: Vehicle parking shall be provided to meet the location
and quantity requirements of specific uses without detracting from the creation
of attractive pedestrian environments in the following manner:
      1.   Parking lots shall be designed with a hierarchy of circulation: a)
internal collector; b) internal drives; c) parking aisles; and d) service
drives (if applicable).
      2.   The periphery of all surface parking areas shall be designed to
screen automobiles from view from a public or private street. A developer may
screen using one (1) or a combination of the following techniques:
         a.   Decorative walls up to three feet (3') in height;
         b.   A combination of berming and vegetation which provides a dense
visual buffer.
      3.   Parking areas with two hundred (200) or more parking stalls shall be
divided by buildings or a landscaped area(s) which are a minimum of ten feet
(10') wide and the length of the parking area being divided.
      4.   Adequate space for unimpeded turn-around shall be provided at dead-
end aisles.
      5.   Parking areas shall incorporate pedestrian walkways in a manner that
links buildings to the street sidewalk system by either a raised concrete
walkway or pedestrian plaza and landscaped strip (see pedestrian mobility,
bicycle circulation and parking, subsection
13.38.080B of this chapter).
      6.   Each parking space shall comply with the following parking stall
dimensions:
         a.   Minimum parking layout dimensions:
 
                       Parking Angle
Label Design Component 0°        30°45°60°90°
                       (Parallel)
A            Stall width                9'(8')1 9'     9'     9'     9'
B            Stall length               22'     18'    18'    18'    18'
C            Stall width parallel to    n/a     18'0"  12'9"  10'5"  9'0"
             aisle
D            Stall depth to curb or     n/a     16'10" 19'1"  20'1"  18'0"
             wall
E            Stall depth to interlock   n/a     12'11" 15'11" 17'10" 18'0"
F            Aisle width2 One-way       13'     14'    16'    19'    n/a
                          Two-way       24'     22'    24'    24'    26'
             Module width One-way aisle n/a     43'9"  51'0"  46'11" n/a
G            Wall/curb to Two-way aisle n/a     51'9"  59'0"  61'11" 62'0"
             interlock
             Module width One-way aisle n/a     39'10" 47'10" 54'8"  n/a
H            Interlock to Two-way aisle n/a     47'10" 55'10" 59'8"  62'0"
             interlock
Not shown in Module width One-way aisle 31'0"   47'8"  54'2"  59'2"  n/a
figure 3     Wall/curb to Two-way aisle 42'0"   55'8"  62'2"  64'2"  62'0"
             wall/curb
I            Cross aisle  One-way       15'     15'    15'    15'    15'
             width2       Two-way       22'     22'    22'    22'    22'
   Notes:
      1.    8 foot width applies to on-street parking stalls.
      2.    The Director may require greater aisle width due to emergency
equipment needs. Aisles less than 24 feet shall not be designated as fire
access.
      n/a    Not applicable.
FIGURE 17
Reference Drawing For Minimum Parking Layout Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3948.png]
 
FIGURE 18
Minimum Dimensions For Common Parking Lot Layouts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3950.png]
FIGURE 19
Minimum Dimensions For Common Parking Lot Layouts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3952.png]
      7.   An appropriate number of handicap spaces shall be provided on the
building site as provided in section
13.24.070 of this title.
      8.   On-street parking spaces immediately adjacent to the site may be
credited toward parking requirements if such parking is identified and approved
during the site plan review and approval process; and
      9.   For parking lot landscaping standards, see landscape design,
subsection
13.38.050F3e of this chapter.
      10.   Minimum and maximum parking ratio parking requirements shall be met
as provided in the following table:
 
Land Use                  Minimum Parking Ratio      Maximum Parking Ratio
Nursing home or other     0.25 stall per bed, plus 1 0.25 stall per bed, plus 1
similar uses              per employee on a peak     per employee on a peak
                          shift                      shift
Professional office       3.0 spaces per 1,000       4.0 spaces per 1,000
                          square feet of floor area  square feet of floor area
Senior citizen (assisted) 1 stall per 2 dwelling or  1 stall per 2 dwelling or
                          sleeping units             sleeping units
Senior citizen            1 stall per dwelling unit  1.5 stalls per dwelling
(independent)             (20% of stalls shall be    unit (20% of stalls shall
                          covered)                   be covered)
 
      11.   The maximum number of parking stalls on a site may be increased by
twenty five percent (25%) subject to the following:
         a.   A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total parking area is
landscaped; and
         b.   A tree to parking stall ratio of 0.25 to 1 is provided within the
parking area; or
         c.   A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the total parking
stalls on site are within a parking structure or below grade.
      12.   The minimum number of parking stalls on a site may be decreased
subject to the following:
         a.   The number of stalls required for a site may be decreased by
twenty percent (20%) if a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total parking
area is landscaped; and
         b.   A tree to parking stall ratio of 0.25 to 1 is provided within the
parking area; or
         c.   A minimum of twenty five percent (25%) of the total parking
stalls on site are within a parking structure or below grade; or
         d.   If a transit shelter, bus turn-around, or other transit
improvement is provided which satisfies City standards and provides seating and
shelter, the minimum parking requirement may be reduced by five percent (5%).
To qualify, the land use requesting the decrease shall be located within six
hundred feet (600') of a transit stop with a maximum thirty (30) minute
headway. Installation of transit facilities requires written approval from the
transit agency.
      13.   All parking or service areas shall be paved with a solid surface
and shall be arranged and striped to provide orderly and safe loading,
unloading, and parking of vehicles. The City Engineer and Community Development
Director shall review and may approve or deny other types of surfacing
materials.
      14.   Parking lot striping shall be maintained on a regular basis so that
striping is visible for the safe ingress/egress and parking of vehicles.
      15.   Notwithstanding any other parking requirements provided in this
chapter, when land uses occupy the same lot or adjacent lots, the total number
of off street parking spaces required for each use may be combined and shared.
A proposal for sharing off street parking shall be presented to the Community
Development Director. If the proposal involves the accommodation of more than
ten (10) parking spaces (total accumulated spaces required for all involved
uses), the Director may present the proposal to the Planning Commission for
site plan review. In order to qualify for shared parking, applicants shall
present the following:
         a.   The location and identity of each use that will share the
facility.
         b.   The total parking requirement for each use.
         c.   The projected hours of operation of each use and the hours during
which the peak parking demand will be experienced.
         d.   The number of existing and/or proposed parking spaces.
         e.   A site plan that provides for a distance of no greater than five
hundred feet (500') from the nearest entrance of each use to the nearest edge
of the parking facility.
         f.   A site plan that demonstrates that the proposed shared parking
facility will comply with all standards required by this Code for parking lot
development.
   F.   Parking Structures And Parking Beneath Buildings: The appearance of
parking structures, whether freestanding or attached, shall relate to the
buildings they serve and contribute to the character of the development. The
incorporation of parking structures in a commercial development is encouraged
in order to minimize site coverage. The following standards shall apply:
      1.   The general architectural criteria shall apply to all parking
structures (see section
13.38.040, "Architectural Design", of this chapter). Design features shall
include the same finish materials as the exterior of the building on the site.
      2.   Pedestrian connections between parking structures and main buildings
shall be provided. Connections shall be separated from vehicular travel areas,
well lit, and convenient.
      3.   Any parking structure shall be landscaped at the base of the
facility with trees and shrubs/ornamental grass, along with other materials
that will deemphasize the use of the facility as a parking structure and
adequately mitigate adverse visual impacts. It is strongly encouraged, but not
required, to landscape the top level with trees, grass, and other pedestrian
friendly elements.
   G.   Future Parking Lots And Structures: Projects which are expected to be
developed in phases shall anticipate and accommodate such phasing in the
parking lot design. Increased parking demands shall relate to anticipated
expansions.
      1.   Where expansion is planned, appropriate amounts of land for
additional parking shall be reserved at the outset.
   H.   Mass Transit Facilities: Transit facilities shall be accommodated
within all mixed use developments as approved by the serving agency. Transit
routes, access points and shelter locations should be addressed along major
roadways within and on the perimeter of such projects. Transit facilities shall
be provided in a manner to make transit an attractive mode of travel for both
employees and patrons. (Ord. 15-08, 10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017)
13.38.080: PEDESTRIAN MOBILITY, BICYCLE CIRCULATION AND PARKING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Pedestrian and bicycle systems shall be designed to
be safe and to encourage walking and bicycling throughout the project.
Individual lots shall be integrated with adjacent properties designed to form a
comprehensive system and to provide convenient access to transit stops and
trail systems. Pedestrian spaces and routes shall be designed to invite walking
to and from each development. Routes shall be integrated to form a
comprehensive circulation system, providing convenient, safe and visually
attractive access to all destinations on the site.
   B.   Overall Pedestrian And Bicycle Circulation: Pedestrian accessibility
provides linkages with surrounding areas and uses and opens auto-oriented
developments to the neighborhood, thereby reducing traffic impacts and enabling
the development to project a friendlier, more inviting image.
Bikeways and pedestrian walkways shall be buffered from external and internal
automobile circulation within parking lots. Walkways are intended to lead
pedestrians from parking areas to building entrances to facilitate convenient
movement and to minimize conflicts with cars. Pedestrians should feel
comfortable that they are in a clearly defined pathway to the building. The
development shall:
      1.   Locate buildings and design on-site circulation to minimize
pedestrian/vehicle conflicts.
      2.   Separate pedestrian and vehicle movements with the use of
landscaping, barriers or other appropriate design solutions as approved by the
Community Development Director.
      3.   Differentiate areas of pedestrian and bicycle/vehicle interface with
accent pavement and signage to alert drivers to potential conflicts.
      4.   A minimum of one (1) sidewalk connection between a building and the
perimeter street is required which shall include the following:
         a.   A minimum six foot (6') wide sidewalk.
         b.   A minimum four foot (4') wide planter on each side of the
sidewalk.
      5.   The developer shall submit a pedestrian access plan which shows
pedestrian paths and connections with the public sidewalk on the site plan.
      6.   The following standards shall apply for any commercial, office, or
retail building:
         a.   Provide sidewalks, not less than six feet (6') wide along any
facade that contains a public customer entrance.
         b.   Except where features such as arcades and entry ways are part of
the facade, provide a six foot (6') wide planting bed between the facade of the
building and the adjacent sidewalk (see landscape design, subsection
13.38.050F3f of this chapter).
         c.   Provide weather protection features such as awnings or arcades
within thirty feet (30') of all customer entrances.
   C.   Bicycle Circulation And Parking: Functional and attractive bicycle
parking shall be provided in convenient locations and in adequate numbers for
employees and users. The development shall:
      1.   Provide bicycle parking in the following minimum ratio:
         a.   One (1) bicycle space for every twenty (20) required off- street
automobile parking spaces up to a total maximum requirement of twenty (20)
bicycle parking spaces per development phase; and
         b.   A minimum of three (3) bicycle parking spaces shall be provided
per lot or building, regardless of building size. Maintenance buildings may be
exempt from this requirement.
      2.   Bicycle parking is only useful to cyclists if it is located
properly. Accordingly, bicycle parking shall be located:
         a.   On the same lot as the principal use;
         b.   To prevent damage to bicycles by cars;
         c.   In a convenient, highly visible, active, well lighted area;
         d.   So as not to interfere with pedestrian movements;
         e.   As near the principal entrance of the building as practical; and
         f.   To provide safe access from the parking spaces to the right- of-
way or bicycle lane.
      3.   Both employees and customers shall be considered when determining
locations for bicycle parking. For example, a bike rack located within a
parking structure may work for employees but would not work well for customers
who would normally access the business from an exterior entrance. A highly
visible location is determined from the vantage point of someone inside the
building or near the principal pedestrian entrance. Locating bicycle parking
under a building overhang, or in another way providing a degree of protection
from the weather, will greatly improve its convenience.
      4.   Appropriate parking facilities include bike racks which allow the
bicycle to be supported upright by its frame in two (2) places and should allow
the frame and one (1) or both wheels to be secured. For long term employee
parking, bike lockers are encouraged. Bicycle parking facilities shall be:
         a.   Consistent with the surroundings in color and design and
incorporated, whenever possible, into buildings or street furniture design;
         b.   Designed to allow each bicycle to be supported by its frame;
         c.   Designed to allow the frame and wheels of each bicycle to be
secured against theft;
         d.   Designed to avoid damage to the bicycles;
         e.   Anchored to resist rust or corrosion, or removal by vandalism;
and
         f.   Designed to accommodate a range of bicycle shapes and sizes and
facilitate easy locking without interfering with adjacent bicycles. (Ord. 15-
08, 10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017)
13.38.090: SCREEN WALLS AND FENCES:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Any fence or wall shall be decorative and
contribute to the visual quality of the development, used to screen service
areas, loading areas, and outdoor storage areas. When not required for
security, screening, or grade transitions, fences and walls shall be as
inconspicuous and low as possible.
   B.   Wall And Fence Design And Materials: A fence or wall shall be
constructed of materials which are compatible with the on-site building
architecture. The following shall apply:
      1.   Perimeter Fence: A solid perimeter fence or wall shall be
constructed adjacent to single family residential land uses;
      2.   Retaining Walls: For retaining walls in excess of thirty inches
(30") in height, provide safety protection in the form of railings, fences or
hedges, or create a terrace with two (2) shorter walls;
      3.   Architectural Treatment: Incorporate architectural treatment on both
sides of perimeter walls;
      4.   Architectural Offsets: Solid fence or wall runs greater than fifty
(50) linear feet shall be articulated with architectural offsets a minimum
depth of two feet (2') to incorporate landscape pockets;
      5.   Walls: A wall shall consist of concrete, stone, brick, or similar
type of solid masonry material and shall conform to structural requirements of
the applicable building codes;
      6.   Berms: A berm shall be constructed of earthen materials and shall be
landscaped;
      7.   Solid Fences: A solid fence shall consist of vinyl, precast
concrete, masonry, or other similar materials forming an opaque screen and
shall conform to structural requirements of the applicable building codes;
      8.   Planting: Plant materials used for screening shall be of a type or
used in such a manner so as to provide an opaque screen having a minimum width
of two feet (2');
      9.   Signs: No signs or sign supports shall be permitted on any required
screening; and
      10.   Elevation Differences: Notwithstanding the requirements listed
above where the finished elevation of the property is lower at the boundary
line (or within 5 feet inside the boundary line) than an abutting property
elevation, such change in elevation may be used in lieu of, or in combination
with, additional screening to satisfy the screening requirements for this
district.
   C.   Screening Requirements: A development shall include screening of
service areas, refuse and waste removal areas, loading docks, truck parking
areas, outdoor areas used for the display, storage, or sale of seasonal
inventory, and other areas which tend to be unsightly shall be screened using
fencing, walls, and/or landscaping:
      1.   Uses being screened shall not be visible above the screen wall
enclosure as viewed from the public right(s)-of-way and shall be constructed of
materials and finishes to complement the primary structure;
      2.   Gates and/or access doors shall have self-latching mechanisms and
shall be opaque metal or another acceptable material which is durable. Chain
link gates with slats are not permitted; and
      3.   Screening shall block views to these areas from both on site as well
as from public rights-of-way, pedestrian walkways, pedestrian bikeways and
adjacent properties. (Ord. 15-08, 10-21-2015)
13.38.100: SIGN DESIGN:
   A.   Please refer to the signage and outdoor advertising standards in
chapter 13.26 of this title. (Ord. 15-08, 10-21-2015)
13.38.110: EXTERIOR SITE LIGHTING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Exterior lighting shall be used to provide
illumination for the security and safety of entry drives, parking, service and
loading areas, pathways, courtyards and plazas, without intruding on adjacent
properties. Site lighting shall be architecturally compatible and consistent in
design between sites.
   B.   Fixture Design: Exterior light fixtures shall be compatible and relate
to the architectural character of the buildings on a site. Site lighting shall
be provided at the minimum level to accommodate safe pedestrian and vehicle
movements, without causing any off-site glare.
      1.   Metal halide or other white light fixtures may be used. High-
pressure sodium is prohibited in any application.
      2.   The maximum height of poles within landscaped and plaza areas is
twenty feet (20'), measured from finished grade. Poles within these areas may
be set on pedestals no more than eight inches (8") in height.
   C.   Decorative Architectural Lighting: Special lighting that accents
building features and creates visual interest is permitted, provided that
design continuity is maintained among buildings.
      1.   Neon tubing is not acceptable as a building accent or to accentuate
the building's form.
      2.   Lighting fixtures mounted directly on structures may be allowed when
utilized to enhance specific architectural elements or to help establish scale
or provide visual interest.
      3.   "Wall pack lights" are permitted only in loading and service areas,
and shall be down-lit and shielded from view.
      4.   Using lighting to highlight entrances, art, terraces, and special
landscape features is highly recommended.
   D.   Parking Lot Lighting: Parking lot lighting shall be designed to be
unobtrusive and to provide safe light for orderly functions. This chapter
requires the following:
      1.   Parking lot light fixtures shall be similar in design to the other
lighting in the surface parking area;
      2.   Lighting shall be selected that has a concealed light source of the
"cut-off" variety to prevent glare onto adjacent buildings and sites;
      3.   Maximum height of parking lot poles is twenty four feet (24')
measured from finished grade and shall have a maximum base height of two feet
(2'); and
      4.   Pedestrian areas in a parking lot shall be well lit.
   E.   Pedestrian Area Lighting: Walkway lighting shall be scaled to the
pedestrian to provide for safe use of pathways and pedestrian areas. Any walks,
stairs, or ramps shall be lighted for the safe passage of pedestrians. The use
of lighted bollards or other low level fixtures is strongly encouraged to
identify pedestrian walkways and drop-off areas at entrances of buildings.
   F.   Landscape Lighting: Landscape lighting which enhances and complements
the landscape materials is permitted. Where landscape lighting is used,
fixtures shall be concealed where possible (i.e., in trees, behind rocks or
shrubs) to control glare.
   G.   Site Security Lighting: Security lighting may be necessary on some
sites, but it may not negatively impact the site and building architecture or
adjacent parcels. No light source (bulb) shall be directly visible from
adjacent parcels. (Ord. 15-08, 10-21-2015, eff. 7-25-2017)
   H.   Light Intensity: The light intensity levels within all areas shall
correspond to use and potential hazards. This chapter requires the following:
      1.   Lighting Plan Required: A photometric lighting plan shall be
required for all areas in residential developments except for areas within the
ownership of single-family residential building lots. The lighting plan shall
address all other areas of the development, including, but not limited to, open
space, driveways, parking lots and facilities, walkways, sidewalks, streets,
clubhouses, pools, etc.
      2.   Lighting Plan Preparation; Illumination Levels: Lighting plans shall
be prepared and stamped by a recognized lighting engineer or lighting
professional utilizing the lighting recommendations of the Illuminating
Engineering Society (IES) Lighting Handbook; notwithstanding, the following
levels of illumination shall be maintained for each of the specific locations:
         a.   Building entrances: 2.0 foot-candles.
         b.   Sidewalks: 0.8 foot-candle.
         c.   Bikeways: 0.5 foot-candle.
         d.   Courts/plazas/terraces: 0.5 foot-candle.
         e.   Ramps: 3.0 foot-candles.
         f.   Stairways: 3.0 foot-candles.
         g.   Parking lots: 0.8 foot-candle.
         h.   Roadways: 0.6 foot-candle.
         i.   Gas station canopy: 10.0 foot-candles, 107.6 lumens/square meter.
      3.   Spotlights: Reflectors, spotlights, floodlights, and other sources
of illumination may be used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, signs,
parking, and loading areas provided they are equipped with proper lenses or
other devices concentrating the illumination upon the building, landscaping,
signs, parking, and loading areas.
      4.   Light Spill: No unshielded lights, reflectors, spotlights, strobe
lights, or searchlights shall be so located that they are pointed toward or are
directly visible from public rights-of-way. All lighting shall be shielded and
directed downward to avoid light spill beyond the property line. Unshielded,
exterior wall mounted floodlights (wall packs) are prohibited. Intensities
shall be controlled so that neighboring areas will not be adversely affected by
glare or excessive light. (Ord. 17-15, 6-14-2017)
CHAPTER 13.39
SSD-R-MUIRHOUSE ZONING DISTRICT
SECTION:
13.39.010: Purpose
13.39.020: Applicability
13.39.030: Land Use And Density
13.39.040: Architectural Design
13.39.050: Site Planning
13.39.060: Grading And Drainage
13.39.070: Vehicular Circulation And Parking
13.39.080: Pedestrian Mobility And Circulation
13.39.090: Screen Walls And Fences
13.39.100: Sign Design
13.39.110: Exterior Site Lighting
13.39.120: Other Development Standards
13.39.130: Figures
13.39.010: PURPOSE:
The Site Specific Development-Residential-Muirhouse District (SSD-R-Muirhouse)
is established to promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the
community by facilitating the creation of a residential community in a high
quality setting. It is the purpose of this chapter to encourage quality design
and development of land in a manner that suits the unique needs of the property
and contributes to orderly traffic circulation and compatibility with
surrounding land uses. All new or future development within the SSD-R-Muirhouse
Zoning District shall be in conformity with this title and any site-specific
Master Plan approved by the Planning Commission. Specifically, this zone
intends to:
   A.   Enhance and protect the quality of life and community image of the City
of Taylorsville through clearly articulated development design policies and
standards;
   B.   Protect and promote Taylorsville's long-term economic viability through
design standards which encourage and reward high quality development and
discourage less attractive and less enduring alternatives;
   C.   Minimize adverse impacts of vehicular circulation to existing
neighborhoods and to the surrounding physical environment;
   D.   Enhance and protect the security, health, safety, and welfare of all
residents of the City of Taylorsville; and
   E.   Facilitate an understanding of the City's expectations and notify and
assist developers in compiling a complete and efficient application. (Ord. 18-
12, 4-18-2018)
13.39.020: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions in this chapter shall apply to all new development,
redevelopment, exterior remodels, additions to existing structures, refacing,
signs, and accessory structures within the SSD-R-Muirhouse Zoning District.
This chapter includes minimum development standards and will be used by City
staff and, if applicable, the Planning Commission to review development
applications. The policies established in these provisions shall be met through
actual compliance with each design standard.
   A.   Boundary Descriptions: The SSD-R-Muirhouse Zoning District is limited
to a specific area in the City as illustrated in section
13.39.130, figure 1 of this chapter, which is described as:
   Boundary Description Phase 1 & Phase 2
   Beginning at a point north 89°58'12" east 866.13 feet along the section
line, and south 0°01'48" east 811.62 feet from the northwest corner of section
8, Township 2 south, range 1 west, Salt Lake base and meridian; and running
thence south 89°46'10" east 403.46 feet; thence south 00°13'50" west 718.76
feet; thence north 89°49'36" west 39.93 feet; thence south 36°46'07" west 50.06
feet to the northerly boundary of Southridge 4 Subdivision; thence along said
northerly boundary north 50°25'45" west 20.00 feet; thence north 64°32'56" west
137.15 feet to the northerly boundary of Southridge 3 Subdivision; thence along
said northerly boundary north 64°32'56" west 69.73 feet; thence north 55°37'14"
west 127.45 feet; thence north 37°05'56" west 89.02 feet; thence north
26°21'38" west 88.06 feet; thence leaving said northerly boundary north
00°13'50" east 363.11 feet; thence south 89°46'10" east 67.24 feet; thence
north 00°13'50" east 74.00 feet to the point of beginning.
   Boundary Description Phase 3
   Beginning at a point N 89°58'12" E 800.09 feet along the section line, and
S0°01'48"E 548.51 feet from the northwest corner of section 8, township 2
south, range 1 west, Salt Lake base and meridian; and running thence
S00°13'50"W 699.91 feet: more or less to the northerly boundary of Southridge
Subdivision No. 3; thence along said northerly line the following two courses:
1) N26°21'38"W 166.17 feet; 2) N36°12'38"W 71.27 feet; thence N00°01'48"W 67.66
feet more or less to the northerly line of the Utah and Salt Lake Canal; thence
along said northerly line N47°10'07"W 6.32 feet; thence N00°01'48"W 421.80
feet; thence S89°53'09"E 123.59 feet to the point of  beginning.
   Contains 8.58 acres in area.  (Ord. 18-12, 4-18-2018)
13.39.030: LAND USE AND DENSITY:
   A.   Uses: Uses permitted under this chapter shall conform to the
development standards provided elsewhere in this Development Code, the
application procedures for development, and any overlay districts as
applicable. Uses permitted as a conditional use shall comply with the
requirements for administrative conditional use permits and/or non-
administrative conditional use permits as applicable.
The approval of any additional land uses beyond those allowed shall require and
be contingent upon the favorable exercise of future legislative discretion by
the City Council following all required notice and public hearings before the
Planning Commission and City Council.
   B.   Table Of Uses: All uses not included in the table below shall be deemed
not permitted.
 
P = Permitted                      S = Special use permit
AC = Administrative conditional    N = Not permitted
NC = Nonadministrative conditional  
 
 
Land Use SSD-R-Muirhouse District
Accessory apartments                               S
Accessory structure                                NC
Animals (household pets)                           P
Backyard chickens                                  N
Bed and breakfast                                  N
Dwelling, multiple-unit                            P
Home occupation                                    P
Parks, public and private                          P
Planned unit development                           P
Residential facility for elderly persons           P
Residential facility for persons with a disability P
Residential lease, short term                      N
Zero lot line development                          P
 
   C.   Density: Allowable dwelling units per acre: 15.3 units per acre. (Ord.
18-12, 4-18-2018)
13.39.040: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Architectural design seeks to add to community
character while providing flexibility to avoid rigid uniformity of design. All
elements including the scale and mass of buildings, materials, color, roof
styles, door and window openings, and details should be responsive to
functional architectural design and promote a cohesive design statement.
      Building masses shall respond to "human scale" with materials and details
that are proportionate to human height and provide visual interest at the
street and sidewalk level. Buildings shall be reduced in apparent mass or
articulated to avoid large monolithic, box-like shapes.
   B.   Architectural design, building massing, roof forms, color, materials,
orientation, and fenestration shall be consistent with section
13.39.130, figures 2, "Denton Model Floor Plans"; 3, "Floor Plan End Denton
Option"; 4, "Hastings Floor Plans"; 5, "Elevations 1"; 6, "Elevations 2"; 7,
"Elevations 3"; and 8, "Color Renderings", of this chapter.
   C.   Maximum building height: Thirty five feet (35').
   D.   Roof-mounted mechanical units (including evaporative coolers, HVAC
units, vents, etc.) shall be located or screened so they are not visible from
adjacent public and/or private streets as well as from adjacent properties.
   E.   Buildings may be designed and sited to maximize the use of solar gain
for energy savings, and shall respect the solar access requirements of adjacent
(existing and proposed) buildings. Solar equipment is permitted subject to the
standards set forth in section
13.11.210 of this title. (Ord. 18-12, 4-18-2018)
13.39.050: SITE PLANNING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Buildings shall be located to maximize the
presentation of streetscaping and primary building entries to roadways, to
provide clear orientation and access for both vehicles and pedestrians, to
facilitate internal pedestrian circulation, and to place structures in
consideration of the existing built context, the location of adjoining uses,
and the location of roads.
   B.   All building locations, building orientation, roadways, driveways,
pedestrian ways, park spaces, landscape areas, vehicular parking areas,
dumpster locations, and sign locations, shall be consistent with section
13.39.130, figure 9, "Site Plan", of this chapter.
   C.   Building Setbacks: All building setbacks shall be consistent with
section
13.39.130, figure 9, "Site Plan", of this chapter.
   D.   Site Coverage Requirements: Open space and landscaped areas shall be
deemed valued amenities. Common and private open space shall be provided and
shall not cover less than forty percent (40%) of the gross site area.
      1.   Stormwater detention/retention areas may be included in open space
coverage if located fully within the lot, and when those areas are effectively
landscaped to satisfy the requirements in this Code. (See subsection E,
"Landscape Design", of this section.)
   E.   Landscape Design:
      1.   Purpose And Intent: Landscaping shall be required within the subject
site to:
         a.   Enhance the aesthetics of the development;
         b.   Create a pedestrian-friendly environment;
         c.   Break up the mass of buildings;
         d.   Soften architectural materials;
         e.   Provide screening for service areas;
         f.   Enhance streetscapes;
         g.   Provide shade and climate control;
         h.   Create an attractive entrance and gateway to the project; and
         i.   Provide buffers between incompatible land uses or site areas.
All landscaping within the SSD-R-Muirhouse District shall be consistent with
section
13.39.130, figure 10, "Landscape Plan Part 1", and "Landscape Plan Part 2", of
this chapter.
      2.   Sight Lines: Adequate sight lines shall be maintained for an
effective thirty foot (30') sight triangle formed by the intersection of
straight lines extended from the back of the curb (or future curb) and a line
connecting them at points thirty feet (30') from the intersection of the curb
line, except a reasonable number of trees pruned to permit unobstructed views
to automobile drivers. Plants and signage are allowed within the sight triangle
if:
         a.   Plants do not exceed thirty six inches (36") in height at full
maturity; and
         b.   Signs do not exceed thirty six inches (36") in height (measured
from top of curb height) unless they are eighty percent (80%) or more open.
      3.   Landscape Irrigation/Water Conservation: Reasonable effort shall be
made to conserve water by utilizing alternative means for maintaining a
suitable landscape environment. Low water use and water conservation concepts
may be incorporated into the landscape design of each development without
compromising the intent to establish significant visual amenities through
landscaping.
      4.   Landscape Standards:
         a.   Landscape Plans: Any landscape plans shall be prepared by a
licensed professional.
         b.   Installation: The installation of any landscaping shall be done
by a licensed landscape contractor.
         c.   Artificial Plants: Artificial plants of any type, size or color
are prohibited as exterior landscaping within any lot.
         d.   Mulching:
            (1)   All planting beds shall be mulched with either wood,
decorative rock, or other ground cover to stabilize soils, control erosion, and
conserve water use; and
            (2)   Rock mulch shall be restricted to less than three inches (3")
in size.
         e.   Parking: Parking is prohibited within landscaped areas on a site.
      5.   Plant Size Standards: An immediate landscape impact is deemed
desirable within the development by incorporating minimum plant- size
standards. The following height and caliper standards shall be required:
 
Deciduous shade/canopy trees 2.0" caliper
Ornamental trees             2.0" caliper
Evergreen trees              6' - 8' height
Multi-stem ornamentals       8' - 10' height
Shrubs                       50% shall be 5 gallon container
Ornamental grasses           50% shall be 1 gallon container
Vines                        1 gallon container
Ground cover/perennials      21/4" pots
 
      6.   Landscape Maintenance And Replacement: The developer, or home owners
association upon completion of the project, shall be responsible for providing,
protecting and maintaining landscaping in a healthy and growing condition. The
following requirement shall be noted on the landscape plan:
         a.   Dead or diseased plant materials shall be removed and replaced
within a reasonable time or within one month with the same type, size and
quantity of plant material as originally installed unless incompatible with the
soil or weather conditions.
      7.   Site Furniture And Features: Site furnishings, including benches,
waste receptacles, exterior lighting, planters, railings and bollards, shall be
visually consistent throughout including color, materials, and design style
based on section
13.39.130, figure 11 of this chapter,”Site Furnishings”. All components of
outdoor site furniture shall be low maintenance, highly durable and resistant
to weather, vandalism, graffiti, and theft.
   F.   Utilities And Mechanical Equipment: The visual and noise impacts of
utilities and mechanical equipment shall be mitigated in the following manner
and shall apply to all public and private rights-of-way and pedestrian areas
within the development:
      1.   All new permanent utility lines shall be installed underground;
      2.   Abandoned utility boxes, meters and pedestals shall be removed;
      3.   Damaged utility boxes, meters, and pedestals shall be repaired;
      4.   Utility box and pedestals shall be placed such that they do not
block pedestrian travel or required visibility triangles at street
intersections and driveways;
      5.   Utility boxes, pedestals, and meter panels shall be painted to blend
in with its immediate surroundings. All utility boxes and meter panels on walls
shall be painted to match the building walls (subject to utility company
approvals); and
      6.   All utility boxes and pedestals shall be screened from view by means
of vegetation or enclosures to minimize visual and auditory impacts. Such
enclosures or landscaping treatments shall be consistent with the design theme
of the development.
   G.   Service, Refuse, And Storage Areas: Service, delivery, refuse and
storage areas shall not be visually obtrusive. The visual impact of such areas
shall be minimized; especially views of such areas from roadways, pedestrian
walkways, adjacent properties and dwelling units. Refuse collection areas shall
be designed and located consistent with section
13.39.130, figure 9, "Site Plan", of this chapter. (Ord. 18-12, 4-18-2018)
13.39.060: GRADING AND DRAINAGE:
   A.   Water Quality Control And Drainage: The project shall implement
appropriate measures to mitigate negative impacts on the storm sewer system and
adjacent waterways and properties. Stormwater retention is encouraged on site
when possible. Water quality control and drainage proposals shall be approved
by the City Engineer.
   B.   Site Grading And Excavation: Buildings shall be designed to relate to
existing grade conditions and to minimize cut-and-fill on-site. The following
shall apply:
      1.   Site grading designs shall allow for easy pedestrian access from
sidewalks, pathways, trails, and parking areas.
      2.   Modification to existing site topography shall be permitted where
and to the extent that it contributes to good design and shall be executed in
such a manner as to avoid drainage impacts (such as erosion and road damage),
both on-site and downstream.
   C.   Grading And Drainage: Grading and drainage improvements shall be
consistent with section
13.39.130, figure 12, "Grading And Drainage Plan", of this chapter. (Ord. 18-
12, 4-18-2018)
13.39.070: VEHICULAR CIRCULATION AND PARKING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The on-site vehicular circulation and parking
system is deemed a critical factor in the safety and success of any
development. The parking/access/circulation systems provide for the safe,
efficient, convenient, and functional movement of multiple modes of
transportation both on and off the site where pedestrian/bicycle/vehicle
conflicts are minimized.
   B.   Vehicular Access: Roadway location and widths shall be consistent with
section 13.39.130, figure 9, "Site Plan", of this chapter.
   C.   Service/Delivery And Emergency Access: Service circulation within a
development shall be designed to provide safe movements for all anticipated
vehicles. The design of individual lots to accommodate truck access shall meet
all regulatory requirements for turning radii without sacrificing other
standards.
      1.   Lots shall include the necessary dimensions for the on-site
maneuvering of refuse vehicles and firetrucks as determined by the City
Engineer and applicable fire authority; a minimum twenty foot (20') wide,
unobstructed driveway, lane, or other access way and turnaround may be required
for this purpose.
   D.   Vehicle Parking: Vehicle parking shall be provided as illustrated in
section
13.39.130, figure 9, "Site Plan", of this chapter:
      1.   Each dwelling unit shall provide an attached two car garage with
direct access to a public or private roadway.
      2.   Additional and guest parking shall be provided as illustrated on
section
13.39.130, figure 9, "Site Plan", of this chapter. Minimum parking dimensions
shall be 9' x 18'.
      3.   An appropriate number of handicap spaces shall be provided on the
building site as provided in section
13.24.070 of this title.
      4.   All parking or roadway areas shall be paved with a solid surface and
shall be arranged and striped to provide orderly and safe loading, unloading,
and parking of vehicles. The City Engineer and Community Development Director
shall review and may approve or deny other types of surfacing materials.
      5.   Parking lot and road striping shall be maintained on a regular basis
so that striping is visible for the safe ingress/egress and parking of
vehicles. (Ord. 18-12, 4-18-2018)
13.39.080: PEDESTRIAN MOBILITY AND CIRCULATION:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Pedestrian systems shall be designed to be safe and
to encourage walking throughout the project. Individual lots shall be
integrated with adjacent properties designed to form a comprehensive system and
to provide convenient access to public rights-of-way. Pedestrian spaces and
routes shall be designed to invite walking throughout the development. Routes
shall be integrated to form a comprehensive circulation system, providing
convenient, safe and visually attractive access to all destinations on the
site. (Ord. 18-12, 4-18-2018)
13.39.090: SCREEN WALLS AND FENCES:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: All fences and walls shall be decorative and
contribute to the visual quality of the development, used to screen service
areas, loading areas, and outdoor storage areas. When not required for
security, screening, or grade transitions, fences and walls shall be as
inconspicuous and low as possible.
   B.   Wall And Fence Design And Materials: All fences and walls within the
SSD-R-Muirhouse District shall be constructed of high quality materials and be
consistent with section
13.39.130, figure 13, "Fence Design", of this chapter.
   C.   Screening Requirements: The development shall include screening of
service areas, refuse and waste removal areas.
      1.   Uses being screened shall not be visible above the screen wall
enclosure as viewed from the public right(s)-of-way and shall be constructed of
materials and finishes to complement the primary structure;
      2.   Gates and/or access doors shall have self-latching mechanisms and
shall be opaque metal or another acceptable material which is durable. Chain
link gates with slats are not permitted; and
      3.   Screening shall block views to these areas from both on site as well
as from public rights-of-way, pedestrian walkways, pedestrian bikeways and
adjacent properties. (Ord. 18-12, 4-18-2018)
13.39.100: SIGN DESIGN:
A landscaped entrance monument sign shall be installed at the main entrance of
the community consistent with section
13.39.130, figure 14, "Entrance Sign", of this chapter. (Ord. 18-12, 4-18-2018)
13.39.110: EXTERIOR SITE LIGHTING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Exterior lighting shall be used to provide
illumination for the security and safety of entry drives, parking, service and
loading areas, pathways, and park space, without intruding on adjacent
properties. Site lighting shall be architecturally compatible and consistent in
design throughout the development.
   B.   Fixture Design: Exterior light fixtures shall be compatible and relate
to the architectural character of the buildings on a site. Site lighting shall
be provided at the minimum level to accommodate safe pedestrian and vehicle
movements, without causing any off-site glare.
      1.   Metal halide or other white light fixtures may be used. High-
pressure sodium is prohibited in any application.
      2.   The maximum height of poles within landscaped and park areas is
twenty feet (20'), measured from finished grade. Poles within these areas may
be set on bases no more than eight inches (8") in height.
   C.   Decorative Architectural Lighting: Special lighting that accents
building features and creates visual interest is permitted, provided that
design continuity is maintained among buildings.
      1.   Neon tubing is not acceptable as a building accent or to accentuate
the building's form.
      2.   Lighting fixtures mounted directly on structures may be allowed when
utilized to enhance specific architectural elements or to help establish scale
or provide visual interest.
      3.   "Wall pack lights" are not permitted.
      4.   Using lighting to highlight entrances, art, terraces, and special
landscape features is highly recommended.
   D.   Pedestrian Area Lighting: Walkway lighting shall be scaled to the
pedestrian to provide for safe use of pathways and pedestrian areas. Any walks,
stairs, or ramps shall be lighted for the safe passage of pedestrians. The use
of lighted bollards or other low level fixtures is strongly encouraged to
identify pedestrian walkways.
   E.   Landscape Lighting: Landscape lighting which enhances and complements
the landscape materials is permitted. Where landscape lighting is used,
fixtures shall be concealed where possible (i.e., in trees, behind rocks or
shrubs) to control glare.
   F.   Site Security Lighting: Security lighting may be necessary in some
areas, but it may not negatively impact the site and building architecture or
adjacent parcels. No light source (bulb) shall be directly visible from
adjacent parcels. (Ord. 18-12, 4-18-2018)
13.39.120: OTHER DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Unless otherwise specified within the SSD-R-Muirhouse District, all current
development standards shall apply. (Ord. 18-12, 4-18-2018)
13.39.130: FIGURES:
   FIGURE 1
   SSD-R-MUIRHOUSE DISTRICT BOUNDARY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4037.png]
   FIGURE 2
   DENTON FLOOR PLANS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3956.png]
   FIGURE 3
   FLOOR PLAN END DENTON OPTION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3958.png]
   FIGURE 4
   HASTINGS FLOOR PLANS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3960.png]
   FIGURE 5
   ELEVATIONS 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3962.png]
   FIGURE 6
   ELEVATIONS 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3964.png]
   FIGURE 7
   ELEVATIONS 3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3966.png]
   FIGURE 8
   COLOR RENDERINGS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3968.png]
   FIGURE 9
   SITE PLAN 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4039.png]
   FIGURE 9
   SITE PLAN 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4041.png]
   FIGURE 10
   LANDSCAPE PLAN PART 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4043.png]
 
   FIGURE 10
   LANDSCAPE PLAN PART 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4045.png]
   FIGURE 10
   LANDSCAPE PLAN PART 3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4047.png]
   FIGURE 10
   LANDSCAPE PLAN PART 4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4049.png]
   FIGURE 11
   SITE FURNISHINGS - PARK AND COMMUNITY FEATURES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4051.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4053.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4055.png]
   FIGURE 11
   SITE FURNISHINGS - DOG PARK
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4057.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4059.png]
   FIGURE 12
   GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLAN PART 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4062.png][Image]
   FIGURE 12
   GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLAN PART 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4064.png]
   FIGURE 13
   FENCE DESIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4066.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4068.png]
   FIGURE 14
   ENTRANCE SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4070.png]
(Ord. 18-12, 4-18-2018)
CHAPTER 13.40
SSD-R-THORNHILL PARK ZONING DISTRICT
SECTION:
13.40.010: Purpose
13.40.020: Applicability
13.40.030: Land Use And Density
13.40.040: Architectural Design
13.40.050: Site Planning
13.40.060: Grading And Drainage
13.40.070: Vehicular Circulation And Parking
13.40.080: Pedestrian Mobility And Circulation
13.40.090: Screen Walls And Fences
13.40.100: Exterior Site Lighting
13.40.110: Other Development Standards
13.40.120: Figures
13.40.010: PURPOSE:
The Site Specific Development-Residential-Thornhill Park District (SSD-R-
Thornhill Park) is established to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare of the community by facilitating the creation of a residential
community that is complementary and compatible with its setting. It is the
purpose of this section to encourage quality design and development of land in
a manner that suits the unique needs of the property and contributes to orderly
traffic circulation and compatibility with surrounding buildings and land uses.
All new development within the SSD-R-Thornhill Park Zoning District shall be in
conformity with this title. Specifically, this zone intends to:
   A.   Enhance and protect the quality of life and community image of the City
of Taylorsville through clearly articulated development design policies and
standards;
   B.   Protect and promote Taylorsville's long-term economic viability through
design standards which encourage and reward high quality development and
discourage less attractive and less enduring alternatives;
   C.   Minimize adverse impacts of vehicular circulation to existing
neighborhoods and to the surrounding physical environment;
   D.   Enhance and protect the security, health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City of Taylorsville; and
   E.   Facilitate an understanding of the City's expectations and notify and
assist developers in compiling complete and efficient applications. (Ord. 19-
01, 3-6-2019)
13.40.020: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions in this chapter shall apply to existing development, new
development, redevelopment, exterior remodels, additions to existing
structures, signs, and accessory structures within the SSD-R-Thornhill Park
Zoning District. This chapter includes minimum development standards and will
be used by City staff and, if applicable, the Planning Commission to review
development applications. The policies established in these provisions shall be
met through actual compliance with each design standard.
   A.   Boundary Description: The SSD-R-Thornhill Park Zoning District is
limited to a specific area in the City as illustrated in section
13.40.120, figure 1, "SSD-R-Thornhill Park Zoning District", of this chapter
which is described as:
Beginning at a point of intersection on the East right of way line of Redwood
Road and the North right of way line of relocated 5770 South Street, said point
being North 792.00 feet and East 53.00 feet and North 49.00 feet from the
center of Section 15, Township 2 South, Range 1 West, Salt Lake Base and
Meridian; said point also being 53 feet perpendicularly distant Easterly from
the center line of Redwood Road at Redwood Road Engineering Station 32 + 65 and
running thence South 44° 42' 47" East along said North line 21.35 feet; thence
South 89° 37' 17" East along said North line 52.11 feet to a point of a curve
to the right, the radius point of which bears South 0° 22' 43" West 540.04
feet; thence Easterly along the arc of said curve and said North line 185.94
feet (long chord bears South 79° 45' 28" East 185.02 feet); thence North 89°
52' 42" East 1021.75 feet; thence North 0° 06' 57" West 521.93 feet; thence
South 89° 53' 12" West 1270.42 feet to the East right of way of Redwood Road;
thence South 0° 03' 47" East along said East line 473.17 feet to the point of
beginning.
Less and excepting that portion lying within Crosspointe Street as dedicated
July 06, 1988 as Entry No. 44646616 in Book 88-7 of Plats at Page 62 of the
official records.
Also excepting therefrom that portion conveyed to City of Taylorsville, a Utah
municipality in Special Warranty Deed (Right-of-Way) recorded September 14,
2005 as Entry No. 9490702 in Book 9188 at Page 3740 described as follows:
Beginning at a point on the southerly radius of the Cross Pointe Street
Dedication as shown on the official plat thereof, said point being East 81.00
feet and South 1,403.56 feet from the North quarter corner of Section 15,
Township 2 South, Range 1 West, Salt Lake Base and Meridian; thence South 41°
44' 37" West 38.24 feet; thence South 00° 12' 06" West 8.71 feet; thence West
6.00 feet; thence South 00° 10' 42" West 31.91 feet; thence South 01° 57' 46"
East 85.37 feet; thence South 14° 27' 11" West 18.77 feet to the West line of
said parcel and the East line of Redwood Road; thence North 00° 11' 40" East
142.56 feet (North 00° 03' 47" West by record) along said line to a point of
curvature on the East line of Redwood Road and the Southerly line of the Cross
Pointe Street Dedication; thence following said Southerly line northeasterly
47.35 feet along the arc of a 30.00 foot radius curve to the right, through a
central angle of 90°26'16", the chord of which bears North 45° 01' 28" East
42.59 feet; thence South 89° 51' 21" East 2.74 feet to the point of beginning.
Contains approximately 13.26 acres
Tax ID No.: 21-15-251-010
   B.   Sub-Area Description: At the time of the adoption of the SSD-R-
Thornhill Park Zoning District the property described above encompasses a two
hundred thirty two (232) unit multi-family residential complex constructed over
approximately 11.47 acres of the 13.26 acre property. In addition, the property
described above encompasses a 1.79 acre vacant area ("sub-area") located at the
eastern most portion of the property as illustrated in section
13.40.120, figure 2, "SSD-R-Thornhill Park Sub-Area", of this chapter. The sub-
area is described as follows:
Beginning at a point on the Southerly line of 5600 South Street as dedicated by
the CROSSPOINTE STREET DEDICATION, recorded July 6, 1988 as Book 88-7 Page 62
in the Office of the Salt Lake County Recorder, located S89°53'30"W along the
Section line 1,506.57 feet and South 1,396.25 feet from the Northeast Corner of
Section 15, T2S, R1W, SLB&M; thence N89°53'12"E along said street 136.32 feet;
thence along the arc of a curve to the right with a radius of 25.00 feet a
distance of 39.32 feet through a central angle of 90°06'48" Chord: S45°03'24"E
35.39 feet to the Westerly line of 1500 West Street as dedicated by said
CROSSPOINTE STREET DEDICATION; thence along said street the following 4 (four)
courses and distances: 1) South 84.80 feet; 2) along the arc of a curve to the
left with a radius of 930.18 feet a distance of 163.51 feet through a central
angle of 10°04'17" Chord: S05°02'09"E 163.30 feet to a point of reverse
curvature; 3) thence along the arc of a curve to the right having a radius of
870.14 feet a distance of 151.19 feet through a central angle of 09°57'20"
Chord: S05°05'37"E 151.00 feet; 4) thence S00°06'57"E 39.00 feet to the
Northeasterly corner of EXCHANGE PLACE OFFICE PARK, according to the Official
Plat thereof recorded January 7, 1998 as Book 98-1P Page 6 in the Office of the
Salt Lake County Recorder; thence S89°53'03"W along said plat 182.43 feet;
thence N00°06'42"W 69.60 feet; thence N00°58'02"W 392.42 feet to the point of
beginning.
Contains: 78,002 square feet or 1.79 acres+/-
The SSD-R-Thornhill Park zoning classification is intended to permit and
facilitate additional multi-family development in the sub-area that is
compatible with the existing development. Development standards stated within
this chapter are applicable to new development within the sub- area. Existing
development at the time of adoption of this chapter, including, but not
necessarily limited to, building design, parking, circulation, signage, site
layout, fencing, and landscaping shall not be impacted by these standards.
Except as otherwise specified, all existing development within the SSD-R-
Thornhill Park sub-area shall comply with the development standards of the RM-
12 zoning classification. (Ord. 19-01, 3-6-2019)
13.40.030: LAND USE AND DENSITY:
   A.   Density: Permittable density within the sub-area (see section
13.40.120, figure 2 of this chapter) shall be limited to no more than eighteen
(18) units per acre. Overall density within the SSD-R-Thornhill Park
classification shall be limited to no more than twenty (20) units per acre.
   B.   Uses: Uses permitted under this chapter shall conform to the
development standards provided elsewhere in this Development Code, the
application procedures for development, and any overlay districts as
applicable. Uses permitted as a conditional use shall comply with the
requirements for administrative conditional use permits and/or non-
administrative conditional use permits as applicable.
The approval of any additional land uses beyond those allowed shall require and
be contingent upon the favorable exercise of future legislative discretion by
the City Council following all required public notice and hearings before the
Planning Commission and City Council.
   C.   Table Of Uses: All uses not included in the table below shall be deemed
not permitted.
 
P  = Permitted                      NC = Nonadministrative conditional use
AC = Administrative conditional use N  = Not permitted
 
Land Use SSD-R Thornhill
         Park District
Accessory apartments                               N
Accessory structure                                AC
Animals (household pets)                           P
Backyard chickens                                  N
Bed and breakfast                                  N
Dwelling, multiple-unit                            P
Home occupation                                    P
Planned unit development                           P
Private park or open space                         P
Residential facility for elderly persons           P
Residential facility for persons with a disability P
Residential lease, short term                      NC
 
(Ord. 19-01, 3-6-2019)
13.40.040: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Architectural design seeks to add to community
character while providing flexibility to avoid rigid uniformity of design. All
elements including the scale and mass of buildings, materials, color, roof
styles, door and window openings, and details should be responsive to
functional architectural design and promote a cohesive design statement.
Building masses shall respond to "human scale" with materials and details that
are proportionate to human height and provide visual interest at the street and
sidewalk level. Buildings shall be reduced in apparent mass or articulated to
avoid large monolithic, box-like shapes.
   B.   Consistency: Architectural design for all new structures constructed in
the sub-area, including building massing, roof forms, color, materials,
orientation, and fenestration shall be consistent with existing buildings as
illustrated in section
13.40.120, figures 3A and 3B of this chapter.
   C.   Maximum Building Height: Thirty feet (30').
   D.   Mechanical Units: Roof-mounted mechanical units (including evaporative
coolers, HVAC units, vents, etc.) shall be located or screened so they are not
visible from adjacent public and/or private streets as well as from adjacent
properties.
   E.   Solar: Buildings may be designed and sited to maximize the use of solar
gain for energy savings, and shall respect the solar access requirements of
adjacent (existing and proposed) buildings. Solar equipment is permitted
subject to the standards set forth in section
13.11.200 of this title. (Ord. 19-01, 3-6-2019)
13.40.050: SITE PLANNING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Buildings shall be located to maximize the
presentation of streetscaping, to provide clear orientation and access for both
vehicles and pedestrians, to facilitate internal pedestrian circulation, and to
place structures in consideration of the existing built context, the location
of adjoining uses, and the location of roads.
   B.   Locations: All building locations, building orientation, roadways,
driveways, pedestrian ways, park spaces, landscape areas, vehicular parking
areas, dumpster locations, and sign locations, shall be consistent with section
 13.40.120, figure 4, "SSD-R-Thornhill Park Site Plan", of this chapter.
   C.   Stormwater: Stormwater detention/retention areas shall be landscaped.
   D.   Landscape Design:
      1.   Purpose And Intent: Landscaping shall be required within the subject
site to:
         a.   Enhance the aesthetics of the development;
         b.   Create a pedestrian-friendly environment;
         c.   Break up the mass of buildings;
         d.   Soften architectural materials;
         e.   Provide screening for utilities and service areas;
         f.   Enhance streetscapes;
         g.   Provide shade and climate control;
         h.   Create attractive entrances to the project; and
         i.   Provide buffers between incompatible land uses or site areas.
All landscaping within the SSD-R-Thornhill Park sub-area shall be consistent
with section
13.40.120, figure 5, "SSD-R-Thornhill Park Landscape Plan", of this chapter.
      2.   Sight Lines: Adequate sight lines shall be maintained for an
effective thirty foot (30') sight triangle formed by the intersection of
straight lines extended from the back of the curb (or future curb) and a line
connecting them at points thirty feet (30') from the intersection of the curb
line, except a reasonable number of trees pruned to permit unobstructed views
to automobile drivers. Plants, fences and signage are allowed within the sight
triangle if:
         a.   Plants do not exceed thirty six inches (36") in height at full
maturity; and
         b.   Signs and fences do not exceed thirty six inches (36") in height
(measured from top of curb height) unless they are eighty percent (80%) or more
open.
      3.   Landscape Irrigation/Water Conservation: Reasonable effort shall be
made to conserve water by utilizing alternative means for maintaining a
suitable landscape environment. Low water use and water conservation concepts
may be incorporated into the landscape design of each development without
compromising the intent to establish significant visual amenities through
landscaping.
      4.   Landscape Standards:
         a.   Plans: Any landscape plans shall be prepared by a licensed
professional;
         b.   Installation: The installation of any landscaping shall be done
by a licensed landscape contractor;
         c.   Artificial Plants: Artificial plants of any type, size or color
are prohibited as exterior landscaping within any lot;
         d.   Mulching:
            (1)   All planting beds shall be mulched with either wood,
decorative rock, or other ground cover to stabilize soils, control erosion, and
conserve water use; and
            (2)   Rock mulch shall be restricted to less than three inches (3")
in size.
         e.   Parking: Parking is prohibited within landscaped areas on a site.
      5.   Plant Size Standards: An immediate landscape impact is deemed
desirable within the development by incorporating minimum plant- size
standards. The following height and caliper standards shall be required:
 
Deciduous shade/canopy trees 2.0" caliper
Ornamental trees             2.0" caliper
Evergreen trees              6' - 8' height
Multi-stem ornamentals       6' - 8' height
Shrubs                       50% shall be 5 gallon container
Ornamental grasses           50% shall be 1 gallon container
Vines                        1 gallon container
Ground cover/perennials      21/4" pots
 
      6.   Landscape Maintenance And Replacement: The developer, or management
association upon completion of the project, shall be responsible for providing,
protecting and maintaining landscaping in a healthy and growing condition. The
following requirement shall be noted on the landscape plan:
         a.   Dead or diseased plant materials shall be removed and replaced
within a reasonable time or within one month with the same type, size and
quantity of plant material as originally installed unless incompatible with the
soil or weather conditions.
      7.   Site Furniture And Features: Site furnishings, including, but not
necessarily limited to, benches, waste receptacles, exterior lighting,
planters, railings and bollards, shall be visually consistent throughout the
SSD-R-Thornhill Park zoning classification including color, materials, and
design style. All components of outdoor site furniture shall be low
maintenance, highly durable and resistant to weather, vandalism, graffiti, and
theft.
   E.   Utilities And Mechanical Equipment: The visual and noise impacts of
utilities and mechanical equipment shall be mitigated in the following manner
and shall apply to all public and private rights-of-way and pedestrian areas
within the development:
      1.   All new permanent utility lines shall be installed underground;
      2.   Abandoned utility boxes, meters and pedestals shall be removed;
      3.   Damaged utility boxes, meters, and pedestals shall be repaired;
      4.   Utility box and pedestals shall be placed such that they do not
block pedestrian travel or required visibility triangles at street
intersections and driveways;
      5.   Utility boxes, pedestals, and meter panels shall be painted to blend
in with its immediate surroundings. All utility boxes and meter panels on walls
shall be painted to match the building walls (subject to utility company
approvals); and
      6.   All utility boxes and pedestals shall be screened from view by means
of vegetation or enclosures to minimize visual and auditory impacts. Such
enclosures or landscaping treatments shall be consistent with the design theme
of the development.
   F.   Service, Refuse, And Storage Areas: Service, delivery, refuse and
storage areas shall not be visually obtrusive. The visual impact of such areas
shall be minimized; especially views of such areas from roadways, pedestrian
walkways, adjacent properties and dwelling units. Refuse collection areas shall
be designed and located consistent with section
13.40.120, figure 4, "SSD-R-Thornhill Park Site Plan", of this chapter. (Ord.
19-01, 3-6-2019)
13.40.060: GRADING AND DRAINAGE:
   A.   Water Quality Control And Drainage: The project shall implement
appropriate measures to mitigate negative impacts on the storm sewer system and
adjacent waterways and properties. Stormwater retention is encouraged on site
when possible. Water quality control and drainage proposals shall be approved
by the City Engineer.
   B.   Site Grading And Excavation: Buildings shall be designed to relate to
adjacent grade conditions. Site grading designs shall allow for easy pedestrian
access from sidewalks, pathways, trails, and parking areas.
   C.   Modifications And Improvements: Grading and drainage modifications and
improvements shall be approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 19-01, 3-6-2019)
13.40.070: VEHICULAR CIRCULATION AND PARKING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The on-site vehicular circulation and parking
system is deemed a critical factor in the safety and success of any
development. The parking/access/circulation systems provide for the safe,
efficient, convenient, and functional movement of multiple modes of
transportation both on and off the site where pedestrian/bicycle/vehicle
conflicts are minimized.
   B.   Vehicular Access: Roadway location and widths shall be consistent with
section
13.40.120, figure 4, "SSD-R-Thornhill Park Site Plan", of this chapter.
   C.   Service/Delivery And Emergency Access: Service circulation within the
development shall be designed to provide safe movements for all anticipated
vehicles. The design of individual lots to accommodate truck access shall meet
all regulatory requirements for turning radii without sacrificing other
standards.
      1.   Access roads and parking aisles shall include the necessary
dimensions for the on-site maneuvering of refuse vehicles and firetrucks as
determined by the City Engineer and applicable fire authority; a minimum twenty
foot (20') wide, unobstructed driveway, lane, or other access way and
turnaround may be required for this purpose.
   D.    Vehicle Parking: Vehicle parking shall be provided as illustrated in
section
13.40.120, figure 4, "SSD-R-Thornhill Park Site Plan", of this chapter:
      1.   Forty (40) new parking stalls with direct access to a parking aisle
shall be constructed in the sub-area.
      2.   A minimum of two (2) parking stalls with direct access to a parking
aisle shall be dedicated to each new dwelling unit. Seventy five percent (75%)
of the dedicated stalls shall be covered.
      3.   The overall apartment complex will provide parking at a rate of two
(2) parking stalls per 2-bedroom unit; 1.5 parking stalls per 1-bedroom unit;
and 0.25 parking stalls per unit for guest parking.
      4.   Minimum parking dimensions shall be 9' x 18'.
      5.   An appropriate number of handicap spaces shall be provided on the
building site as provided in section
13.24.070 of this title.
      6.   All parking or roadway areas shall be paved with a solid surface and
shall be arranged and striped to provide orderly and safe loading, unloading,
and parking of vehicles.
      7.   Parking lot and road striping shall be maintained on a regular basis
so that striping is visible for the safe ingress/egress and parking of
vehicles. (Ord. 19-01, 3-6-2019)
13.40.080: PEDESTRIAN MOBILITY AND CIRCULATION:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Pedestrian systems shall be designed to be safe and
to encourage walking throughout the project. Individual lots shall be
integrated with adjacent properties designed to form a comprehensive system and
to provide convenient access to public right-of-ways. Pedestrian spaces and
routes shall be designed to invite walking throughout the development. Routes
shall be integrated to form a comprehensive circulation system, providing
convenient, safe and visually attractive access to all destinations on the
site. (Ord. 19-01, 3-6-2019)
13.40.090: SCREEN WALLS AND FENCES:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: All fences and walls shall be decorative and
contribute to the visual quality of the development, used to screen service
areas, loading areas, and outdoor storage areas. When not required for
security, screening, or grade transitions, fences and walls shall be as
inconspicuous and low as possible.
   B.   Perimeter Fence Design And Materials: All perimeter fences within the
SSD-R-Thornhill Park sub-area shall be constructed of high quality materials
and be consistent with section
13.40.120, figure 6, "SSD-R-Thornhill Park Fence Design", of this chapter.
   C.   Screening Requirements: The development shall include screening of
service areas, refuse and waste removal areas.
      1.   Uses being screened shall not be visible above the screen wall
enclosure as viewed from the public right(s)-of-way and shall be constructed of
masonry materials similar to the primary structures;
      2.   Gates and/or access doors shall have self-latching mechanisms and
shall be opaque metal or another low maintenance material which is durable.
Chain link gates with or without slats are not permitted; and
      3.   Screening shall block views to these areas from both on site as well
as from public rights-of-way, pedestrian walkways, pedestrian bikeways and
adjacent properties. (Ord. 19-01, 3-6-2019)
13.40.100: EXTERIOR SITE LIGHTING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Exterior lighting shall be used to provide
illumination for the security and safety of entry drives, parking, pathways,
and park space, without intruding on adjacent properties. Site lighting shall
be architecturally compatible and consistent in design throughout the SSD-R-
Thornhill Park Zoning District.
   B.   Fixture Design: Exterior light fixtures shall be compatible and relate
to the architectural character of the buildings on a site. Site lighting shall
be provided at the minimum level to accommodate safe pedestrian and vehicle
movements, without causing any off-site glare.
      1.   The maximum height of poles within landscaped and park areas is
twenty feet (20'), measured from finished grade. Poles within these areas may
be set on bases no more than eight inches (8") in height.
   C.   Decorative Architectural Lighting: Special lighting that accents
building features and creates visual interest is permitted, provided that
design continuity is maintained among buildings.
      1.   Neon tubing is not acceptable as a building accent or to accentuate
the building's form.
      2.   Lighting fixtures mounted directly on structures may be allowed when
utilized to enhance specific architectural elements or to help establish scale
or provide visual interest.
      3.   "Wall pack lights" are not permitted.
      4.   Using lighting to highlight entrances, art, terraces, and special
landscape features is highly recommended.
   D.   Pedestrian Area Lighting: Walkway lighting shall be scaled to the
pedestrian to provide for safe use of pathways and pedestrian areas. Any walks,
stairs, or ramps shall be lighted for the safe passage of pedestrians. The use
of lighted bollards or other low level fixtures is strongly encouraged to
identify pedestrian walkways.
   E.   Landscape Lighting: Landscape lighting which enhances and complements
the landscape materials is permitted. Where landscape lighting is used,
fixtures shall be concealed where possible (i.e., in trees, behind rocks or
shrubs) to control glare.
   F.   Site Security Lighting: Security lighting may be necessary in some
areas, but it may not negatively impact the site and building architecture or
adjacent parcels. No light source (bulb) shall be directly visible from
adjacent parcels. (Ord. 19-01, 3-6-2019)
13.40.110: OTHER DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Unless otherwise specified within the SSD-R-Thornhill Park District, all
current development standards shall apply. (Ord. 19-01, 3-6-2019)
13.40.120: FIGURES:
   FIGURE 1
   SSD-R-THORNHILL PARK ZONING DISTRICT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4002.png]
   FIGURE 2
   SSD-R-THORNHILL PARK SUB-AREA
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4004.png]
   FIGURE 3A
   SSD-R-THORNHILL PARK ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4006.png]
   FIGURE 3B
   SSD-R-THORNHILL PARK ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4008.png]
   FIGURE 4
   SSD-R-THORNHILL PARK SITE PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4010.png]
   FIGURE 5
   SSD-R-THORNHILL PARK LANDSCAPE PLAN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4012.png]
   FIGURE 6
   SSD-R-THORNHILL PARK FENCE DESIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e8457c2bb22ca455508566321220c1d9a2854f92/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4014.png]
(Ord. 19-01, 3-6-2019)
CHAPTER 13.41
SSD-IN-TEMPLE ZONING DISTRICT
13.41.010: Purpose
13.41.020: Applicability
13.41.030: Land Use And Density
13.41.040: Architectural Design
13.41.050: Site Planning
13.41.060: Grading And Drainage
13.41.070: Vehicular Circulation And Parking
13.41.080: Pedestrian Mobility And Circulation
13.41.090: Screen Walls And Fences
13.41.100: Sign Design
13.41.110: Exterior Site Lighting
13.41.120: Other Development Standards
13.41.130: Figures
13.41.010: PURPOSE:
The Site Specific Development-Institutional-Temple Zoning District (SSD-IN-
Temple Zoning District) is established to promote the public health, safety,
and welfare of the community by facilitating the creation of an institutional
location that is complementary and compatible with it's setting. It is the
purpose of this section to encourage quality design and development of land in
a manner that suits the unique needs of the property and contributes to orderly
traffic circulation and compatibility with surrounding buildings and land uses.
All new development within the SSD-IN-Temple zoning district shall be in
conformity with this title. Specifically, this zone intends to:
   A.   Enhance and protect the quality of life and community image of the City
of Taylorsville through clearly articulated development design policies and
standards;
   B.   Protect and promote Taylorsville's long-term economic viability through
design standards which encourage and reward high quality development and
discourage less attractive and less enduring alternatives;
   C.   Minimize adverse impacts of vehicular circulation to existing
neighborhoods and to the surrounding physical environment;
   D.   Enhance and protect the security, health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City of Taylorsville; and
   E.   Facilitate an understanding of the City's expectations and notify and
assist developers in compiling complete and efficient applications. (Ord. 20-
10, 2020)
13.41.020: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions in this chapter shall apply to existing development, new
development, redevelopment, exterior remodels, additions to existing
structures, signs, and accessory structures within the SSD-IN-Temple zoning
district. This chapter includes minimum development standards and will be used
by city staff and, if applicable, the Planning Commission to review development
applications. The policies established in these provisions shall be met through
actual compliance with each design standard.
   A.   Area: The SSD-IN-Temple zoning district is limited to a specific area
in the City as illustrated in Figure 1: SSD-IN-Temple District, containing Tax
ID parcels 21-09-205-001; 21-09-205-002; and 21-09-208-011.
   Contains approximately 7.65 acres. (Ord. 20-10, 2020)
13.41.030: LAND USE AND DENSITY:
   A.   Uses permitted under this chapter shall conform to the development
standards provided elsewhere in this development code, the application
procedures for development, and any overlay districts as applicable. Uses
permitted as a conditional use shall comply with the requirements for
administrative conditional use permits and/or non-administrative conditional
use permits as applicable.
   The approval of any additional land uses beyond those allowed shall require
and be contingent upon the favorable exercise of future legislative discretion
by the City Council following all required public notice and hearings before
the Planning Commission and City Council.
   All uses not included in the table below shall be deemed not permitted.
   B.   Table of Uses:
 
Land Use                       SSD-IN-Temple Zoning District
Religious or cultural activity P
Church                         P
Parking, structure/terrace     P
Parking, underground           P
 
      P        =  Permitted 
      AC     =  Administrative conditional use
      NC     =  Nonadministrative conditional use
      N        =  Not permitted  (Ord. 20-10, 2020)
13.41.040: ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Architectural design seeks to add to community
character while providing flexibility to avoid rigid uniformity of design. All
elements including the scale and mass of buildings, materials, color, roof
styles, door and window openings, and details should be responsive to
functional architectural design and promote a cohesive design statement.
   Building masses shall respond to "human scale" with materials and details
that are proportionate to human height and provide visual interest at the
street and sidewalk level.  Buildings shall be reduced in apparent mass or
articulated to avoid large monolithic, box-like shapes.
   B.   Architectural design for all new structures constructed in the SSD-IN-
Temple zoning district, including building massing, roof forms, and
fenestration shall be consistent with Figure 2: Architectural Massing. Primary
exterior building materials shall be limited to stone, masonry, precast, and/or
glass fiber reinforced concrete (GFRC). Predominate exterior colors shall be
limited to whites, off-whites, tans, grays, and earth tone reds.
   All four (4) primary facades of the structure shall receive equal
architectural consideration in terms of design, color, materials, massing, roof
forms, and fenestration.
   C.   Maximum Building Height:
      1.   Occupied space: Seventy five feet (75').
      2.   Overall height: Two hundred twenty feet (220').
   D.   Roof-mounted mechanical units (including HVAC units, vents, etc.) shall
be located or screened so they are not visible from adjacent public and/or
private streets as well as from adjacent properties.
   E.   Buildings may be designed and sited to maximize the use of solar gain
for energy savings and shall respect the solar access requirements of adjacent
(existing and proposed) buildings. Solar equipment is permitted subject to the
standards set forth in 13.11.210 of the City Code. (Ord. 20-10, 2020)
13.41.050: SITE PLANNING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Buildings shall be located and oriented to maximize
the presentation of the structure to adjacent streets and other public ways, to
provide clear orientation and access for both vehicles and pedestrians, to
facilitate internal pedestrian circulation, and to place structures in
consideration of the existing built context, the location of adjoining uses,
and the location of roads.
   B.   All building locations, building orientation, roadways, driveways,
pedestrian ways, park spaces, landscape areas, vehicular parking areas,
dumpster locations, and sign locations, shall be consistent with Figure 3: Site
Plan.
   C.   Surface storm water detention/retention areas shall be landscaped.
   D.   Landscape Design:
      1.   Purpose And Intent: Landscaping shall be required within the subject
site to:
         a.   Enhance the aesthetics of the development;
         b.   Create a pedestrian-friendly environment;
         c.   Break up the mass of buildings and parking lots;
         d.   Soften architectural materials;
         e.   Provide screening for utilities and service areas;
         f.   Enhance streetscapes;
         g.   Provide shade and climate control;
         h.   Create attractive entrances to the project; and
         i.   Provide buffers between incompatible uses or areas.
      All landscaping within the SSD-IN-Temple zoning classification shall be
consistent with Figures 4-1 through 4-3 Landscape Plan.
      2.   Adequate vehicle circulation sight lines shall be maintained for an
effective thirty (30) foot sight triangle formed by the intersection of
straight lines extended from the back of the curb (or future curb) and a line
connecting them at points thirty feet (30') from the intersection of the curb
line, except a reasonable number of trees pruned to permit unobstructed views
to automobile drivers. Plants, fences and signage are allowed within the sight
triangle if:
         a.   Plants do not exceed thirty-six inches (36") in height at full
maturity; and
         b.   Signs and fences do not exceed thirty-six inches (36") in height
(measured from top of curb height) unless they are eighty percent (80%) or more
open.
      3.   Landscape Irrigation/Water Conservation: Reasonable effort shall be
made to conserve water by utilizing alternative means for maintaining a
suitable landscape environment. Low water use and water conservation concepts
may be incorporated into the landscape design of each development without
compromising the intent to establish significant visual amenities through
landscaping.
      4.   Landscape Standards:
         a.   All landscape plans shall be prepared by a licensed professional;
         b.   The installation of any landscaping shall be done by a licensed
landscape contractor;
         c.   Artificial plants of any type, size or color are prohibited as
exterior landscaping.
         d.   Mulching:
         (1)   All planting beds shall be mulched with either wood, decorative
rock, or other ground cover to stabilize soils, control erosion, and conserve
water use; and
         (2)   Rock mulch shall be restricted to less than two inches (2") in
size.
         e.   Parking is prohibited on landscaped areas on the site.
      5.   Plant Size Standards: An immediate landscape impact is deemed
desirable within the development by incorporating minimum plant-size standards.
The following minimum standards shall be required:
         a.   Deciduous Shade/Canopy Trees: Two inch (2.0") caliper;
         b.   Ornamental Trees: Two inch (2.0") caliper;
         c.   Evergreen Trees: Six foot (6') height;
         d.   Multi-Stem Ornamentals: Four foot (4') height;
         e.   Shrubs: One (1) gallon container;
         f.   Ornamental Grasses: One (1) gallon container;
         g.   Perennials And Vines: Six inch (6") pot; and
         h.   Ground Cover/Annuals: Two and one-fourth inch  (2 ¼") pots.
      6.   Landscape Maintenance And Replacement: The developer, owner, or
management association upon completion of the project, shall be responsible for
providing, protecting and maintaining landscaping in a healthy and growing
condition. The following requirement shall be noted on the landscape plan:
         a.   Dead or diseased plant materials shall be removed and replaced
within a reasonable time or within one (1) month with the same type, size and
quantity of plant material as originally installed unless incompatible with the
soil or weather conditions.
      7.   Site Furniture And Features: Site furnishings, including, but not
necessarily limited to, benches, waste receptacles, exterior lighting,
planters, railings and bollards, shall be visually consistent throughout the
SSD-IN-Temple zoning classification including color, materials, and design
style. All components of outdoor site furniture shall be low maintenance,
highly durable and resistant to weather, vandalism, graffiti, and theft.
   F.   Utilities And Mechanical Equipment: The visual and noise impacts of
utilities and mechanical equipment shall be mitigated in the following manner
and shall apply to all public and private rights-of-way and pedestrian areas
within the development:
      1.   All new permanent utility lines shall be installed underground;
      2.   Abandoned utility boxes, meters and pedestals shall be removed;
      3.   Damaged utility boxes, meters, and pedestals shall be repaired;
      4.   Utility box and pedestals shall be placed such that they do not
block pedestrian travel or required visibility triangles at street
intersections and driveways;
      5.   Utility boxes, pedestals, and meter panels shall be painted to blend
in with its immediate surroundings. All utility boxes and meter panels on walls
shall be painted to match the building walls (subject to utility company
approvals); and
      6.   All utility boxes and pedestals shall be screened from view by means
of vegetation or enclosures to minimize visual and auditory impacts. Such
enclosures or landscaping treatments shall be consistent with the design theme
of the development.
   G.   Service, Refuse, And Storage Areas: Service, delivery, refuse and
storage areas shall not be visually obtrusive. The visual impact of such areas
shall be minimized; especially views of such areas from roadways, pedestrian
walkways, adjacent properties and dwelling units. Refuse collection areas shall
be located consistent with Figure 3: Site Plan. (Ord. 20-10, 2020)
13.41.060: GRADING AND DRAINAGE:
   A.   Water Quality Control And Drainage: The project shall implement
appropriate measures to mitigate negative impacts on the storm sewer system and
adjacent waterways and properties. Water quality control and drainage proposals
shall be approved by the City Engineer.
   B.   Site Grading And Excavation: Buildings shall be designed to relate to
adjacent grade conditions. Site grading designs shall allow for easy pedestrian
access from sidewalks, pathways, trails, and parking areas.
   C.   Grading and drainage modifications and improvements shall conform to
Title 17 of the Taylorsville Municipal Code, the City's Storm Water Management
Plan and the City's UPDES storm water permit issued by the Utah Division of
Water Quality.
   D.   Grading and drainage improvements shall be consistent with Figure 5:
Grading and Drainage. (Ord. 20-10, 2020)
13.41.070: VEHICULAR CIRCULATION AND PARKING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The on-site vehicular circulation and parking
system is deemed a critical factor in the safety and operation of the proposed
development. The parking/access/circulation systems provide for the safe,
efficient, convenient, and functional movement of multiple modes of
transportation both on and off the site where pedestrian/bicycle/vehicle
conflicts are minimized.
   B.   Vehicular Access: Roadway location and widths shall be consistent with
Figures 6-1 and 6-2: Vehicular Circulation and Parking.
   C.   Service/Delivery And Emergency Access: Service circulation within the
development shall be designed to provide safe movements for all anticipated
vehicles. The design of areas to accommodate truck access shall meet all
regulatory requirements for turning radii without sacrificing other standards.
      1.   Access roads and parking aisles shall include the necessary
dimensions for the on-site maneuvering of refuse vehicles and firetrucks as
determined by the city engineer and applicable fire authority; a minimum twenty
foot (20') wide, unobstructed driveway, lane, or other access way and
turnaround may be required for this purpose;
   D.   Vehicle parking shall be provided as illustrated in Figures 6-1 and 6-
2: Vehicular Circulation and Parking.
      1.   Total parking stalls: Four hundred seventy-two (472) with two
hundred twenty-eight (228) at grade and two hundred forty-four (244)
underground.
      2.   Minimum parking dimensions shall be nine feet (9') x eighteen feet
(18').
      3.   An appropriate number of handicap spaces shall be provided on the
building site as provided in 13.24.070 of the Taylorsville City Code. 
      4.   All parking or roadway areas shall be paved with a solid surface and
shall be arranged and striped to provide orderly and safe loading, unloading,
and parking of vehicles.
      5.   Parking lot and road striping shall be maintained on a regular basis
so that striping is visible for the safe ingress/egress and parking of
vehicles.
      6.   A minimum of ten (10) bicycle parking spaces shall be provided in a
convenient, highly visible, active, and well lighted area that does not
interfere with pedestrian movement. Bicycle parking should be located as near
the principal entrance of the building as practical.
      7.   All parking areas shall be landscaped as illustrated in Figures 4-
1 through 4-3: Landscape Plan. (Ord. 20-10, 2020)
13.41.080: PEDESTRIAN MOBILITY AND CIRCULATION:
Purpose And Intent: Pedestrian systems shall be designed to be safe and to
encourage walking throughout the project. Individual lots shall be integrated
with adjacent properties designed to form a comprehensive system and to provide
convenient access to public right of ways. Pedestrian spaces and routes shall
be designed to invite walking throughout the development. Routes shall be
integrated to form a comprehensive circulation system, providing convenient,
safe and visually attractive access to all destinations on the site. Pedestrian
circulation shall be consistent with Figure 7: Pedestrian Mobility and
Circulation. (Ord. 20-10, 2020)
13.41.090: SCREEN WALLS AND FENCES:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: All fences and walls shall be decorative and
contribute to the visual quality of the development, used to screen service
areas, loading areas, and outdoor storage areas. When not required for
security, screening, or grade transitions, fences and walls shall be as
inconspicuous and low as possible.
   B.   Perimeter Fence Design And Materials: All perimeter fences within the
SSD-IN-Temple zoning classification shall be constructed of high quality
materials and be consistent with Figures 8-1 through 8-3 Fence Design.
   C.   Screening Requirements: The development shall include screening of
service, refuse and waste removal areas.
      1.   Uses being screened shall not be visible above the screen wall
enclosure as viewed from the public right(s) of way and shall be constructed of
masonry materials similar to the main structure;
      2.   Gates and/or access doors shall have self-latching mechanisms and
shall be opaque metal or another low maintenance material which is durable.
Chain link gates with or without slats are not permitted; and
      3.   Screening shall block views to these areas from both on site as well
as from public rights of way, pedestrian walkways, pedestrian bikeways and
adjacent properties. (Ord. 20-10, 2020)
13.41.100: SIGN DESIGN:
A landscaped monument sign shall be permitted consistent with Figure 9:
Entrance Sign. (Ord. 20-10, 2020)
13.41.110: EXTERIOR SITE LIGHTING:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: Exterior lighting shall be used to provide
illumination for the security and safety of entry drives, parking, pathways,
and open space, without intruding on adjacent properties. Site lighting shall
be architecturally compatible and consistent in design throughout the SSD-IN-
Temple zoning district.
   B.   Fixture Design: Exterior light fixtures shall be compatible and relate
to the architectural character of the buildings on a site. Site lighting shall
be provided at the minimum level to accommodate safe pedestrian and vehicle
movements, without causing any off-site glare.
      1.   The maximum height of poles within landscaped and park areas is
twenty feet (20'), measured from finished grade. Poles within these areas may
be set on bases no more than eight inches (8") in height.
   C.   Decorative Architectural Lighting: Special lighting that accents
building features and creates visual interest is permitted, provided that
design continuity is maintained throughout the project.
      1.   Neon tubing is not acceptable as a building accent or to accentuate
the building's form.
      2.   Lighting fixtures mounted directly on structures may be allowed when
utilized to enhance specific architectural elements or to help establish scale
or provide visual interest.
      3.   "Wall pack lights" are not permitted.
      4.   Using lighting to highlight entrances, art, terraces, and special
landscape features is highly recommended.
   D.   Pedestrian Area Lighting: Walkway lighting shall be scaled to the
pedestrian to provide for safe use of pathways and pedestrian areas. Any walks,
stairs, or ramps shall be lighted for the safe passage of pedestrians. The use
of lighted bollards or other low-level fixtures is strongly encouraged to
identify pedestrian walkways.
   E.   Landscape Lighting: Landscape lighting which enhances and complements
the landscape materials is permitted. Where landscape lighting is used,
fixtures shall be concealed where possible (i.e. in trees, behind rocks or
shrubs) to control glare.
   F.   Site Security Lighting: Security lighting may be necessary in some
areas, but it may not negatively impact the site, building architecture or
adjacent parcels. No light source (bulb) shall be directly visible from
adjacent parcels.
   G.   Site lighting shall be consistent with Figure 9: Lighting. (Ord. 20-10,
2020)
13.41.120: OTHER DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Unless otherwise specified within the SSD-IN-Temple District, all current
development standards shall apply. (Ord. 20-10, 2020)
13.41.130: FIGURES:
Figures are attached to Ord. 20-10, passed 2020. (Ord. 20-10, 2020)
TITLE 14
HIGHWAYS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Definitions   14.04
City Council And Community Development Department   14.08
Standards For Roadway Development   14.12
Excavations   14.16
Encroachments And Obstructions   14.20
Poles, Posts And Fences   14.24
Sidewalk Use And Maintenance   14.32
Driveways   14.36
Bridges, Ditches And Waterways   14.40
Shade Trees   14.44
Street Vacations   14.48
Unlawful Activities And Liability For Damages   14.52
Special Events   14.56
Naming Public Places   14.60
CHAPTER 14.04
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
14.04.010: Class C Roads
14.04.020: Construction
14.04.030: City Roads
14.04.040: Curb Line
14.04.050: Department
14.04.060: Fence Line
14.04.070: Highway Authorities
14.04.080: Limited Access Facility
14.04.090: Maintenance
14.04.100: Official Map
14.04.110: Person
14.04.120: Public Highway
14.04.130: Right Of Way
14.04.140: Section
14.04.150: Sidewalk
14.04.010: CLASS C ROADS:
"Class C roads" means the same as "city roads", defined in this chapter. (Ord.
96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.04.020: CONSTRUCTION:
"Construction" means the construction, reconstruction, replacement and
improvement of the public highways, including the acquisition of rights of way
and material sites. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.04.030: CITY ROADS:
"City roads" include all public roads and streets within the city that are not
designated as state highways. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.04.040: CURB LINE:
"Curb line" means a line on either side of the center of a highway ten feet
(10') inside the right of way line and running parallel to the right of way
line. Any individual exceptions to this definition must be approved by the city
council. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.04.050: DEPARTMENT:
"Department" means the city's community development department. (Ord. 96-17, 6-
19-1996)
14.04.060: FENCE LINE:
"Fence line" means a line on either side of the center of a highway coterminous
with the outside boundary or limits of the highway. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.04.070: HIGHWAY AUTHORITIES:
"Highway authorities" means the state road commission or the city council.
(Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.04.080: LIMITED ACCESS FACILITY:
"Limited access facility" means a highway, road or street especially designed
for through traffic and over, from or to which neither owners nor occupants of
abutting lands, nor other persons, have any right to easement, or have only a
limited right or easement of access, light, air or view. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-
1996)
14.04.090: MAINTENANCE:
"Maintenance" means the performance of all things necessary to keep a public
highway in serviceable condition. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.04.100: OFFICIAL MAP:
"Official map" means the official map(s) of the city, as adopted by the city
council in accordance with law, showing the highways, freeways, parks,
parkways, and sites for public buildings or works, including subsurface
facilities, in the acquisition, financing, or construction of which the city
has participated or may be called upon to participate. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.04.110: PERSON:
"Person" includes any individual, firm, company, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation, association, other entity, or any group or combination,
and the plural as well as the singular, unless the intent to give a more
limited meaning is disclosed by the context. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.04.120: PUBLIC HIGHWAY:
"Public highway" or "highway" means any road, street, lane, court, place,
viaduct, tunnel, culvert, bridge, alley, or other public way situated within
this city laid out or erected as such by the public, or dedicated, abandoned or
open to the public, or made such in any action for the partition of real
property, or such other public property so designated by any ordinance or
statute, and includes the entire area within the right of way. (Ord. 96-17, 6-
19-1996)
14.04.130: RIGHT OF WAY:
"Right of way" means land, property or an interest therein, usually in a strip,
acquired for or devoted to use as a public highway. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.04.140: SECTION:
"Section" means a section of this title unless some other section is
specifically mentioned. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.04.150: SIDEWALK:
"Sidewalk" means that area between the curb line and the fence line on either
side of a highway. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
CHAPTER 14.08
CITY COUNCIL AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
14.08.010: Jurisdiction And Control
14.08.020: Gifts, Bequests And Donations To City
14.08.030: Contribution Of Property By City
14.08.040: Determination Of Width Of Right Of Way
14.08.050: Preparation And Storage Of Plats And Descriptions
14.08.060: Agreement With Political Subdivisions And Federal Government
14.08.070: Acquisition Of Property And Property Rights For Limited Access
Facilities
14.08.080: Authority To Provide And Maintain Limited Access Facilities
14.08.090: Restricting Use Of Highway
14.08.100: Local Service Roads
14.08.010: JURISDICTION AND CONTROL:
All highways, roads, paths, and ways within the city that are not designated as
federal or state, special highways, roads, paths, or ways shall be under the
direction and authority of the city council. Such roads shall be constructed
and maintained by or under the authority of the city council from funds made
available for that purpose, and the city council shall have the authority to
expend, or by contract cause to be expended, such funds as are allocated to the
city from the state road fund under rules mutually adopted by the city council
and the state road commission. The amount used annually from the state road
fund for this purpose, together with such other amounts from federal, county or
other sources as may be made available, shall constitute the funds to be spent
in constructing and maintaining class "C" roads in the city.
When in the opinion of the city council the funds available for road purposes
from sources other than the levy made against tangible property are adequate to
properly construct and maintain the class "C" roads, the city may cease making
a levy for city road purposes, or, at its option, may use any portion of the
class "C" road funds provided by Utah Code Annotated title 27, for the
construction and maintenance of class "A" state roads by cooperative agreement
with the state road commission. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.08.020: GIFTS, BEQUESTS AND DONATIONS TO CITY:
Gifts, bequests and donations by persons to the city, unless designated for
another purpose, shall become part of the city capital improvement fund and
shall be expended under the direction of the city council. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-
1996)
14.08.030: CONTRIBUTION OF PROPERTY BY CITY:
The city is authorized to contribute real or personal property to the state
road commission for state or federal highway purposes. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.08.040: DETERMINATION OF WIDTH OF RIGHT OF WAY:
The department may, subject to approval by the city council, determine the
permissible width of rights of way for public highways in the city. (Ord. 96-
17, 6-19-1996)
14.08.050: PREPARATION AND STORAGE OF PLATS AND DESCRIPTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the department to provide for the preparation and
storage of current plats and descriptions of all city roads and of such other
highways as the city council may from time to time locate upon public lands
within the city. The plats and descriptions shall be kept on file with the
department. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.08.060: AGREEMENT WITH POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS AND FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
The city council is authorized to enter into agreements with other governmental
entities with respect to the financing, planning, establishment, improvement,
maintenance, use, regulation or vacation of limited access facilities or other
public ways to facilitate the purposes of this section. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.08.070: ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY AND PROPERTY RIGHTS FOR LIMITED ACCESS
FACILITIES:
The city may acquire private or public property or property rights for limited
access facilities and service roads, including rights of access, air, view, and
light, by gift, devise, purchase, or condemnation, in the same manner as it now
or hereafter may be authorized by law to acquire such property or property
rights in connection with highways, roads, and streets within the city. All
property rights so acquired may be in fee simple or in any lesser estate or
interest. In connection with the acquisition of property or property rights for
any limited access facility or portion thereof or service road in connection
therewith, the city may, in its discretion, acquire an entire lot, block or
tract of land if, by so doing, the interests of the public will be best served,
even though said entire lot, block, or tract is not immediately needed for the
right of way proper. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.08.080: AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE AND MAINTAIN LIMITED ACCESS FACILITIES:
The highway authorities of the city are authorized to plan, designate,
establish, regulate, vacate, alter, improve, maintain and provide limited
access facilities for public use whenever such authorities are of the opinion
that traffic conditions, present or future, will justify such special
facilities. The highway authorities of the city may also exercise, relative to
limited access facilities, any and all additional authority now or hereafter
vested in them relative to public highways within their respective
jurisdictions. Such authorities may regulate, restrict or prohibit the use of
such limited access facilities by pedestrians, animals or the various classes
of vehicles or traffic. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.08.090: RESTRICTING USE OF HIGHWAY:
Whenever it is deemed necessary, because of construction, maintenance work, or
emergency, to suspend all or part of the travel on a public highway (or portion
thereof) in the city, the department may, subject to the approval of the city
council, restrict the use of or close such highway or portion thereof. Whenever
such highway or portion thereof is so restricted or closed to travel, the
department shall erect suitable barriers and notices to be posted at the point
where the detour road takes off from such closed or restricted highway, and
such detour road shall be clearly indicated by signs and adequately maintained.
(Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.08.100: LOCAL SERVICE ROADS:
In connection with the development of any limited access facility, the
department may, subject to city council approval, plan, designate, establish,
use, regulate, alter, improve, maintain and vacate local service roads and
streets or designate as local service roads and streets any existing roads or
streets. The department may exercise jurisdiction over service roads in the
same manner as is authorized over limited access facilities. Such local service
roads or streets shall be of appropriate design, and shall be separated from
the limited access facility by means of all devices designated as necessary or
desirable by the proper authority. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
CHAPTER 14.12
STANDARDS FOR ROADWAY DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
14.12.010: Definitions
14.12.020: Roadways To Comply With Standards
14.12.025: Curb Ramps, Ramps And Sidewalks To Comply With Standards
14.12.030: Policies
14.12.040: Clear View Of Intersecting Streets
14.12.050: Landscaping Overhanging Street Pavement
14.12.060: Sidewalks
14.12.065: Curb Ramps
14.12.070: Horizontal Clearance To Obstructions
14.12.080: Cul-De-Sacs
14.12.090: Roadway Design
14.12.100: Minimum Right Of Way And Pavement Design
14.12.110: Driveway Approaches
14.12.120: Intersection Design
14.12.130: Private Roadways
14.12.140: Street Direction And Grade
14.12.150: Exceptions
14.12.010: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
AASHTO GUIDELINES: The engineering and development standards published by
AASHTO in the current edition titled "A Policy On Geometric Design Of Highways
And Streets".
ADA ACCESSIBILITY GUIDELINES (ADAAG): The minimum standards set forth in the
federal register, volume 56, number 144, July 26, 1991, regarding the
accessibility to places of public accommodation and commercial facilities by
persons with disabilities.
ARTERIAL: Generally signalized streets that serve primarily through traffic and
provide access to abutting properties as a secondary function.
CLEAR VIEW: That portion of the corners at intersections where obstructions are
limited to two feet (2') in height in order to preserve a safe sight distance
for motorists entering intersections.
COLLECTOR STREET: Street providing land access and traffic circulation service
within residential, commercial and industrial areas. They enable moderate
quantities of traffic to move efficiently between local streets and the major
street network.
CORNER LOT: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets,
where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed one
hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
CURB RAMPS: A short ramp cutting through a curb or built up to a curb.
DECISION SIGHT DISTANCE: The distance required for a driver to detect an
unexpected or otherwise difficult to perceive information source or hazard in a
roadway environment that may be visually cluttered, recognize the hazard or its
threat potential, select appropriate speed and path, and initiate and complete
the required safety maneuver safely and efficiently.
DEVELOPED PARCEL: Those land uses other than agricultural.
DRIVEWAY: An access constructed within and adjoining a roadway, connecting the
roadway with adjacent property and intended to be used in such a way that the
access into the adjacent property will be complete and will not cause the
blocking of any sidewalk border area or roadway.
LOCAL STREETS: Streets primarily providing access to immediately adjacent
properties. Through movement may be possible, but is not encouraged.
MULTI-FAMILY DRIVEWAY: A driveway providing access to more than four (4)
dwelling units.
PRIVATE ROADWAY: A roadway in private ownership which is controlled and
maintained by the owners and not the city.
PUBLIC ROADWAY: A roadway which has been dedicated, deeded or otherwise
conveyed to public use.
RAMP: A walking surface which has a running slope greater than one to twenty
(1:20).
ROADWAY: The entire width between the boundaries of any highway, street or road
which is used for vehicular traffic. The terms "roadway", "highway", "street"
and "road" are used interchangeably in this chapter.
SIDEWALK: A facility provided for pedestrian movement, usually segregated from
vehicular traffic by a curb or provided on a separate right of way.
SIGHT DISTANCE: The same as stopping sight distance.
STOPPING SIGHT DISTANCE: The minimum sight distance required that will allow
motorists traveling at or near the design speed to stop before reaching a
stationary object in its path. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.020: ROADWAYS TO COMPLY WITH STANDARDS:
All public and private roadway development located within and subject to the
jurisdiction of the city shall meet the requirements of this chapter. Where
specific elements of design and construction are not addressed in this chapter,
roadway design and construction shall comply with the engineering guidelines
for design set forth in the AASHTO publication, "A Policy On Geometric Design
Of Highways And Streets", 1990, and any successor editions. The department or
its designee shall utilize the AASHTO manual in setting safe design
requirements. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.025: CURB RAMPS, RAMPS AND SIDEWALKS TO COMPLY WITH STANDARDS:
All public and private curb ramp, ramp and sidewalk development located within
and subject to the jurisdiction of the city shall meet the requirements of this
chapter. Where specific elements of design and construction are not addressed
in this chapter, curb ramp, ramp and sidewalk construction shall comply with
the minimum guidelines for design set forth in the ADAAG, July 26, 1991, and
any successor editions. The department shall utilize the ADAAG in setting
appropriate design requirements. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.030: POLICIES:
The department may adopt policies for use by developers and others in the
overall layout and design of streets and adjacent developments. The department
will keep and make available to the public copies of the policy. (Ord. 96-17,
6-19-1996)
14.12.040: CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS:
   A.   Corner sight distance for local streets as defined in the AASHTO
guidelines shall be a minimum of three hundred feet (300'). All other locations
shall be provided with sight distance in accordance with AASHTO guidelines.
(Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
   B.   No constructed or planted obstruction to view, in excess of two feet
(2') in height above the level of the adjacent street pavement (measured at the
edge of the pavement) shall be allowed within the clear view of intersecting
streets. Exceptions to this are signs that conform to the applicable land
development code; a reasonable number of trees pruned to ten feet (10'); and
pumps at gasoline service stations. In the event the provisions of this
subsection conflict with the land development code, the most restrictive shall
apply. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   C.   Landscaping material which infringes the clear view of intersecting
streets and creates a safety hazard, after due notice to property owner has
been given, may be trimmed by city employees. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.050: LANDSCAPING OVERHANGING STREET PAVEMENT:
Trees and landscaping which overhang the street pavement shall be trimmed to a
minimum height of thirteen and one-half feet (131/2') above the street
pavement. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.060: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Sidewalks shall be located as far as practical from travel lanes. As
the minimum standard, concrete sidewalks shall be four feet (4') in width with
a five foot (5') utility strip between the roadway edge of sidewalk and back of
curb.
   B.   A five foot (5') sidewalk will be allowed integral with the back of
curb where exceptional topographic conditions exist or where specifically
approved by the city council. Where integral sidewalk is permitted, the right
of way may be reduced accordingly.
   C.   When properties are adjacent, but do not access or front on public
right of way, a stamped brick pavement in the utility strip or other suitable
approved finishing material shall be required to reduce maintenance in these
areas unless an exception is granted by the city council.
   D.   In developments which have a minimum lot area of one acre, aesthetic
alternatives may be approved in lieu of standard concrete, except areas along
collectors and arterials. The department or its designee shall review and
approve all design and geometric standards for such requests.
   E.   Sidewalks shall remain unobstructed from vegetation and other
obstructions to a minimum height of seven feet (7'). (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.065: CURB RAMPS:
   A.   Curb ramps shall be provided wherever an accessible route crosses a
curb.
   B.   The least possible slope shall be used for any curb ramp. Slope shall
be measured by: Slope equals Y:X, where X is a level plane.
   C.   The maximum slope of a curb ramp in new construction shall be one to
twelve (1:12). Curb ramps to be constructed on existing sites or in existing
buildings or facilities may have slopes and rises less than one to twelve (1:
12) as follows:
      1.   A slope between one to ten (1:10) and one to twelve (1:12) is
allowed for a maximum rise of six inches (6");
      2.   A slope between one to eight (1:8) and one to ten (1:10) is allowed
for a maximum rise of three inches (3"); and
      3.   A slope steeper than one to eight (1:8) is not allowed.
   D.   The minimum width of a curb ramp shall be thirty six inches (36"),
exclusive of flared sides.
   E.   Surfaces or curb ramps shall be stable, firm and slip resistant.
   F.   If a curb ramp is located where pedestrians must walk across the ramp,
or where it is not protected by handrails or guardrails, it shall have flared
sides, the maximum slope of the flare shall be one to ten (1:10). Curb ramps
with returned curbs may be used where pedestrians would not normally walk
across the ramp.
   G.   Built up curb ramps shall be located so that they do not project into
vehicular traffic lanes.
   H.   Curb ramps shall be located or protected to prevent their obstruction
by parked vehicles.
   I.   Curb ramps at marked crossings shall be wholly contained within the
markings, excluding any flared sides.
   J.   If diagonal (or corner type) curb ramps have returned curbs or other
well defined edges, such edges shall be parallel to the direction of pedestrian
flow. The bottom of diagonal curb ramps shall have forty eight inches (48")
minimum clear space. If diagonal curb ramps are provided at marked crossings,
the forty eight inch (48") clear space shall be within the markings. If
diagonal curb ramps have flared sides, they shall also have at least a twenty
four inch (24") long segment of straight curb located on each side of the curb
ramp and within the marked crossing.
   K.   Any raised islands in crossings shall be cut through level with the
street or have curb ramps at both sides and a level area at least forty inches
(40") long between the curb ramps in the part of the island intersected by the
crossings. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.070: HORIZONTAL CLEARANCE TO OBSTRUCTIONS:
On all streets a minimum clearance of twenty four inches (24") shall be
provided between the curb face or shoulder edge and obstructions such as
utility poles, fire hydrants, etc., except standard mailboxes approved by the
U.S. postal service. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.080: CUL-DE-SACS:
   A.   Cul-de-sacs and turnarounds shall have a minimum right of way radius of
fifty feet (50') in residential areas and sixty feet (60') in commercial and
industrial areas. A circular left hand offset is desirable.
   B.   Hammerhead, "L", "Y" and "T" turnarounds shall only be allowed when
approved by the city's planning commission upon written recommendation and
design review of the department.
   C.   A temporary turnaround for stub streets in excess of one hundred fifty
feet (150') long shall be provided where the extension of a street is planned
and anticipated.
   D.   The length of a cul-de-sac shall vary inversely with density to
accommodate a maximum of twenty five (25) lots and shall not be longer than one
thousand feet (1,000'). (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.090: ROADWAY DESIGN:
   A.   All vertical grades shall be a maximum of ten percent (10%).
   B.   A minimum vertical grade of four-tenths of one percent and a minimum
crown slope of two percent (2%) shall be provided for adequate drainage of
runoff.
   C.   All approach legs of intersections shall provide vertical crest grades
not to exceed two percent (2%) for a distance of at least fifty feet (50') from
right of way line of intersecting streets.
   D.   The length of crest and sag vertical curbs shall be designed in
accordance with AASHTO guidelines.
   E.   Vertical and horizontal curves shall be designed to provide a minimum
stopping sight distance in accordance with AASHTO guidelines using the design
speeds listed below. Decision sight distances, however, may be required as
outlined in AASHTO's guidelines where more complex driver information error is
likely to occur.
   F.   All roadways shall be designed in accordance with the following design
speeds using AASHTO's guidelines, principles, and practices:
      1.   Local: Twenty five (25) mph;
      2.   Collector: Forty (40) mph;
      3.   Arterial: Fifty (50) mph.
   G.   Super elevation rates above 0.06 ft./ft. shall be prohibited to
minimize slipping across a roadway when stopped or attempting to slowly gain
momentum from a stopped position. Super elevation will not be allowed on local
residential streets.
   H.   Where a centerline deflection angle of more than ten degrees (10°)
occurs, a circular curve shall be introduced. There shall be a tangent of at
least fifty feet (50') on local streets and one hundred feet (100') for
collectors and arterials between reverse curves. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.100: MINIMUM RIGHT OF WAY AND PAVEMENT DESIGN:
   A.   The minimum pavement width and pavement design standards shall be
provided as follows:
 
          Right Of Pavement  Minimum
          Way      Width     Design
          Width              Section
                             8 inch
Local     42 feet  25 feet   base 3 inch
                             asphalt
                             8 inch
Local     50 feet  25 feet   base 3 inch
                             asphalt
                             8 inch
Collector 60 feet  35 feet   base 3 inch
                             asphalt
                             8 inch
Collector 66 feet  41 feet   base 3 inch
                             asphalt
                             10 inch
Collector 80 feet  55 feet   base 4 inch
                             asphalt
                              
Arterial  106 feet 55 feet - 12 inch
                   81 feet   base 6 inch
                             asphalt
 
   B.   All roadway sections shall be designed in accordance with specific
geotechnical specifications acceptable to the city. Such geotechnical
specifications shall be paid for by the applicant. The city shall require
analysis and additional design requirements when unusual site or traffic
conditions exist. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.110: DRIVEWAY APPROACHES:
   A.   Requirements for commercial, industrial, manufacturing, and multiple-
family uses requiring motor vehicle access shall meet the requirements as
hereinafter provided:
      1.   Access shall not be by more than one driveway approach for each one
hundred feet (100') of frontage on any street. The planning commission, or
staff where specifically delegated, may modify this requirement when
considering a particular site plan in those cases where the commission or staff
determines that the safety and convenience of the general public would be
better served by more or less driveway approaches.
      2.   Wherever possible, adjacent sites should share driveway approaches.
      3.   Additional driveway approaches may be warranted by the following
table 3-A for on center spacing of driveway approaches:
   TABLE 3-A
   RECOMMENDED DRIVEWAY
   APPROACH SPACING
 
Median Barrier Principal Arterial Arterial Collector
No             250 feet           200 feet 175 feet
Yes            185 feet           115 feet 85 feet
 
      4.   No two (2) of said driveway approaches shall be closer to each other
than fifty feet (50').
      5.   No driveway approach shall be closer than one hundred feet (100') to
the point of intersection of the two (2) property lines at any corner. If there
is not one hundred feet (100') of frontage then the driveway approach will be
placed five feet (5') from the property line furthest from the intersection of
the property lines, if the nearest existing driveway approach is fifty feet
(50') or further away. In no instance shall a driveway approach be closer than
sixty feet (60') from the projected intersection right of way lines with a
minimum of five foot (5') flared section. Flared driveway approaches are
required for distinction from intersection corners.
      6.   The minimum width of a driveway approach shall be twelve feet (12')
and the maximum shall be thirty feet (30').
      7.   The community development director may approve a driveway approach
up to a maximum of fifty feet (50') wide.
   B.   Single-family dwellings shall meet the following requirements as
hereinafter provided:
      1.   Single-family dwellings shall be permitted only one access unless a
circular driveway approach is utilized.
      2.   There shall be a minimum of thirty five feet (35') between the
entrances of circular driveway approaches and the two (2) closest edges of the
driveway approach.
      3.   Corner lots will be allowed to have one driveway approach per street
frontage.
      4.   There shall be a minimum ten feet (10') distance between all
approved driveway approaches except on cul-de-sacs.
      5.   The minimum street driveway approach width at the property line
shall be ten feet (10'), and for a home with a three (3) car garage, the
driveway approach width at the property line may be a maximum of thirty feet
(30').
      6.   On new construction for a home with a three (3) car garage, the
driveway approach width at the property line may be a maximum of thirty feet
(30').
      7.   No radius or flare portion of a driveway approach shall intersect
the adjacent projected property line except where shared approaches are
utilized.
      8.   On corner lots, driveway approaches shall be set back a minimum of
twenty five feet (25') from the point of intersection of the right of way
lines.
   C.   All driveway approach grades shall not exceed four percent (4%) within
twenty feet (20') of the roadway boundary.
   D.   Approaches shall be a minimum of five feet (5') from a side property
line at the front lot line except on cul-de-sacs. (Ord. 97-43, 10-16-1997; amd.
Ord. 99-14, 5-19-1999)
14.12.120: INTERSECTION DESIGN:
   A.   The minimum radius of curb return on local streets in residential areas
shall be twenty five feet (25'). A larger radius shall be used in industrial
areas or higher functional classification streets as approved by the department
or its designee in accordance with AASHTO guidelines.
   B.   Streets shall intersect at an angle of ninety degrees (90°) where
possible, but in no case shall the angle of intersection be less than eighty
degrees (80°).
   C.   Offset intersections shall be avoided whenever possible and offsets
shall be provided with minimum distances as follows:
      1.   Local streets: One hundred fifty feet (150');
      2.   Collectors: Five hundred feet (500');
      3.   Arterials: Eight hundred feet (800').
   D.   Left turns shall be prohibited within two hundred feet (200') of major
intersections either by signs or concrete medians. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.130: PRIVATE ROADWAYS:
   A.   The width of all private roadways shall consist of a minimum of twenty
feet (20') of unobstructed travel surface. Roadways shall be twenty five feet
(25') wide where they form cul-de-sacs greater than five hundred feet (500') in
length. Short sections may be reduced to preserve trees or other features as
approved by the fire department.
   B.   All surfaces shall consist of an approved design capable of carrying
twenty four (24) ton vehicles.
   C.   Except as modified by subsections A and B of this section, all private
roadways shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   D.   Each and every owner of any interest in a private roadway shall be
jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance and repairs to the
roadway. The city shall have no responsibility or liability for the maintenance
of or repair to any private roadway. Each private roadway shall be maintained
in a manner which allows easy access and passage of emergency vehicles
throughout the entire length of the roadway. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.140: STREET DIRECTION AND GRADE:
No street shall vary from the direction and grade of other city streets unless
an exception in the direction and grade is obtained from the city council.
(Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.12.150: EXCEPTIONS:
In cases where unusual topographical, aesthetic, or other exceptional
conditions or circumstances exist, variations or exceptions to the requirements
of this chapter may be approved by the city council after receiving
recommendations from the planning commission and the department, provided that
the variation or exceptions are not detrimental to the public safety or
welfare. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
CHAPTER 14.16
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
14.16.010: Definitions
14.16.020: Permit Application Requirements
14.16.030: Emergency Work
14.16.040: Fees
14.16.050: Permit; Contents; Duration And Extensions
14.16.060: Permit; No Transfer Or Assignment
14.16.070: Compliance With Specifications, Standards, Traffic Control
Regulations; Site Permittee Identification
14.16.080: Other Highway Permits
14.16.090: Relocation Of Structures In Public Ways
14.16.100: Impact Of Excavation On Existing Improvements
14.16.110: Restoration Of Public Property
14.16.120: Insurance Requirements
14.16.130: Bond; When Required, Conditions, Warranty
14.16.140: Hold Harmless Agreement; Limitations On City Liability
14.16.150: Work Without Permit; Penalty
14.16.160: Failure To Comply; Default In Performance
14.16.170: Failure To Conform To Design Standards; Penalty
14.16.180: Appeal Of Suspension, Revocation, Or Stop Order
14.16.190: Tampering With Traffic Barricades
14.16.200: Conflict With Governing Provisions
14.16.210: Violation; Penalty
14.16.010: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
APPLICANT: Any person who makes application for a permit.
APPURTENANCES: Miscellaneous concrete surfaces within the public way such as
parking bays.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of which
constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or property, or which
causes interruption of utility services.
ENGINEERING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS: The standards set forth in the
latest version of the "City Of Taylorsville Design And Construction Standards
Manual" published by the city engineer.
FAILURE: A work site restoration which fails to meet engineering design and
construction standards, or which results in a deteriorated or substandard
condition within the duration of the warranty period. Failure may be settlement
of surfaces, deterioration of materials, or other surface irregularities.
Measurement of failure shall be further defined in the engineering design and
construction standards.
PERMITTEE: Any person who has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed to
fulfill the requirements of this chapter.
PIPE DRIVEWAY: A driveway approach which uses a pipe or other means to bridge
the gutter.
PRIVATE DRAIN LINE: A pipe installed solely for the transmission of water
collected or generated on private property such as drainage, spring, or storm
water, or condensate into the public drainage system.
PROPERTY OWNER: Person or persons who have legal title to property and/or
equitable interest in the property, or the ranking official or agent of a
company having legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the
property.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY: Any company subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah
state public service commission, or any business entity providing gas,
electricity, water, telephone, communication, or other utility product or
services for use by the general public.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public rights of way and easements, public
footpaths, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public
highways, public alleys, and public drainageways. It does not, however, include
utility easements not within public ways of the city.
RESIDENT: The person or persons currently making their home at a particular
dwelling.
STORM DRAIN: A dedicated pipe, conduit, waterway, or ditch installed in a right
of way or easement for the transmission of storm and drainage water. This term
does not include private drain lines.
TRAFFIC BARRICADE MANUAL: The "Manual Of Uniform Traffic Control Devices"
("MUTCD").
WORK SITE RESTORATION: Means and includes the restoring of the original ground
or paved hard surface area to comply with engineering design and construction
standards, and includes, but is not limited to, repair, cleanup, backfilling,
compaction, stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in
acceptable condition following the conclusion of the work, or the expiration or
revocation of the permit. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.020: PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   No public way of the city shall be dug up or excavated, and no
approach, road, driveway, pole, pipeline, conduit, sewer, ditch, culvert,
billboard, advertising sign or other structure or object of any kind or
character shall be placed, constructed or maintained within any public way
except as permitted by and in accordance with city ordinances and regulations.
   B.   Any person desiring to perform work of any kind in a public way within
the city shall make application for a permit prior to beginning such work. Such
application shall be filed with the city's community development director or
other designee appointed by the city on a form or forms to be furnished by the
city. Property owners and/or tenants for whom work is being done shall be
responsible for obtaining the permits, provided, however, contractors may
obtain the permit in the contractor's name.
   C.   No person shall be eligible to apply for or receive permits to do work
within the public ways of the city, save and except the following:
      1.   Contractors licensed by the state as general contractors;
      2.   Public utility companies;
      3.   Property owners installing, replacing, or maintaining less than five
hundred (500) square feet or one hundred (100) linear feet of sidewalk, curb,
and gutter, or driveway approach, or other work approved by the city's
community development director or other designee appointed by the city, upon a
portion of the public way adjacent to their residence; or
      4.   Persons offering a service which requires occupation of the public
way, such as scaffold or staging, staging of a crane, installation or
maintenance of electric signs, glass, awnings, and painting or cleaning of
buildings or sign boards or other structures.
   D.   The city's community development director or other designee appointed
by the city may deny the issuance of permits to contractors, utility companies,
or other permit applicants who have shown by past performance that in their
opinion they will not consistently conform to the engineering design and
construction standards, or the requirements of this chapter.
   E.   When the city's community development director or other designee
appointed by the city determines that it is necessary to fully determine the
relationship of the work proposed to existing or proposed facilities within the
public ways, or to determine whether the work proposed complies with the
engineering design and construction standards, the city may require the filing
of engineering plans, specifications and sketches showing the proposed work in
sufficient detail to permit determination of such relationship or compliance,
or both, and the application shall be deemed suspended until such plans and
sketches are filed and approved.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work upon any public
way until the city's community development director or other designee appointed
by the city has approved the application and until a permit has been issued for
such work, except as specifically approved to the contrary in this chapter.
   G.   The disapproval or denial of an application by the city's community
development director or other designee appointed by the city may be appealed by
the applicant to the mayor by filing of a written notice of appeal within ten
(10) days of the date of the denial. The mayor may hear such appeal, if written
request therefor be timely filed as soon as practicable, and render its
decision within a reasonable time following such appeal.
   H.   In approving or disapproving work within any public way, or permits
therefor, in the inspection of such work; in reviewing plans, sketches or
specifications; and generally in the exercise of the authority conferred
hereunder, the city's community development director or other designee
appointed by the city shall act in such manner as to preserve and protect the
public way and the use thereof, but shall have no authority to govern the
actions or inaction of permittees and applicants or other persons which have no
relationship to the use, preservation or protection of the public way.
   I.   A permit is not required from the city's community development director
or other designee appointed by the city for a city, county, state, federal, or
other government employee to perform routine maintenance work, not involving
excavations.
   J.   A permit is not required from the city's community development director
or other designee appointed by the city for hand digging excavations for
installation or repair of sprinkler systems and landscaping within the nonpaved
areas of the public way. However, conformance to the engineering design and
construction standards is required. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.030: EMERGENCY WORK:
   A.   Any person maintaining pipes, lines, or facilities in the public way
may proceed with work upon existing facilities without a permit when emergency
circumstances demand the work to be done immediately; provided a permit could
not reasonably and practicably have been obtained beforehand.
   B.   In the event that emergency work is commenced on or within any public
way of the city during regular business hours, the city's community development
director or other designee appointed by the city shall be notified within one-
half (1/2) hour from the time the work is commenced. The person commencing and
conducting such work shall take all necessary safety precautions for the
protection of the public and the direction and control of traffic, and shall
ensure that work is accomplished according to the traffic barricade manual and
other applicable laws, regulations, or generally recognized practices in the
industry.
   C.   Any person commencing emergency work in the public way during other
than business hours without a permit shall immediately thereafter apply for a
permit or give notice during the first hour of the first regular business day
on which city offices are open for business after such work is commenced. A
permit for such emergency work may be issued which shall be retroactive to the
date when the work was begun, at the discretion of the city's community
development director or other designee appointed by the city. (Ord. 01-46, 10-
19-2001)
14.16.040: FEES:
   A.   The applicant shall make a deposit with the application for a permit in
the amount set forth in chart 14.16.040 of this section. The balance of the
deposit after subtracting the reasonable, direct and actual cost to the city of
exercising authority over public ways within the city shall be returned to the
applicant without interest within forty five (45) days after work is completed.
   B.   The city may waive the fee or a portion thereof provided for in this
chapter after a public hearing where it is determined that such fee pertains to
a nonprofit entity.
   CHART
14.16.040
   DEPOSIT SCHEDULE
 
All applicants shall deposit a minimum of one hundred eighty dollars
($180.00) plus the estimated reasonable, direct and actual cost to the city
of exercising authority over public ways within the city. The estimate of
such cost shall be made by the city's community development director or his
designee based on the following schedule:
1. Application review:
  A. Administration review $53.00 per hour
  B.Clerical               41.00 per hour
2. Field inspection:
  A. Per site visits       45.00 per hour
  B. Clerical              41.00 per hour
"Site visit" means preinspection of area(s) where excavations will occur,
daily inspection and observation by city inspectors.
In addition, all permittees shall post one of the following bonds: cashier's
check, escrow agreement or irrevocable letter of credit as set forth in
section 14.16.130 of this chapter in the amounts described:
Excavation Length           Amount
0 - 100 feet                $1,000.00
101 - 300 feet              2,000.00
301 - 450 feet              3,000.00
451 - 600 feet              4,000.00
601 feet or more            As determined by the city engineer
 
(Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.050: PERMIT; CONTENTS; DURATION AND EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Each permit application shall state the starting date and estimated
completion date. Work shall be completed within sixty (60) days from the
starting date or as directed by the city's community development director or
other designee appointed by the city. The city's community development director
or other designee appointed by the city shall be notified by the permittee of
commencement of the work at least twenty four (24) hours prior to commencing
work. The permit shall be valid for the time period specified in the permit.
   B.   If the work is not completed during such period, prior to the
expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply to the city's community
development director or other designee appointed by the city for an additional
permit or an extension, which may be granted by the city's community
development other designee appointed by the city for good cause shown.
   C.   The length of the extension requested by the permittee shall be subject
to the approval of the city's community development director or other designee
appointed by the city. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.060: PERMIT; NO TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT:
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be
performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a permittee from subcontracting the work
to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the
permit shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under
the permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this
chapter and under said permit. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.070: COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS, STANDARDS, TRAFFIC CONTROL
REGULATIONS; SITE PERMITTEE IDENTIFICATION:
   A.   The work performed in the public way shall conform to the requirements
of the engineering design and construction standards, traffic barricade
standards, federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations.
   B.   Where a job site is left unattended, before completion of the work,
signage with minimum two inch (2") high letters shall be attached to a
barricade or otherwise posted at the site, indicating the permittee's name, or
company name, telephone number, and after hours telephone number. (Ord. 01-46,
10-19-2001)
   C.   All excavations shall be conducted in a manner resulting in a minimum
amount of interference or interruption of street or pedestrian traffic.
Inconvenience to residents and businesses fronting on the public way shall be
minimized. Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades and/or other structures
will be available and used where necessary to prevent accidents involving
property or persons. Barricades must be in place until all of the permittee's
equipment is removed from the site and the excavation has been backfilled and
proper temporary gravel surface is in place, except where backfilling and
resurfacing is to be done by the city; in which case the barricades, together
with any necessary lights, flares or reflective barricades, must remain in
place until the backfill work is actually commenced by the city. From sunset to
sunrise, all barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined by adequate
signal lights, reflective barricades, etc. The permittee shall notify at least
twenty four (24) hours in advance of any planned excavation requiring street
closure or traffic detours: 1) the police department; 2) the Utah transit
authority; 3) every public school district operating a school within the city;
4) the United States postal service; 5) the Salt Lake County public works
department (or other public works service provider for the city); and 6) the
Salt Lake County fire department (or other fire emergency provider for the
city). (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001; amd. Ord. 05-01, 3-16-2005, eff. 4-1-2005)
14.16.080: OTHER HIGHWAY PERMITS:
   A.   Holders of permits for work on highways owned or under the jurisdiction
of other government entities, but located within the city limits, shall not be
required to obtain permits from the city under the provisions of this chapter,
unless the work extends beyond the back side of the curb, or beyond any other
designated jurisdictional boundary. Any city permit shall not be construed to
permit or allow work on a county road, a state highway, or within the city
without an applicable county or state permit.
   B.   The city's community development director or other designee appointed
by the city shall have the right and authority to regulate work under permits
issued by other governmental entities with respect to hours and days of work,
and measures required to be taken by the permittee of said governmental entity
for the protection of traffic and safety of persons and property.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
impose any duty, implied or expressed, on the city or its employees, officers,
agents or assigns, relative to the protection of traffic and safety of persons
or property, arising out of the issuance of any permit issued by government
entities other than the city, or arising out of any work performed on any
public way owned or within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-
2001)
14.16.090: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAYS:
   A.   The city's community development director or other designee appointed
by the city may direct any person owning or maintaining facilities or
structures in the public way to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or
structures as the city's community development director or other designee
appointed by the city may require. Sewers, pipes, drains, tunnels, conduits,
pipe driveways, vaults, trash receptacles and overhead and underground gas,
electric, telephone, telecommunication and communication facilities shall
specifically be subject to such directives.
   B.   Any directive by the city's community development director or other
designee appointed by the city shall be based upon the following:
      1.   The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being
maintained contrary to law, or determined by the city's community development
director or other designee appointed by the city to be structurally unsound or
defective; (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
      2.   The facility or structure constitutes a nuisance as defined under
state statute or city ordinance. (This section shall not, however, be deemed to
diminish the vehicle impound authority of the police department or other law
enforcement service provider for the city); (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001; amd. Ord.
05-11, 3-16-2005, eff. 4-1-2005)
      3.   The authority under which the facility or structure was installed
has expired or has been revoked;
      4.   The facility or structure is not in conformity with public
improvements proposed for the area; or
      5.   The public way is about to be repaired or improved and such
facilities or structures may pose a hindrance to construction.
   C.   Any person owning or maintaining facilities or structures in the public
way who fails to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or structures upon
notice to do so by the city's community development director or other designee
appointed by the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as described in section
1.08.020 of this code, and promptly shall perform such alterations,
modifications or relocations. All costs of alteration, modification or
relocation shall be borne by the person owning or maintaining the facilities or
structures involved. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.100: IMPACT OF EXCAVATION ON EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   If any sidewalk or curb ramp is blocked by excavation work, a temporary
sidewalk or curb ramp shall be constructed or provided. Said temporary
improvement shall be safe for travel and convenient for users, and consistent
with applicable standards for such.
   B.   Where excavations are made in paved areas, the surface shall be
replaced with a temporary gravel surface until such time as the permanent
repairs are completed.
   C.   1. At any time a permittee disturbs the yard, residence or the real or
personal property of a private property owner or the city, such permittee shall
ensure that such property is returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition
that is comparable to the condition that existed prior to the commencement of
the work.
      2.   The costs associated with the disturbance and the return,
replacement and/or restoration shall be borne by the permittee. Further, a
permittee shall reimburse a property owner or the city, for any actual damage
caused by the permittee, its subcontractor, or its independent contractor, in
connection with the disturbance of such property. However, nothing in this
subsection shall require the permittee to pay a subscriber or private property
owner when that subscriber or private property owner requests that the
permittee remove, replace or relocate improvements associated with the service
provided by the permittee to the property owner and when the permittee
exercises due care in the performance of that service, or when the subscriber
or private property owner provided false information to the permittee on which
the permittee relied to its detriment.
   D.   Examples of types of acts specifically included in this section are the
following:
      1.   Removal of sod, lawn, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveways, or
fence, to install, trench, repair, replace, remove or locate equipment,
sprinkler systems, cable or other appurtenances of the permittee;
      2.   Installation or removal of equipment or other appurtenances of the
permittee's system within a private property owner's property or residence
which requires drilling, excavating, plastering, or the like on the part of the
permittee;
      3.   Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a
fixture of a private property owner (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air
conditioning, heating unit, or the like) in order to perform some sort of
construction, maintenance or repair by the permittee; or
      4.   Permanently removing a permittee's equipment or other appurtenances
due to the revocation, termination or nonrenewal of the franchise (if
applicable).
   E.   Existing drainage channels, such as gutters or ditches, shall be kept
free of dirt or other debris so that natural flow will not be interrupted. When
it is necessary to block or otherwise interrupt flow of the drainage channel, a
method of rerouting the flow must be submitted for approval by the city's
community development director or other designee appointed by the city prior to
the blockage of the channel.
   F.   The requirements imposed upon the permittee extend to any subcontractor
or independent contractor that the permittee might employee to perform the
tasks pursuant to the permit.
   G.   The requirements of this section shall not apply to the removal by a
permittee, of a permanent structure placed by a property owner in a public way,
unless such property owner has received prior written permission from the
city's community development director or other designee appointed by the city
granting the property owner the right to install a permanent structure on a
public way, and such written permission has been recorded in the office of the
county recorder.
   H.   No permit shall be granted to excavate any road or highway that has
been resurfaced within two (2) years prior to the date of the application for
permit except in cases of emergency or as approved by the mayor upon such terms
and conditions as the mayor deems appropriate and subject to section
14.16.110 of this chapter. The city shall post and make available upon request
a schedule of the planned dates that roads in the city will be resurfaced.
   I.   Any permittee shall immediately notify the city of any emergency
situations (including, without limitation, damage to pipes, lines or other
underground apparatus of electricity, telephone, water or other utility service
provider) caused by or resulting from such permittee's activities on a public
way.
   J.   Any permittee marking the asphalt or concrete surfaces of any public
way shall, subject to applicable Utah state law, make such markings as
unobstructive as possible and use only paint or another marking material that
disintegrates or otherwise is obliterated as soon as possible. (Ord. 01-46, 10-
19-2001)
14.16.110: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   The permittee shall, at its own expense, restore all public way
facilities modified, damaged or removed by the permittee to a condition that is
comparable to or better than the condition that existed prior to the
commencement of the work, as required by the engineering regulations, design
standards and specifications promulgated by the city from time to time. Such
regulations, design standards and specifications shall require, at a minimum,
that restoration work be performed beyond the walls of any trench for a minimum
distance of twenty four inches (24") on each side of the trench for trenches
less forty two inches (42") deep, and a minimum distance of thirty six inches
(36") on each side of the trench for trenches deeper than forty two inches
(42"); provided, however, that the city's community development director or
other designee appointed by the city may determine not to require restoration
of the street surface beyond the walls of any trench located in a street
scheduled to be reconstructed by the city within three (3) years following
completion of the excavation work, if the cost of such work exceeds the benefit
to the city, and the site can otherwise be restored to the satisfaction of the
city for such three (3) year period. All restoration work shall be accomplished
within the time limits set forth in the permit, unless additional time is
granted in writing by the city's community development director or other
designee appointed by the city.
   B.   Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, and unless otherwise
authorized by the city's community development director or other designee
appointed by the city in the permit, all paving and replacement of street
facilities shall be completed within three (3) calendar days from the time the
excavation commences on major or collector streets, and within seven (7)
calendar days from the time the excavation commences on all other streets,
except as provided for during excavation in winter or during weather conditions
which do not allow paving according to applicable standards and specifications.
In winter, a temporary patch must be provided, to be replaced with permanent
materials when weather permits. In all excavations, restoration of pavement
surfaces shall be made immediately after backfilling is completed or concrete
is cured. If work is expected to exceed the above duration, the permittee shall
submit a detailed construction schedule for approval. The schedule will address
means and methods to minimize traffic disruption and complete the construction
as soon as reasonably possible.
   C.   If the permittee fails to restore the surface of any public right of
way to its original condition in accordance with the standards required in this
chapter, the city's community development director or other designee appointed
by the city may authorize and employ the necessary assistance to restore the
surface to its original condition. Permittee shall pay all expenses incurred to
restore the surface. The city's community development director or other
designee appointed by the city shall prepare an itemized statement of all
expenses incurred in such restoration and shall deliver a copy thereof to the
permittee and/or the bondholder.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any permittee to close or permit a trench to
be closed until the same has been inspected by the city's designated
representative. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.120: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall furnish to the city's
community development director or other designee appointed by the city evidence
that such applicant has a comprehensive general liability and property damage
policy that includes contractual liability coverage endorsed with the following
limits and provisions:
      1.   A minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single
limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage
and not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate. The
general aggregate limit shall apply separately to the permit, or the general
aggregate limit shall be two (2) times the required occurrence limit. The
coverage shall be in the nature of broad form commercial general liability
coverage. The city attorney may increase or decrease minimum insurance limits,
depending on the potential liability of any project.
      2.   All policies shall include the city, its employees, officers,
officials, agents, volunteers and assigns, as insureds. Any reference to the
"city" shall include the city, its employees, officers, officials, agents,
volunteers and assigns.
      3.   The coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the city, its
employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns. Any insurance
or self-insurance maintained by the city, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers, and assigns shall be in excess of the permittee's insurance
and shall not contribute to or with it.
      4.   Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policy shall
not affect coverage provided to the city, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers, and assigns.
      5.   Coverage shall state that the permittee's insurance shall apply
separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought,
except with respect to the limits of the insurer's liability.
      6.   Underwriters shall have no right of recovery or subrogation against
the city, it being the intent of the parties that the insurance policy so
affected shall protect both parties and be primary coverage for any and all
losses covered by the described insurance.
      7.   The insurance companies issuing the policy or policies shall have no
recourse against the city for payment of any premiums due or for any
assessments under any form of any policy.
      8.   Each insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that the coverage
shall not be suspended, voided, canceled, or reduced in coverage or in limits,
except after thirty (30) days' prior written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested sent to the city with a copy to the city attorney.
      9.   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, save harmless and defend
the city and its officers and employees against any claim or loss, damage or
expense sustained on account of damages to persons or property occurring by
reason of permit work done by the permittee, his/her subcontractor or agent,
whether or not the work has been completed and whether or not the right of way
has been opened to public travel.
      10.   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, hold harmless and
defend the city, and its officers and employees against any claim or loss,
damage or expense sustained by any person occurring by reason of doing any work
pursuant to the permit including, but not limited to, falling objects or
failure to maintain proper barricades and/or lights as required from the time
work begins until the work is completed and right of way is opened for public
use.
   B.   Insurance is to be placed with insurers with an AM Best rating of no
less than an A carrier, with a rating of "7" or higher.
   C.   The permittee shall furnish the city's community development director
or other designee appointed by the city with certificates of insurance and
original endorsements effecting coverage required by the permit. The
certificates and endorsements for each insurance policy are to be signed by a
person authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The city
expressly reserves the right to require complete, certified copies of all
required insurance policies at any time. Consequently, the permittee shall be
prepared to provide such copies prior to the issuance of the permit.
   D.   If any of the required policies are, or at any time become,
unsatisfactory to the city as to form or substance, or if a company issuing any
such policy is, or at any time becomes, unsatisfactory to the city, the
permittee shall promptly obtain a new policy, submit the same to the city for
approval, and thereafter submit verification of coverage as required by the
city. Upon failure to furnish, deliver and maintain such insurance as provided
herein, the city may declare the permit to be in default and pursue any and all
remedies the city may have at law or in equity, including those actions
outlined in this chapter.
   E.   The permittee shall include all subcontractors as insured under its
policies or shall furnish separate certificates and endorsements for each
subcontractor. All coverages for subcontractors shall be subject to all of the
requirements stated herein.
   F.   Any deductibles or self-insured retentions shall be declared to and
approved by the city. At the option of the city, either the insurer shall
reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self- insured retentions as respects
the city, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers or assigns, or
the permittee shall procure a bond, in a form acceptable to the city,
guaranteeing payment of losses and related investigations, claim
administration, and defense expenses.
   G.   A property owner performing work adjacent to his residence may submit
proof of a homeowner's insurance policy in lieu of the insurance requirements
of this section.
   H.   A public utility company may be relieved of the obligation of
submitting certificates of insurance if such company shall submit satisfactory
evidence in advance that:
      1.   It is insured in the amounts set forth in this chapter, or has
complied with state requirements to become self-insured. Public utilities may
submit annually evidence of insurance coverage in lieu of individual
submissions for each permit; and
      2.   Said coverage provides to the city the same scope of coverage that
would otherwise be provided by a separate policy as required by this chapter.
(Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.130: BOND; WHEN REQUIRED, CONDITIONS, WARRANTY:
   A.   Except as noted in this chapter, each applicant, before being issued a
permit, shall provide the city with a cash deposit, escrow agreement or an
irrevocable letter of credit in the amount set forth in the fee schedule
adopted pursuant to section
14.16.040 of this chapter in a form acceptable to the city attorney to
guarantee faithful performance of the work authorized by a permit granted
pursuant to this chapter. The amount of such bond required may be increased or
decreased at the discretion of the city's community development director or
other designee appointed by the city whenever it appears that the amount and
cost of the work to be performed, and not satisfactorily completed, may vary
from the amount of bond otherwise required under this chapter. The form of the
irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement shall be subject to the
approval of the city attorney.
   B.   Public utilities franchised by the city shall not be required to file a
cash deposit, or irrevocable letter of credit if such requirement is expressly
waived in the franchise agreements or otherwise provided for in the franchise
agreements.
   C.   The bond required by this section shall be conditioned as follows:
      1.   The permittee shall fully comply with the requirements of the city
ordinances and regulations, specifications and standards promulgated by the
city relative to work in the public way, and respond to the city in damages for
failure to conform therewith;
      2.   After work is commenced, the permittee shall proceed with diligence
and expedition and shall promptly complete such work and restore the public way
to engineering design and construction standards, so as not to obstruct the
public place or travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary;
      3.   The permittee shall guarantee the materials and workmanship for a
period of two (2) years from completion of such work, with reasonable wear and
tear excepted; and
      4.   Unless authorized by the city's community development director or
other designee appointed by the city on the permit, all paving, resurfacing or
replacement of street facilities on major or collector streets shall be done in
conformance with the regulations contained herein within three (3) calendar
days, and within seven (7) calendar days from the time the excavation commences
on all other streets, except as provided for during excavation in winter or
during weather conditions which do not allow paving according to the
engineering design and construction standards. In winter, a temporary patch
must be provided. In all excavations, restoration or pavement surfaces shall be
made immediately after backfilling is completed or concrete is cured. If work
is expected to exceed the above duration, the permittee shall submit a detailed
construction schedule for approval. The schedule will address means and methods
to minimize traffic disruption and complete the construction as soon as
reasonably possible. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.140: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT; LIMITATIONS ON CITY LIABILITY:
   A.   The permittee agrees to save the city, its officers, employees and
agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may
accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under the
permit. The issuance and acceptance of any permit under this chapter shall
constitute such a hold harmless agreement by the permittee to this section.
   B.   This chapter shall neither be construed as imposing upon the city, its
officers, employees and agents, any liability or responsibility for damages to
any person injured by or by reason of the performance of any work within the
public way, or under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter; nor shall the
city, its officers, officials, employees, agents, volunteers or assigns thereof
be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of
inspection authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of
any work. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.150: WORK WITHOUT PERMIT; PENALTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to do or cause any work
to be done in the public way without first obtaining a permit.
   B.   In addition, a stop order may be issued by the city's community
development director or other designee appointed by the city directed to any
person or persons doing or causing any work to be done in the public way
without a permit. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.160: FAILURE TO COMPLY; DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE:
   A.   Any permit may be revoked or suspended and a stop order issued by the
city's community development director or other designee appointed by the city,
after notice to the permittee for:
      1.   Violation of any condition of the permit, the bond, or of any
provision of this chapter;
      2.   Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the city or law
relating to the work; or
      3.   Existence of any condition or the doing of any act which does
constitute, may constitute, or cause a condition endangering life or property.
   B.   A suspension or revocation by the city's community development director
or other designee appointed by the city, and a stop order, shall take effect
immediately upon entry thereof by the city's community development director or
other designee appointed by the city and notice to the person performing the
work in the public way. Notice to the person performing the work shall be
accomplished when the city's community development director or other designee
appointed by the city has posted a stop work order at the location of the work
and written notice has been mailed, return receipt requested, to the address
indicated by the permittee on the permit.
   C.   Whenever the city's community development director or other designee
appointed by the city finds that a default has occurred in the performance of
any term or condition of the permit, written notice thereof shall be given.
Such notice shall be addressed to the holder of the permit and state the work
to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the
city's community development director or other designee appointed by the city
to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work.
   D.   In the event the holder of the permit, within a reasonable time
following the giving of such notice (taking into consideration the exigencies
of the situation, the nature of the work, the requirements of public safety and
for the protection of persons and property), fails either to commence and cause
the required work to be performed with due diligence, or to indemnify the city
for the cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice, the city may
perform the work, at the discretion of the city's community development
director or other designee appointed by the city, with city forces or contract
forces or both, and suit may be commenced by the city attorney against the
contractor and/or holder of the permit, and such other persons as may be
liable, to recover the balance due to the city, including attorney fees, on
account thereof. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.170: FAILURE TO CONFORM TO DESIGN STANDARDS; PENALTY:
   A.   For failure to conform to the engineering design and construction
standards, the city's community development director or other designee
appointed by the city may:
      1.   Suspend or revoke the permit;
      2.   Issue a stop order;
      3.   Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
      4.   Require an extended warranty period; and/or
      5.   Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance
costs. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.180: APPEAL OF SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR STOP ORDER:
Any suspension, revocation or stop order by the city's community development
director or other designee appointed by the city may be appealed by the
permittee to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten
(10) days of the action of the city's community development director or other
designee appointed by the city. The mayor may hear such appeal, if written
request therefor be timely filed, as soon as practicable, and render their
decision within a reasonable time following filing such appeal. (Ord. 01-46,
10-19-2001)
14.16.190: TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly or without
authorization and legal cause, extinguish, remove or diminish any light
illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down, remove or in any
manner alter any rail, fence or barricade protecting any excavation or other
construction site. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.200: CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING PROVISIONS:
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of any other ordinance, agreement, franchise, or other document
governing the excavation of a public way, the more restrictive provisions of
the aforesaid documents shall apply. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
14.16.210: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a violation of any provision of
this chapter, or failure to comply with an order of suspension, revocation or
stop work, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as described in section
1.08.020 of this code. Each day the violation exists shall be a separate
offense. No criminal conviction shall excuse the person from otherwise
complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 01-46, 10-19-2001)
CHAPTER 14.20
ENCROACHMENTS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
SECTION:
14.20.010: Encroachments Prohibited
14.20.020: Conformance To Grade Required
14.20.030: Improvements On Or Near Sidewalk Or Curb Ramp
14.20.040: Obstructing Traffic On Sidewalk, Curb Ramp Or Highway Prohibited
14.20.050: Unattended Animals On Highway Prohibited
14.20.060: Impoundment Of Animals
14.20.070: Removal Of Unlawful Installations
14.20.080: Advertising; Permit Required
14.20.090: Confining And Securing Loads On Vehicles Required
14.20.100: Water Upon Highway Prohibited
14.20.105: Placing Snow Upon Highway Prohibited
14.20.110: Encroachments Deemed Obstructions
14.20.010: ENCROACHMENTS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful to extend or construct any sidewalks or curb ramps so as to
encroach upon any highway, nearer to the center thereof than the curb line as
designated in this title, or to encroach upon any sidewalk or curb ramp with
any building, fence, wall, post or other obstruction nearer than the fence
line, so as to make the sidewalk narrower than the widths approved by the
department. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.20.020: CONFORMANCE TO GRADE REQUIRED:
It is unlawful to lay, build or construct any sidewalk upon any highway in the
city where the grade has been fixed by order of the city council, except in
accordance with such grade, or to lay, build or construct any permanent
pavement or sidewalk, except upon specifications furnished by the department or
its designee in accordance with such fixed grade; and it is the duty of the
department to keep records, plats or maps showing the grades as fixed, for
reference, and for furnishing specifications therefrom, the fee provided by law
to be charged for such specifications and to be paid into the city treasury.
(Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.20.030: IMPROVEMENTS ON OR NEAR SIDEWALK OR CURB RAMP:
It is unlawful for any person to construct, place, keep or maintain upon or
across any sidewalk or curb ramp in the city any porch, platform or other
structure, except as the grade thereof, or any flume, pipe or structure, except
at or below the grade thereof. Where any platform, porch, flume, pipe or
structure is below the grade, it shall be covered to grade; and such platform,
porch, flume, pipe, or structure shall be kept in good repair by the party in
whose interest it is constructed or used, so as not to be dangerous to
pedestrians or an obstruction to the safe and ordinary use of the sidewalk or
curb ramp. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.20.040: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC ON SIDEWALK, CURB RAMP OR HIGHWAY PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful to construct, place, keep or maintain upon or across any
sidewalk, curb ramp or highway in the city any open ditch, flume, conduit,
waterway, headgate, log, building material, vehicle, railway, or other
obstruction; provided, building materials, vehicles or objects may be placed
temporarily in such manner on public highways as not to impede, endanger or
obstruct ordinary traffic, but no such building material, vehicles or other
objects shall be permitted to remain on such highway contrary to instructions
from the city council. It is unlawful to pile any dirt or other material, or
make any other defacement on any sidewalk, curb ramp or highway so as to
interfere with the ordinary use thereof.
   B.   It is unlawful to drive or place any vehicle, animal or other object
upon or along any sidewalk, curb ramp or highway or to permit the same to
remain thereon in a manner likely to impede or obstruct the ordinary use
thereof. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.20.050: UNATTENDED ANIMALS ON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED:
Every person staking, tethering, herding, grazing, pasturing, allowing to run
at large, or causing to be staked, tethered, herded, grazed, pastured or
allowed to run at large, any horse, cow, mule, sheep, goat, swine or other
animal upon any of the public highways of the city shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.20.060: IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS:
It is the duty of animal control to take into its custody any horse, cow, mule,
sheep, goat, swine or other animal found by him staked, tethered, herded,
pastured or running at large upon any of the public highways of the city, and
to deliver such animal to the city's animal control officials. Those officials
shall retain possession of the animal until the costs of capturing,
transporting and maintaining the animal are paid in full. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-
1996)
14.20.070: REMOVAL OF UNLAWFUL INSTALLATIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to place, construct or maintain any approach,
road, driveway, pole, pipeline, conduit, sewer, ditch, culvert, billboard,
advertising sign or any other structure or object of any kind or character
within the right of way of any city road without complying with the regulations
of the department, which may:
   A.   Remove such installation from the right of way or require such person
to remove the same; or
   B.   Give written notice to such person to remove the installation from the
right of way. The notice may be served either by personal service or by mailing
the notice to the person by registered mail and posting a copy thereof on the
installation for a period of ten (10) days. If the installation is not removed
within ten (10) days after the notice is complete, the department may remove
the same and recover costs and expenses, and also the sum of ten dollars
($10.00) for each day the same remained within the right of way after notice
was complete, in an action for that purpose; or
   C.   Bring an action to abate the same as a nuisance if such person disputes
or denies the existence of such installation or refuses to remove or permit its
removal. If judgment is recovered by the department, there shall also be
recovered, in addition to having the same abated, the costs of action and the
sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for every day such nuisance remained within the
right of way after notice was given for its removal. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.20.080: ADVERTISING; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to place any form of advertising upon any part of
the public domain in the city, or along any city highway within three hundred
feet (300') of such highway, except upon land in private ownership situated
along such highway (subject to the other requirements of this code), without
first receiving a permit to do so from the department, subject to the approval
of the city council. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.20.090: CONFINING AND SECURING LOADS ON VEHICLES REQUIRED:
   A.   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any city highway unless so
constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting,
leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that reasonable amounts of
sand, salt or other abrasives may be dropped for the purpose of securing
traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway for
cleaning or maintaining such roadway.
   B.   No person shall operate on a public highway any vehicle with a load
unless the load and any covering thereon is suitably fastened, secured and
confined according to the nature of the load so as to prevent the covering or
load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of
the highway. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.20.100: WATER UPON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any users of water from any ditch, stream or well to
wilfully or carelessly permit the same to run upon any city highway in such a
manner as to damage or interfere with the proper use of same, or to cause pools
of water to stand thereon, or to cause anything to be placed or left upon such
highway so as to obstruct travel or to endanger property or persons upon the
same. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.20.105: PLACING SNOW UPON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person removing snow, ice or other material from a
sidewalk or driveway to place or deposit said snow, ice or other material upon
any city road or highway in such a manner as to interfere with the proper use
of the same or so as to obstruct travel or to endanger property or persons upon
the same. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.20.110: ENCROACHMENTS DEEMED OBSTRUCTIONS:
It is the duty of the department to treat as obstructions to public highways
all encroachments declared by the terms of this chapter to be unlawful. (Ord.
96-17, 6-19-1996)
CHAPTER 14.24
POLES, POSTS AND FENCES
SECTION:
14.24.010: Prohibited Generally
14.24.020: Telephone Poles
14.24.030: Electric Light Poles
14.24.040: City Council Permission Required When
14.24.050: Mailboxes
14.24.060: Fences
14.24.070: Posts On Property Abutting Public Highway
14.24.080: Reservation Of Poles For City Use
14.24.090: Violation Deemed Obstruction
14.24.010: PROHIBITED GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any person to set, place, keep or maintain any pole, post,
fence or like obstruction upon or along any public highway, road, street,
avenue, lane, alley, trail, curb ramp or sidewalk in the city, except as
designated in this chapter. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.24.020: TELEPHONE POLES:
Telephone poles shall be set along the pole line, with the face of the pole
nearest the center of the street, one foot (1') toward the property line from a
line known as the curb line or in that area designated for utilities. (Ord. 96-
17, 6-19-1996)
14.24.030: ELECTRIC LIGHT POLES:
Electric light or other poles for carrying electric current for commercial
purposes shall be set in the same manner as telephone poles, one foot (1') from
the curb line or in that area designated for utilities. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.24.040: CITY COUNCIL PERMISSION REQUIRED WHEN:
No telephone, electric light or other pole used for support of wires carrying
electric current shall be set on any public highway in the city without
permission or a grant of right of way therefor being first obtained from the
city council. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.24.050: MAILBOXES:
Posts or structures for carrying or holding mailboxes shall be set either along
the tree or pole line hereinbefore defined for a sufficient distance back of
the curb line so as not to obstruct the street, highway, sidewalk or curb ramp
traffic. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.24.060: FENCES:
Fence posts may be set along a fence line, which is designated as the distance
from the center of any highway not less than half the surveyed and platted
width of the highway; no public highway in the city being regarded as surveyed
and platted less than fifty feet (50') in width. It is unlawful to place or
maintain any fence or building the face of which is nearer the center of any
highway than the line designated as the fence line. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.24.070: POSTS ON PROPERTY ABUTTING PUBLIC HIGHWAY:
It is unlawful to set, place or maintain any telephone, electric light or
current poles, trees, mail, sign or other posts, except as provided in this
chapter, upon property abutting on any public highway in the city, at a point
nearer to the fence line than a line centering one foot (1') therefrom on the
side farthest from the center of the highway; and it is unlawful to set or
maintain any sign or other post at a point nearer the centerline than one- half
foot (1/2') from the outside of the outer limit of any alley or lane. (Ord. 96-
17, 6-19-1996)
14.24.080: RESERVATION OF POLES FOR CITY USE:
It is provided that any grant or permission hereafter given to set telephone or
electric light poles upon any of the public highways in the city, shall be made
subject to the reservation, whether or not the reservation is specifically set
forth in the grant or permission, that wherever the city council shall deem it
necessary for the public good or service, the city shall have the right to
place cross arms on the poles, and to string one set of wires thereon, for
furnishing electric light and current to the city, and to use and operate the
same during the period of such grant or permission, with reasonable regard for
the rights of the grantee. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.24.090: VIOLATION DEEMED OBSTRUCTION:
It is the duty of the department to treat as obstructions to public highways,
all poles, posts, fences or other obstructions set or placed in violation of
the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
CHAPTER 14.32
SIDEWALK USE AND MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
14.32.010: Duty Of Abutting Property Owners
14.32.020: Inspections
14.32.030: Notice To Repair
14.32.040: Permits For Repairs Required When
14.32.050: Repair By City
14.32.060: Right Of Review; Request; Hearing
14.32.070: Stay Of Notice To Repair
14.32.080: Obstruction Of Sidewalks Or Curb Ramps Prohibited
14.32.090: Reserved
14.32.100: Snow Removal; Required
14.32.110: Snow Removal; Clogging Gutter Prohibited
14.32.120: Obstructing Sidewalk Or Curb Ramp While Receiving Goods
14.32.130: Cellar Doors
14.32.140: Driving Or Riding On Sidewalks Prohibited
14.32.150: Games On Sidewalks, Curb Ramps Or Streets
14.32.160: Loitering Prohibited
14.32.010: DUTY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS:
It shall be the duty of each owner of real property abutting or fronting upon
any street, highway or alley within the city to repair and maintain in good
condition all public curbs, curb ramps, gutters and sidewalks across or
immediately abutting their property. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.32.020: INSPECTIONS:
The city, through the department, may inspect the condition of the public
curbs, gutters and sidewalks to determine any defects or needed repairs. (Ord.
96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.32.030: NOTICE TO REPAIR:
   A.   Notice of needed repairs or defects in the public curbs, curb ramps,
gutters and sidewalks shall be sent to the owner of the abutting property as
shown on the records of the county recorder. Such notice shall specify the
repairs needed or the defect and shall state a deadline for completing the
repairs. A review of such deadline shall not be earlier than thirty (30) nor
later than sixty (60) days after the date of the notice. The notice shall
specifically instruct the property owner of his obligation under this chapter
and of his opportunity for review.
   B.   If the abutting property is a residence, the owner may petition in
writing, upon forms approved by the city, to pay fifty percent (50%) of the
cost thereof in advance. If the petition is granted by the city council, the
city council shall, subject to availability of funds, pay the remaining fifty
percent (50%) of the cost of replacement. In such case, the city shall make the
replacement or employ a contractor to make the same.
   C.   The city may propose the creation of a special improvement district to
make the required repairs and to levy assessment on property in accordance with
the Utah municipal improvement district act, Utah Code Annotated section 17A-3-
301 et seq. The creation of improvement districts require notice to property
owners, hearing, and opportunity for owners to protest. Districts may be
defeated if a sufficient number of protests are filed, as defined by statute.
   D.   This section does not preclude the city from replacing defective
sidewalks adjacent to private property, at its own expense, as it may otherwise
deem appropriate. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.32.040: PERMITS FOR REPAIRS REQUIRED WHEN:
No permits shall be necessary for such repairs unless it is necessary to alter
the grade, location or dimensions of the curbs, curb ramps, gutters or
sidewalks. In such event, there shall be no charge for the permit. (Ord. 96-17,
6-19-1996)
14.32.050: REPAIR BY CITY:
In the event that the property owner fails to complete the repairs or to seek
review within the time specified in the notice, the city may at its option make
the repairs with the implied consent of the owner. The city attorney may
instigate civil suit on behalf of the city to recover the city's costs of
repair plus interest, attorney fees and court costs. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.32.060: RIGHT OF REVIEW; REQUEST; HEARING:
   A.   The owner shall have the right to seek review of the notice of repairs
through the department and to appeal any decision rendered by the department to
the city council as provided in subsections B and C of this section.
   B.   The owner may seek review of the notice of repairs by filing a request
with the department. The request must be filed within ten (10) business days
after the date of the notice of repairs. Upon receipt of the petition
requesting a hearing, the department director shall schedule a hearing within
ten (10) business days, before himself or his designee, and cause notice
thereof to be sent to the petitioner.
   C.   After the hearing, the director or his designee shall cause written
notice of his decision to be sent to petitioner, which notice shall also inform
petitioner of his right to appeal to the city council. Petitioner may appeal to
the city council by filing a written request with the city recorder within ten
(10) business days after the date of the director's decision. The petitioner
shall be entitled to a hearing within sixty (60) days after the date the appeal
is filed. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.32.070: STAY OF NOTICE TO REPAIR:
The timely filing of a request for hearing with the director of the department,
or upon appeal therefrom, a request for hearing before the city council, shall
stay the terms of the notice of repair during review proceedings, and all
deadlines shall be redetermined by the hearing authority. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-
1997)
14.32.080: OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS OR CURB RAMPS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any
premises, to place or permit upon the sidewalk, curb ramp or the half of the
street next to such premises:
   A.   Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, refuse matter, ice, water, mud,
garbage, ashes, tin cans or other substances;
   B.   Any vehicle, lumber, wood, boxes, fencing, building material, dead
trees, tree stumps, merchandise, or other thing that obstructs the public
street, curb ramp or sidewalk or any part thereof, or the free use and
enjoyment thereof, or the free passage over and upon the same, or any part
thereof, without the permission of the city council. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.32.090: RESERVED:
(Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.32.100: SNOW REMOVAL; REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for the owner, occupant, lessor or agent of property abutting on
a paved sidewalk to fail to remove or cause to be removed from such paved
sidewalk and any existing curb ramp all hail, snow or sleet falling thereon,
within twenty four (24) hours after the hail, snow or sleet has ceased falling.
(Ord. 04-07, 2-4-2004)
14.32.110: SNOW REMOVAL; CLOGGING GUTTER PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person removing snow from a sidewalk or curb ramp to
deposit snow, dirt or other material in a gutter so as to clog the same, or
prevent the free flow of water therein. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.32.120: OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALK OR CURB RAMP WHILE RECEIVING GOODS:
It is unlawful for any person to place or keep, or suffer to be placed or kept,
upon any sidewalk or curb ramp, any goods, wares or merchandise that he may be
receiving or delivering without leaving a ten foot (10') passageway clear upon
such sidewalk or curb ramp; and it is unlawful for any person receiving or
delivering such goods, wares or merchandise to suffer the same to be or remain
on such sidewalk or curb ramp for a period longer than one hour. (Ord. 96-17,
6-19-1996)
14.32.130: CELLAR DOORS:
It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building having a cellar which
opens upon any street, curb ramp or sidewalk to fail to keep the door or other
covering thereof in good repair and safe for the passage of the customary
traffic on the street, curb ramp or sidewalk. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.32.140: DRIVING OR RIDING ON SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to drive a self-propelled vehicle or team, or
lead, drive or ride any animal upon any sidewalk except at established
crossings. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.32.150: GAMES ON SIDEWALKS, CURB RAMPS OR STREETS:
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk, curb ramp or street by
playing games thereon, such as ball games, marbles, flying of kites, or to
annoy or obstruct the free travel of any pedestrian, team or vehicle. (Ord. 96-
17, 6-19-1996)
14.32.160: LOITERING PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to remain standing, lying or sitting on any
sidewalk or curb ramp for a longer period than two (2) minutes in such manner
as to obstruct the free passage of pedestrians thereon, or to wilfully remain
standing, lying or sitting thereon in the manner for more than one minute after
being requested to move by any peace officer, or to wilfully remain on any
sidewalk or curb ramp in such manner as to obstruct the free passage of any
person or vehicle into or out of any property abutting upon the sidewalk, curb
ramp or any property having access to such sidewalk or curb ramp. (Ord. 96-17,
6-19-1996)
CHAPTER 14.36
DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
14.36.010: Permit Required
14.36.020: Bond Required
14.36.030: Specifications And Grades
14.36.040: Deviation From Permitted Construction Unlawful
14.36.050: Inspection And Approval
14.36.060: Construction Regulations
14.36.010: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to construct, build, establish or maintain any
sidewalk, curb ramp, curb and gutter, or driveway over, across or upon any
public street, road, thoroughfare, or parkway, or to cut or change the
construction of any public sidewalk, curb or gutter for any purpose, without
having first obtained from the department a permit for such construction, cut
or change. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.36.020: BOND REQUIRED:
   A.   Before issuance of any such permit, the contractor or person proposing
the construction shall file with the bond office, on a form furnished by the
city, a penal bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with good
and sufficient surety thereon, conditioned that the makers shall save harmless,
defend and indemnify the city against or on account of accidents, damages or
claims arising out of or during the construction by the contractor. All such
bonds shall be continuing until terminated by notice in writing given thirty
(30) days in advance.
   B.   In addition, a contractor making a business of such construction in the
city shall maintain on file with the department a performance and completion
bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to guarantee for one
year after the date of acceptance by the city work done in the city. (Ord. 96-
17, 6-19-1996)
14.36.030: SPECIFICATIONS AND GRADES:
All construction authorized by the permit issued under section
14.36.010 of this chapter shall be in accordance with the specifications and
grades approved by the department. The acceptance of such permit shall be
deemed an agreement by the permittee to perform such construction in accordance
with such specifications and grades. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.36.040: DEVIATION FROM PERMITTED CONSTRUCTION UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to construct any sidewalk, curb and gutter, or
driveway over, across or upon any public street, road, thoroughfare or parkway,
or to cut or change the construction thereof except in accordance with the
permit issued by the department. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.36.050: INSPECTION AND APPROVAL:
All sidewalks, curb ramps, curb and gutters, and driveways constructed in
accordance with the permits authorized by this chapter shall be subject to
supervision, inspection and approval by the department. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.36.060: CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS:
No private driveway may exceed thirty five feet (35') in width. No driveway,
including sidewalk, shall be less than six inches (6") thick. When more than
one driveway is required for any one parcel of land, a sidewalk island of at
least twelve feet (12') shall be provided between driveways, and in no case
shall a permit be granted for a driveway that will be within ten feet (10')
from the property line where it adjoins any street. It is unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicles over or across any such street corner or within
ten feet (10') therefrom, as provided in this section. Where, in the opinion of
the department, it would be dangerous, or where a driveway conflicts with any
permanent improvements or waterways, the department may refuse to issue the
permit and the matter shall be referred to the city council for further
consideration, in which event a driveway may be permitted at such place if
approved by the city council. (Ord. 05-30, 6-15-2005)
CHAPTER 14.40
BRIDGES, DITCHES AND WATERWAYS
SECTION:
14.40.010: Generally
14.40.020: Bridges
14.40.030: Ditches And Waterways
14.40.040: Headgates
14.40.050: Water Mains
14.40.060: Duty To Repair Bridges And Flumes
14.40.070: Violations Deemed Obstructions
14.40.010: GENERALLY:
It is unlawful for any person to construct, place, set, keep or maintain any
bridge, sewer, well, spill, or like obstruction, upon, in, under or along any
public highway, road, street, avenue, lane, alley, trail, sidewalk or curb ramp
in the city, except as designated in this chapter and coordinated with the
applicable irrigation company. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.40.020: BRIDGES:
Bridges over any ditch, waterway or opening across any sidewalk shall not be
less than the full width of such sidewalk. Bridges over any ditch, waterway or
opening across any roadway section of any highway, trail or sidewalk, except
Jordan River bridges, shall not be narrower than the full width of the roadway
section. In all cases, bridges shall be set square with the road or sidewalk,
and their coverings shall be made to conform to the grade of the road or
sidewalk as fixed by the city council. All bridges shall be of substantial
material and construction, and the plans and specifications shall be approved
by the department and shall be satisfactory to the city council. Bridges
connecting the roadway with the sidewalk shall be made to conform with the
established grade of the roadway and sidewalk. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.40.030: DITCHES AND WATERWAYS:
   A.   All ditches, canals or waterways constructed across or over any
sidewalk or highway shall be securely bridged or flumed; the bridges or flumes
shall conform to the regulations provided in this chapter.
   B.   No ditch, canal or waterway shall be made or constructed across any
sidewalk, curb ramp or highway except upon receiving permission from the city
council and except after conforming with the established grade thereof. When a
change in the grade of any sidewalk, curb ramp or highway becomes necessary for
the convenience of any ditch, canal or waterway, the changed grade shall be
done by or at the expense of the person constructing the ditch, canal, or
waterway, and shall be constructed only after receiving permission to proceed
from the city council or its delegated agent and shall be completed to the
satisfaction of the city council or its agent.
   C.   All ditches, canals or waterways running along any highway shall be
placed at a location approved by the department. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.40.040: HEADGATES:
Headgates for the control of irrigating or other water shall be placed in a
location approved by the department. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.40.050: WATER MAINS:
Water mains for carrying water along or across any highway may be laid by
permission or upon order of the city council, at a sufficient depth to keep the
roadway secure, and when laid along any highway shall be located in the roadway
centering on a line five feet (5') nearer the center of the highway than the
curb line as now fixed by ordinance. No excavation for laying water mains or
pipes shall be made in any public highway without first obtaining the consent
of the city council. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.40.060: DUTY TO REPAIR BRIDGES AND FLUMES:
It is unlawful for any person conveying water through or along any ditch, canal
or waterway along or across any highway to permit any flume, bridge, etc.,
under the control of or owned by the person to become out of repair, and to
remain so after attention has been called thereto, longer than is necessary to
institute the work of repairs thereon, which work shall be diligently
prosecuted to completion. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.40.070: VIOLATIONS DEEMED OBSTRUCTIONS:
It is the duty of the department to treat as obstructions any bridges, flumes,
pipes or ditches placed or constructed in violation of the terms of this
chapter. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
CHAPTER 14.44
SHADE TREES
SECTION:
14.44.010: Care Of Trees
14.44.020: Planting Line
14.44.030: Condemnation And Removal Of Trees
14.44.010: CARE OF TREES:
In all cases the abutting property owner who receives the beneficial use of and
benefit from trees is to care for and water the same. Failure to care for trees
may constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.44.020: PLANTING LINE:
The line on which the trees are to be centered within a city highway right of
way shall be determined by the highway division. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.44.030: CONDEMNATION AND REMOVAL OF TREES:
The department, upon giving proper notice to abutting property owner, shall
have the authority to condemn and remove, or order the removal by the abutting
property owner of, any tree, tree stump, shrub or vine upon any city roads,
avenues, or ways where the tree, tree stump, shrub or vine is dead, diseased or
for any other reason undesirable. The department shall have authority to trim
or prune any road tree or remove any tree that is in violation of any city
ordinance, without serving notice upon the abutting property owner. (Ord. 96-
17, 6-19-1996)
CHAPTER 14.48
STREET VACATIONS
SECTION:
14.48.010: Purpose
14.48.020: Street Defined
14.48.030: Conditions For Vacation
14.48.040: Fees And Advertising Costs
14.48.050: Legal Interest Of City
14.48.060: Evaluation Of Need For Street
14.48.070: Compensation
14.48.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a consistent standard regarding
compensation to the city for the vacation and/or transfer of its interest in
public streets. Vacation of the city's interest in streets should be viewed as
a transfer of a substantial property right for which the public should be
compensated. To prevent windfall enrichment to abutting property owners at
public expense, such transfer should not be made without compensation being
paid to the city. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.48.020: STREET DEFINED:
"Street(s)" means all major and minor streets, alleys, walkways and trails.
(Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.48.030: CONDITIONS FOR VACATION:
Petitions for vacation of public streets shall be considered on the basis of
the following:
   A.   Alleys, Walkways And Trails: Alleys, walkways and trails are not
generally within the current planning and maintenance policies of the city.
Vacation of an alley, walkway or trail relieves the city from present and
future obligations to maintain such alley, walkway or trail. This benefit to
the city is declared to be adequate compensation for the city's interest. Where
appropriate, the city may require conditions precedent to the vacation of any
alley, walkway or trail such as installation of landscaping, fencing or other
improvements which must be completed or bonded for prior to the enactment of
the vacation ordinance.
   B.   Major And Minor Streets: Major and minor streets shall not be vacated
or permanently closed unless adequate compensation has been paid for the
transfer of the city's interest in the land. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.48.040: FEES AND ADVERTISING COSTS:
No petition for vacation of a city street shall be considered unless
accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover costs of review
by city personnel. The petitioner shall pay all advertising costs for public
notices required for vacation hearings. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.48.050: LEGAL INTEREST OF CITY:
No action shall be taken on any petition to vacate a street until the
department identifies and verifies the specific manner in which the city
acquired its interest in the street and the city attorney determines the legal
interest of the city in the street. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.48.060: EVALUATION OF NEED FOR STREET:
Each petition shall be evaluated in terms of the current use of the street and
the need in the foreseeable future for its use as a public street or for any
other public purpose. If such need exists or may exist in the foreseeable
future, the petition shall be denied. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.48.070: COMPENSATION:
Any action providing vacation, sale or other transfer of the city's interest in
any street where compensation is required shall be conditioned upon prior
payment of such compensation and shall not be completed by an enactment of the
ordinance until all required compensation is paid to the city together with
advertising costs for all public notices. Generally, such compensation shall be
the fair market value of the land. In appropriate cases compensation may be
provided for, in part or in whole, through an exchange of land or relocation of
streets within an existing subdivision. Where the city's interest in a street
is transferred to another public entity for a public use which benefits the
city, the city council may determine that the benefit to the city from such use
is adequate compensation for the land. Where appropriate, the city may require
conditions precedent such as the installation of landscaping, fencing or other
improvements which must be completed or bonded for prior to the enactment of a
vacation ordinance. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
CHAPTER 14.52
UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES AND LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES
SECTION:
14.52.010: Disregard Of Warning Or Barricade
14.52.020: Livestock Use On Highway Unlawful
14.52.030: Injury To Trees On Highway; Penalty
14.52.040: Violation Of Class C Road Use Regulations
14.52.050: Liability For Damage To Highway Or Structure
14.52.055: Liability For Damage To Sidewalk Or Curb Ramp
14.52.060: Liability For Damages Due To Illegal Operation
14.52.070: Violation; Penalty
14.52.010: DISREGARD OF WARNING OR BARRICADE:
No person shall wilfully fail to observe any barricade, warning light, sign or
flagman, warning the public that a highway or portion thereof is restricted or
closed to traffic. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.52.020: LIVESTOCK USE ON HIGHWAY UNLAWFUL:
It is unlawful for any person to drive livestock upon the public highways.
(Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.52.030: INJURY TO TREES ON HIGHWAY; PENALTY:
Whoever digs up, cuts down or otherwise injures or wilfully destroys any trees
planted and standing on any city highway in conformity to law is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall also be liable to the owner for treble the amount of
damages sustained. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.52.040: VIOLATION OF CLASS C ROAD USE REGULATIONS:
No person shall wilfully violate any of the rules and regulations of the city
council as to the use of class C roads or traffic thereon, nor shall anyone
unlawfully remove, deface or interfere with any road sign, notice, warning or
barrier. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.52.050: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAY OR STRUCTURE:
Any person who wilfully or negligently injures or damages any city highway,
highway equipment or road sign shall be liable for such damage. The amount of
such damage may be recovered in a civil action brought by the city attorney in
the name of the city. (Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.52.055: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO SIDEWALK OR CURB RAMP:
Any person who wilfully or negligently injures or damages any city sidewalk or
curb ramp shall be liable for such damage. The amount of such damage may be
removed in a civil action brought by the city attorney in the name of the city.
(Ord. 96-17, 6-19-1996)
14.52.060: LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES DUE TO ILLEGAL OPERATION:
Any person driving any vehicle, object or contrivance upon any city, highway,
or highway structure shall be liable for all damage that the highway structure
may sustain as a result of the illegal operation, driving or moving of the
vehicle, object or contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum weight
specified by law. Whenever the driver is not the owner of such vehicle, object
or contrivance, but is operating the same with the express or implied
permission of the owner, then the owner and driver shall be jointly and
severally liable for the damage. Such damage (together with the city's attorney
fees and costs, if any) may be recovered in a civil action brought by the city
attorney in the name of the city at the request of the department. (Ord. 96-17,
6-19-1996)
14.52.070: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Where the performance of an act is prohibited or declared unlawful by the
provisions of this chapter but no penalty is prescribed for the violation of
the provisions, the doing of such an act is declared to be a misdemeanor. (Ord.
96-17, 6-19-1996)
CHAPTER 14.56
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
14.56.010: Purpose
14.56.020: Application Of Provisions
14.56.030: Definitions
14.56.040: Permit Required
14.56.050: Exemption From Permit Requirement
14.56.060: Permit; Application Procedures
14.56.070: Permit; Additional Approval
14.56.080: Permit Application Processing
14.56.090: Permit Fees
14.56.100: Permit Approval And Issuance
14.56.110: Liability Insurance And Indemnification
14.56.120: Appeal Procedures
14.56.130: City Liability
14.56.140: Violation; Penalty
14.56.150: Free Speech Zone
14.56.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations governing the time, place and manner of holding special events on
city streets, city property, or county parks located within the city limits, in
order to promote, protect and assure the safety and convenience of the people
in their use of public streets and places. (Ord. 06-49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.020: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter imposes regulatory requirements on certain activities which are
defined as "special events". The requirements imposed by this chapter do not
alter, supersede or nullify any requirements contained in other statutes,
ordinances or regulations which may also regulate these same activities. These
requirements shall be applied in a content neutral manner and without
discrimination as to race, religion, sex, national origin, political
affiliation or other unlawful discriminatory classification. (Ord. 06-49, 10-4-
2006)
14.56.030: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ATHLETIC EVENT: An organized competitive or recreational event in which a group
of people collectively engage in a sport or form of physical exercise,
including, but not limited to, running, jogging, walking, bicycling or skating,
which interferes with the normal flow of traffic or requires the partial or
full closure of any street located in the city.
BLOCK PARTY OR NEIGHBORHOOD GATHERING: A gathering of one or more adjacent
neighborhoods, for the primary purpose of socializing and interacting with
neighbors, which requires the partial or full closure of any street located in
the city, and does not qualify as a mass gathering.
ENTERTAINMENT EVENT: An organized event having as its primary purpose the
entertainment or amusement of a group of people, including, but not limited to,
parades, carnivals, fairs, concerts, which interferes with the normal flow of
traffic or requires the partial or full closure of any street located in the
city.
MASS GATHERING: An organized event, including, but not limited to, festivals,
sporting events, religious events, fairs, or concerts, held on any street
located in the city, or at any city or county park located within Taylorsville,
which includes product vendors, or food or beverage concessions, or which has
an anticipated peak crowd of over two hundred fifty (250) persons.
POLITICAL EVENT: An organized event, not including an athletic or entertainment
event, having as its primary purpose the exercise of expressive activities of a
political nature, including, but not limited to, speechmaking, picketing,
protesting, marching, demonstrating or debating public issues, on any street
located in the city.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any athletic event, entertainment event, block party or
neighborhood gathering or mass gathering, whether held for profit, nonprofit or
charitable purposes, but does not include a political event or an organized
athletic league that is sponsored by or organized in conjunction with Salt Lake
County parks and recreation. (Ord. 06-49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.040: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity, public or private, to promote, advertise or hold a special event
without first obtaining a special event permit and paying the fees as required
in this chapter. (Ord. 06-49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.050: EXEMPTION FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applied to regulate the use of
traditional public forums as alternative channels of communication by the
public, provided such use is for the free exercise of constitutionally
protected activities and does not disrupt or interfere with traffic on public
streets or the use of public places by other members of the public. (Ord. 06-
49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.060: PERMIT; APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   All applications for special event permits shall be made on a special
event permit application form prescribed by the city and shall include the
following information:
      1.   Type and description of event;
      2.   Name of the sponsoring entity, contact person, address and telephone
number;
      3.   Name of the promoting entity, contact person, address and telephone
number;
      4.   Proposed date, together with beginning and ending times;
      5.   Proposed location, including barricade plan and route map;
      6.   Estimated numbers of event staff, participants and spectators;
      7.   Admission fee, donation, or other consideration to be charged or
requested;
      8.   Type and number of vendors or concessionaires;
      9.   Signature of applicant; and
      10.   If the event is a block party or neighborhood gathering, applicant
must collect and submit with the application form a list of signatures
consenting to the street closure from all neighbors whose vehicular access to
their property is affected by the street closure.
   B.   Completed application forms shall be submitted to the city not more
than three hundred sixty five (365) calendar days and not less than thirty (30)
calendar days before the event is scheduled to take place. Applications
submitted less than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the scheduled event
shall be denied unless the applicant demonstrates to the mayor that compliance
with the thirty (30) day deadline was impractical or impossible due to the
nature of the event. The city shall use reasonable efforts to approve or deny
applications within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving the application.
   C.   No advertising of a special event shall be permitted until city
approval of the special event is granted and a special event permit is issued.
   D.   Special events which cross or involve multiple governmental
jurisdictions shall be approved only if the applicant also obtains formal
authorization from all respective governing bodies. (Ord. 06-49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.070: PERMIT; ADDITIONAL APPROVAL:
   A.   If necessary, the applicant shall obtain approval or disapproval of
their proposed special event from the following agencies:
      1.   Salt Lake Valley health department;
      2.   Salt Lake County; and
      3.   Any government agency which is to provide a service in connection
with the special event.
   B.   The city shall coordinate with other agencies in the review of the
special event applications and to provide services and monitoring of special
events. (Ord. 06-49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.080: PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESSING:
   A.   Special event applications shall be submitted to the city for approval
or denial.
   B.   In reviewing an application, the city, in conjunction with the police
department and other agencies as needed, shall consider the following:
      1.   The impact of the special event on the traffic, noise, parking,
security, health and safety of the public;
      2.   The appropriate and reasonable requirements for the mitigation of
traffic, noise, parking congestion, security, health and safety concerns, and
an evaluation of the measures proposed by the applicant to satisfy those
requirements;
      3.   The demonstrated ability of the applicant to comply with
requirements necessary to protect the safety, health and welfare of the public;
      4.   The location and duration of the special event and the city's
ability to accommodate the event with the necessary resources; and
      5.   Other previously approved special events that could cause scheduling
conflicts during the same period and cause overextension of the city's
resources.
   C.   The city may impose additional requirements or conditions necessary to
protect the public interest by ensuring traffic management, noise, available
parking, security of property, or the health and safety of the public. (Ord.
06-49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.090: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   To defray the administrative costs of processing the application, each
initial application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for all events with an anticipated
peak attendance of two hundred fifty (250) or less persons, and a nonrefundable
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for all events with an anticipated peak
attendance of over two hundred fifty (250) persons.
   B.   In order to promote, protect and assure the safety and convenience of
the people in their use of public streets and places, the applicant for a
special event shall provide police officers for the special event if the police
department determines that the special event requires traffic control or police
protection. The police department shall determine if police protection is
necessary and shall determine the number of police officers required for the
special event based upon such factors as: the date and time of the event; the
route location and length; the anticipated traffic and weather conditions; the
estimated number of participants and spectators; the nature, composition,
format and configuration of the event; any prior events involving the same
event or organization, and the estimated time for the event. All police
officers provided by the applicant to satisfy the requirements of this section
shall be Utah certified category 1 police officers. The applicant shall provide
proof that the applicant has obtained the appropriate number of Utah certified
category 1 police officers prior to the city issuing a permit. If the police
department determines that the use of Taylorsville police officers is in the
best interest of the city, the city may provide Taylorsville police officers
and charge a fee for the service. The fee charged for Taylorsville police
officers shall be calculated using the Taylorsville police department's average
overtime hourly wage and shall be paid prior to the issuing of the special
event permit.
   C.   The city may charge additional fees for city services incidental to the
special event.
   D.   The following special events shall be exempt from the fees set forth in
this section:
      1.   Parades of less than one mile in length;
      2.   School events in the immediate area of the school;
      3.   Events sponsored in whole by the city; and
      4.   Block parties and neighborhood gatherings. (Ord. 06-49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.100: PERMIT APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE:
   A.   A special event permit application shall be approved and a permit shall
be issued to the applicant by the city upon compliance with the requirements of
this chapter. The city shall notify all affected agencies of all special events
permits issued pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   If a special event permit application is denied by the city, the reason
or reasons for denial shall be provided in writing to the applicant.
   C.   The city reserves the right to deny permit applications for proposed
special events which pose a significant danger or threat to the public health,
welfare or safety, or which may result in unreasonable inconvenience or cost to
the public. (Ord. 06-49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.110: LIABILITY INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   No special event permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant
has submitted to the city a certificate of insurance, listing the city as an
additional insured, on an occurrence policy issued by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state, showing comprehensive general liability
and property damage coverage for the event with minimum limits of: two hundred
fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for injury or death for one person in any
one occurrence; five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury or death
for two (2) or more persons in any one occurrence; and one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage in any one occurrence.
   B.   The following special events shall be exempt from the insurance
requirements set forth in this section:
      1.   Parades of less than one mile in length;
      2.   School events in the immediate area of the school;
      3.   Events sponsored in whole by the city; and
      4.   Block parties and neighborhood gatherings.
   C.   In consideration for the issuing of a special event permit and the use
of city streets or property, the applicant agrees to indemnify, save harmless
and defend the city, its officers, employees, and volunteers against any claim
for loss, damage or expense (including, without limitation, the city's attorney
fees and costs, if any) sustained by any person on account of injury, death or
property damage occurring by reason of or arising out of the special event.
(Ord. 06-49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.120: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city concerning the denial of a
special event permit may petition the mayor for reconsideration. All appeals
shall be in writing, shall state the specific grounds for the appeal, and shall
be filed in the city office within seven (7) calendar days after the date the
applicant received notice of the administrative denial. An applicant aggrieved
by the decision of the mayor may seek judicial review of such decision pursuant
to rule 65(b), Utah rules of civil procedure, or any other applicable
ordinance, statute or rule providing for such review. (Ord. 06-49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.130: CITY LIABILITY:
By issuing a special event permit, the city makes no guarantees and assumes no
liability for the safety of participants or spectators of special events. (Ord.
06-49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.140: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, as set
forth in section
1.08.020 of this code. Failure to obtain a permit as required by this chapter
may also result in enforcement action by the city, which, in its discretion,
may stop an event which has not been issued a permit and/or may issue citations
where event staff or participants violate other state statutes or city
ordinances, including, but not limited to, traffic rules and regulations,
disturbing the peace, public nuisance, failure to disperse, trespass, or other
health and safety regulations. (Ord. 06-49, 10-4-2006)
14.56.150: FREE SPEECH ZONE:
   A.   Establishment: The mayor may establish a content neutral free speech
zone for any event which the mayor determines that the establishment of a free
speech zone would serve a substantial government interest such as traffic flow,
crowd control or public safety on public property. All free speech zones
established by the mayor shall be content neutral and appropriately marked as a
free speech zone. All free speech zones shall provide ample opportunity for
protestors to communicate their messages, and be of ample size to accommodate
the number of persons the mayor reasonably anticipates that will exercise the
free speech rights during the event.
   B.   Designation Of Area And Duration: For each event in which the mayor
establishes a free speech zone, the mayor shall make available to the public at
least twenty four (24) hours before the event a map and description of the
location of the event, boundaries of the event, location of the free speech
zone, boundaries of the free speech zone, the hours of the regulations on free
speech, and any other restrictions. The free speech zone, duration of the
protest regulations, and other restrictions shall be narrowly tailored to meet
the legitimate government interest of crowd control, traffic control, or public
safety.
   C.   Definitions:
FREE SPEECH ZONE: The area in which protesting is allowed.
PROTEST: Any demonstration, picketing, speechmaking, marching, vigil or
religious service, and all other like forms of conduct which involve the
communication or expression of views or grievances.
UNLAWFUL PROTEST: Protest at an event designated by the mayor except in the
designated free speech zone or use of sound amplification devices at any event
that the mayor has restricted or prohibited the use of such mechanical or sound
amplification devices.
   D.   Restrictions: In any area designated as a free speech zone area,
protestors may not engage in activities that obstruct or impede pedestrians or
vehicles, or harass bystanders with physical contact. Protestors may not tie,
nail, or otherwise physically attach any banners, signs, pictures,
instructional materials, symbols, or other personal property to any city
property or private property.
   E.   Sound Amplification Devices: The mayor may restrict or prohibit the use
of mechanical loudspeakers or sound amplification devices in the free speech
zone, including, but not limited to, megaphones, bullhorns, and electric
amplifiers, if the mayor determines that the use of sound amplification devices
will substantially interfere with the event or will substantially interfere
with crowd control, traffic control, or public safety and that the protestors
have a reasonable opportunity to communicate their message without sound
amplification.
   F.   Penalties: A person is guilty of unlawful protest if he refuses to
comply with the lawful order of the police to protest in the free speech zone
or if he refuses to comply with the lawful order of the police regarding the
use of any mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplification device at an event
that the mayor has restricted or prohibited such mechanical or sound
amplification devices. Unlawful protest is a class C misdemeanor, which offense
is punishable by imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days and a
fine not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or by both the fine
and the term of imprisonment, if the offense continues after a request by the
police to desist. Otherwise, unlawful protest is an infraction, which offense
is punishable by a fine in an amount not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). (Ord. 06-14A, 4-12-2006; amd. Ord. 06-49, 10-4-2006)
CHAPTER 14.60
NAMING PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION:
14.60.010: Purpose
14.60.020: Definitions
14.60.030: Naming Committee
14.60.040: Guidelines For Naming Or Renaming
14.60.050: Procedures For Naming Or Renaming
14.60.060: Exceptions
14.60.070: Temporary Names
14.60.080: Placing Of Plaques, Trees, Or Plantings
14.60.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a process to name, or change the name
of, a public place. The process provides for citizen input where applicable and
a recommendation from a Naming Committee to the City Council. Names are to
reflect the identity of the City and/or the local area and to ensure ease of
identification for the public. (Ord. 17-22, 11-15-2017)
14.60.020: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
NAMING COMMITTEE: A committee appointed pursuant to section
14.60.030 of this chapter and assigned the task to recommend to the City
Council the name of a public place or change the name thereof.
PUBLIC PLACE: Means, but is not limited to, streets, courts, parks,
thoroughfares, buildings, and other public places located in the City. (Ord.
17-22, 11-15-2017)
14.60.030: NAMING COMMITTEE:
Prior to naming a public place, a Naming Committee shall be formed. The Naming
Committee shall have five (5) members and shall consist of three (3) "at large"
citizens from the City, a member of the City Council, and a member of the City
staff. The "at large" members of the Naming Committee shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The Naming Committee
shall adopt such rules of procedures as the Naming Committee considers
necessary. (Ord. 17-22, 11-15-2017)
14.60.040: GUIDELINES FOR NAMING OR RENAMING:
The Naming Committee shall consider the following before recommending to the
City Council the name of a public place:
   A.   An adjacent street to the public place;
   B.   Predominant physical or geographic features (such as ponds, rivers,
creeks, etc.) in or adjacent to the public place;
   C.   The subdivision in which the public place is located;
   D.   A State or nationally recognized person who has improved the quality of
life for the public;
   E.   A significant historic feature or event;
   F.   An individual or group who has made exceptional contributions to the
City that include:
      1.   Donating or contributing a significant amount of money for the
acquisition and/or development of public places;
      2.   Providing significant volunteer services;
   G.   Local government officials will only be considered after such official
has been out of office for a minimum of five (5) years;
   H.   Public places shall only be renamed for good cause. (Ord. 17-22, 11-15-
2017)
14.60.050: PROCEDURES FOR NAMING OR RENAMING:
   A.   Groups or individuals may submit a written nomination for a name, along
with justification, to the Naming Committee. The nomination may include:
      1.   Reasons for the proposed name; and
      2.   Evidence of community support for the proposed name.
   B.   The Naming Committee shall meet as determined necessary and review
public comment, if any, and the names or renames in accordance with the
guidelines set forth in section
14.60.040 of this chapter and shall forward up to three (3) recommendations to
the City Council.
   C.   After giving notice pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-101 et
seq., as amended from time to time, and giving the public an opportunity to
make comments, the City Council may accept or reject the proposed name(s)
submitted by the Naming Committee and then make a final determination of the
naming by ordinance. (Ord. 17-22, 11-15-2017)
14.60.060: EXCEPTIONS:
The City Council may:
   A.   Give naming consideration to an entity or individual (living or
deceased) who has made a significant land and/or monetary contribution and who
has stipulated the name as a condition of the donation.
   B.   Adopt honorary commemorative names for entities or individuals who have
made significant public service contributions. (Ord. 17-22, 11-15-2017)
14.60.070: TEMPORARY NAMES:
The Mayor may assign a temporary name to a public place to be used until an
official name has been chosen as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 17-22, 11-15-
2017)
14.60.080: PLACING OF PLAQUES, TREES, OR PLANTINGS:
The placing of memorial plaques, trees, or plantings in honor of persons shall
be preapproved by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 17-22, 11-15-2017)
TITLE 15
BUILDING CODE
International Building Code   15.08
Mobile Home Parks 1  (Rep. by Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)   15.24
Highway Dedication   15.28
 
Notes
1 1. See title 13, chapter 13.22 of this code.
CHAPTER 15.08
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
SECTION:
15.08.010: International Building Code; Adopted
15.08.020: Fees In General
15.08.030: Fees For Subpermits
15.08.040: Utility Connections
15.08.050: Transition
15.08.010: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE; ADOPTED:
The city of Taylorsville adopts by reference the edition of the international
building code and national electric code as currently adopted by the state of
Utah as the construction standards to be applied to building construction,
alteration, remodeling, and repair, and in the regulation of building
construction, alteration, remodeling and repair. Any reference herein to the
"building code", "international building code" or "uniform building code" shall
mean the building codes as currently adopted by the state of Utah. (Ord. 10-29,
10-6-2010)
15.08.020: FEES IN GENERAL:
Section 107.3 of the 1977 uniform building code with respect to fees is hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference. Section 107.3 of the 1977 uniform
building code, as adopted herein, is hereby amended to read as follows:
When submittal documents are required by section 106.3.2 of the uniform
building code, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the
submittal documents for review. Said plan review fee shall be as follows:
   1. Forty percent of the building permit for other R-3 and U occupancies; and
   2. Sixty-five percent of the building permit fee for all other occupancies.
EXCEPTIONS:
   1. When, in the opinion of the building official, plans can be reviewed
under an established expedited procedure, the plan review fee for R-3 and U
occupancies, including swimming pools and signs, shall not exceed $30.
   2. Plans which have been previously reviewed and placed in the city's plan
card file in contemplation of future permit issuance shall be charged a plan
review in an amount approved by the council. Such plans may be used for issuing
new permits until a new edition of the building code is adopted by the state of
Utah. In such case, the plans shall be resubmitted for review by the city. The
cost for such review shall be as required for "additional plan review," with a
minimum of two hours. Any such plans which are not used for a period of 18
months shall be resubmitted for a full plan review, with all required fees, if
they are to be used again. Card file plans shall comply with administrative
procedures established by the building official.
   The plan review fees specified in this subsection are separate fees from the
permit fees specified in section 107.2 of the uniform building code and are in
addition to the permit fees.
   When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require
additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as
defined in section 106.3.4.2 of the uniform building code, an additional plan
review fee shall be charged at the rate shown on the fee table.
   Charges for other services to be provided by the building department shall
be based upon the hourly rates indicated in the building code and assessed
according to the following:
   A. Renewal of expired permits where only final inspections are required,
four hours;
   B. Reinspection, one hour;
   C. Inspection requested outside of normal working hours, minimum two hours;
   D. Review of new products or materials for acceptance, minimum four hours;
   E. Request for verification of conformance to code for existing buildings,
minimum one hour.
   The building official may determine charges for other services provided for
which fees are not indicated.
   (Ord. 02-01, 1-2-2002)
15.08.030: FEES FOR SUBPERMITS:
Plumbing, electrical, and mechanical fees shall not be assessed when such
permits are issued in conjunction with a building permit for which required
fees have been paid. If two (2) or more subpermits are received, a building
permit must be taken out. If only one subpermit is required, and no other work
is to be done, fees shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule in
chart 15.08.030 of this section.
CHART 15.08.030
ELECTRICAL, MECHANICAL AND PLUMBING FEES
 
Minimum fee for any subpermit                                           $17.00
   Electrical Fees
For each new or modified circuit                                        5.00
Service change or power to panel (1 meter)                               40.00
Each additional meter on the same inspection                            10.00
Temporary power (each meter base)                                       40.00
   Mechanical Fees
For installation, relocation or modification of each appliance or
piece of equipment regulated by the mechanical code, except as noted    8.50
below
For each new duct line and outlet                                       5.00
For each commercial hood                                                23.00
For each evaporative cooler                                             17.00
   Plumbing Fees
For each plumbing fixture or set of fixtures on 1 trap (including       10.00
supply and drainage piping)
For each sand or grease trap                                            17.00
For installation or alteration of supply or drainage piping, water      17.00
heater, or water treatment device
Note: In cases where this fee schedule cannot practically be applied, the fees
shall be determined by the building official.
 
(Ord. 02-01, 1-2-2002)
15.08.040: UTILITY CONNECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any utility company to provide service to any
structure or building, or to service equipment or wiring for which a permit is
required, until approval is granted by the building official. The building
official may order utility services terminated at any location where the use is
not authorized or is in violation of the building, zoning, or other ordinances
of the city. (Ord. 02-01, 1-2-2002)
15.08.050: TRANSITION:
All building permits issued by the city prior to January 1, 2002, shall be
governed by the applicable codes as of the date the building permit was issued.
(Ord. 02-01, 1-2-2002)
CHAPTER 15.24
MOBILE HOME PARKS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 13, chapter 13.22 of this code.
CHAPTER 15.28
HIGHWAY DEDICATION
SECTION:
15.28.010: Dedication And Improvement Required
15.28.020: Exceptions
15.28.030: Dedication Procedure
15.28.040: Building Permit Issuance
15.28.050: Lots Affected By Dedication
15.28.060: Improvement Standards And Procedures
15.28.070: Appeal
15.28.080: Amendments To Highway Plan
15.28.010: DEDICATION AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in section
15.28.020 of this chapter, no building or structure shall be erected,
reconstructed, structurally altered or enlarged, and no building permit shall
be issued therefor, on any lot or parcel of land which abuts a major or
secondary highway within the city, as shown on the major and secondary highway
element of the general plan, as amended from time to time by the city (the
"street plan") on file with the community development director and made part of
this chapter by reference, or other public street which does not conform to
current city width standards, unless the portion of such lot or parcel within
the right of way of the highway to be widened or requiring additional street
width has been dedicated to the city and improved. The dedication and
improvements shall meet the standards for such highway or street as provided in
section
15.28.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 00-43, 10-18-2000)
15.28.020: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The maximum area required to be dedicated shall not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) of any lot or parcel which was of record in the county recorder's
office on the effective date hereof. In determining the amount of area required
for dedication for purposes of this exception, any highway area which
previously has been dedicated to the public through public use shall not be
included.
   B.   Such required dedication shall not reduce the lot or parcel to less
than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   C.   Dedication shall not be required on those portions of a lot occupied by
a main building existing on the effective date hereof.
   D.   Additional improvements shall not be required on a lot where paved
surface, curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements in good condition exist within
the present right of way, unless use is changed from agricultural or single-
family dwelling to a commercial, industrial, office or two-family dwelling or
more.
   E.   Dedication shall not be required for remodelings, additions and
accessory buildings incidental to a single-family dwelling, used as a
residence, existing on the lot as of the effective date hereof codified in this
chapter, provided that no additional dwelling units are created.
   F.   Dedication shall not be required for additions or accessory buildings
clearly incidental to a main building existing on the lot as of the effective
date hereof, provided that the cumulative floor area of all such additions and
accessory buildings does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet or twenty
percent (20%) of existing square footage, whichever is greater. (Ord. 00-43,
10-18-2000)
15.28.030: DEDICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   Any person or other entity required to dedicate land under the
provisions of this chapter shall execute an offer to dedicate and a warranty
deed or other deed form acceptable to the city properly executed by all parties
of interest in such terms as to be binding on the owner, his/her heirs, assigns
or successor in interest. The offer to dedicate, deed, and a title report shall
be filed with the community development director. No title report need be
furnished in cases where the community development director determines the
property in question is within a street being maintained by the city as
dedicated to the public by use.
   B.   The community development director shall review the offer to dedicate
and deed for completeness and compliance with city requirements which shall
thereafter be promptly processed and submitted to the mayor for final
acceptance. The dedication shall be complete when the deed is recorded in the
office of the county recorder after its acceptance by the city.
   C.   For purposes of this chapter, dedication shall be considered as
satisfactorily assured when the offer to dedicate and deed have been approved
by the community development director. (Ord. 00-43, 10-18-2000)
15.28.040: BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE:
When all dedication and improvements required by this chapter have been
completed or assured as provided in this chapter, a building permit may be
issued. (Ord. 00-43, 10-18-2000)
15.28.050: LOTS AFFECTED BY DEDICATION:
On a lot affected by the dedication required under the provisions of this
chapter, all required yards, setbacks, parking area, loading space and building
locations for new buildings or structures or additions to buildings or
structures shall be measured and calculated from the new lot lines created by
the dedication. However, in applying all other provisions of the land use
ordinances of the city, such lot shall be considered in an area as that which
existed immediately prior to dedication. (Ord. 00-43, 10-18-2000; amd. Ord. 12-
15, 7-11-2012)
15.28.060: IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Major and secondary highways within the city shall be dedicated to the
width indicated on the street plan with a cross section as shown in the city
highway standards, except as provided elsewhere by appropriate authority. (Ord.
00-43, 10-18-2000)
   B.   "Improvements" means those improvements required under the city
subdivision regulations which shall be installed in accordance with the
standards required under the subdivision regulations. (Ord. 00-43, 10-18-2000;
amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
   C.   The community development director must approve variations from the
standards described in this section, as necessary, considering the conditions
of terrain and existing improvements contiguous thereto.
   D.   Improvements required under the provisions of this chapter shall be
assured when they are completed to the satisfaction of the community
development director as required in this chapter or a bond has been filed
guaranteeing their completion within one year.
   E.   If the mayor determines that the required improvements should be
completed in a specified sequence and/or in less than a one year period in
order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the city or its residents
from traffic, flood, drainage or other hazards, the city may require in
approving the bond that the improvements be installed in a specified sequence
and period which may be less than one year and shall incorporate such
requirements in the bond. (Ord. 00-43, 10-18-2000)
15.28.070: APPEAL:
Any person may appeal to the mayor any determination in connection with the
administration, enforcement and other provisions of this chapter. The appeal
must provide sufficient information to provide for a proper determination.
(Ord. 00-43, 10-18-2000)
15.28.080: AMENDMENTS TO HIGHWAY PLAN:
Amendments to the street plan may be made by the city after receiving
recommendations from the community development director. (Ord. 00-43, 10-18-
2000)
TITLE 16
RESERVED
TITLE 17
STORM DRAINAGE AND FLOOD CONTROL DEVELOPMENT
Drainage Of Subsurface Water   17.04
Flood Damage Prevention Regulations   17.10
Stormwater Facilities   17.27
Administration   17.28
Stormwater Maintenance   17.29
Storm Sewer Utility   17.30
Violations And Penalties   17.32
CHAPTER 17.04
DRAINAGE OF SUBSURFACE WATER
SECTION:
17.04.010: Written Permission Required
17.04.020: Minimum Standards
17.04.010: WRITTEN PERMISSION REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to make any improvements in the city where
subsurface water exists within two feet (2') of the foundation level of the
improvements without obtaining the written permission of the director of
community development. This requirement shall include, but not be limited to,
subdividers, persons developing ground for industrial and/or commercial
purposes, and homeowners constructing improvements upon their own property.
(Ord. 01-03, 1-17-2001)
17.04.020: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
Before written permission is issued, the director of community development
shall ensure that the following requirements are met:
   A.   Test holes shall be dug upon the properties to a depth sufficient to
determine the extent of the subsurface water table in the proposed development
to include the depth thereof and any other information regarding same which may
be required by the director of community development.
   B.   All applicants must supply data as to seasonal high water table
elevations.
   C.   All footings shall be at least two feet (2') above the highest water
table elevations, and the type of house construction or other development shall
be governed by this standard, or by a satisfactory design approved by a
licensed professional engineer which shall be submitted to the director of
community development for approval.
   D.   The developer shall provide drainage easements to the city along all
rear, side and front lot lines for drainage purposes whenever required to
accommodate subsurface drainage facilities that are constructed in order to
lower ground water levels. The size of the easement shall be determined by the
director of community development and shall in all events be a minimum of ten
feet (10'). The director of community development shall recommend whether the
drainage easements shall be separate from other utility easements or shall be
used concurrently with such easements.
   E.   All grading of any kind shall be done so as to ensure that the drainage
is away from the proposed improvements and in such a manner as to prevent any
conveying or trapping of water adjacent to the basement and foundation walls of
the improvement. (Ord. 01-03, 1-17-2001)
CHAPTER 17.10
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
17.10.010: Findings
17.10.020: Statement Of Purpose
17.10.030: Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses
17.10.035: Definitions
17.10.040: General Provisions
17.10.050: Administration
17.10.060: Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
17.10.070: Penalties For Noncompliance
17.10.010: FINDINGS:
   A.   The flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation which results
in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce
and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety,
and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or
otherwise protected from flood damage. (Ord. 09-31, 9-16-2009)
17.10.020: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains; electric, telephone, and sewer lines; streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area. (Ord. 09-31, 9-16-2009)
17.10.030: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands. (Ord. 09-31, 9-16-2009)
17.10.035: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application:
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high
velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan
flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent (1%) chance or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet (3') where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).
After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of
the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30,
VE or V.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING: A nonbasement building: a) built, in the case of a building
in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the
elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers),
or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water, and b) adequately anchored
so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of
up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99,
AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
In the case of zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a
building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building", even though
the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls
met the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures".
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the
federal emergency management agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community and all
subsequent amendments and revisions thereto.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal emergency
management agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation
of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   A.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
   B.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to,
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations,
building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a
floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source (see definition of Flood Or Flooding).
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY): The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary
of the interior; or
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
      1.   By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the
interior, or
      2.   Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the national
flood insurance program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the
national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date
of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the coastal barrier resources act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided, the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one
hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction"
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of
the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary conditions, or
   B.   Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided, that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this chapter
when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance,
therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited
by this chapter. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the national flood
insurance program regulations.)
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)
(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the national flood insurance program
regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas. (Ord. 09-31, 9-16-2009)
17.10.040: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the city.
   B.   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency
management agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood
Insurance Study For The City Of Taylorsville", dated September 25, 2009, and
all subsequent amendments and/or revisions thereto, with accompanying flood
insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any
revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this chapter.
   C.   A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   D.   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its
use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
   E.   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict
or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   F.   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:
      1.   Considered as minimum requirements;
      2.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      3.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
   G.   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 09-31,
9-16-2009)
17.10.050: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   The director of community development is hereby appointed the
floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this
chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (national flood insurance
program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
   B.   Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining
to the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building
site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe
from flooding.
      3.   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter.
      4.   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required.
      5.   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.
      6.   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency which is the NFIP coordinator, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
federal emergency management agency.
      7.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
      8.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with subsection
17.10.040B of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of this section.
      9.   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain
administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and
AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the community.
      10.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot (1'), provided,
that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision).
   C.   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not
be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed;
      3.   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of subsection
17.10.060B of this chapter;
      4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
      5.   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with
subsection B of this section.
   D.   Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain
administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      1.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      2.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      3.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      4.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      5.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      6.   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems;
      7.   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      8.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      9.   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      10.   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
   E.   1. The appeal authority as established by the community shall hear and
render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
      2.   The appeal authority shall hear and render judgment on an appeal
only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
      3.   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal
authority may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
      4.   The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency
management agency upon request.
      5.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this chapter.
      6.   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below
the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in this section have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      7.   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the appeal authority may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter.
      8.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      9.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
      10.   Prerequisites for granting variances:
         a.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
         b.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
            (1)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
            (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
            (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         c.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      11.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that:
         a.   The criteria outlined in subsections E1 through E9 of this
section are met, and
         b.   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety. (Ord. 09-31, 9-16-2009)
17.10.060: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
   A.   New Construction And Substantial Improvements: In all areas of special
flood hazard, the following provisions are required for all new construction
and substantial improvements:
      1.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
      2.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      3.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
      4.   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding;
      5.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
      6.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters; and
      7.   On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   B.   Floodproofing Requirements: In all areas of special flood hazard where
base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in: 1) subsection
17.10.040B of this chapter, 2) subsection
17.10.050B8 of this chapter, or 3) subsection C3 of this section, the following
provisions are required:
      1.   Residential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as
proposed in subsection
17.10.050C of this chapter is satisfied.
      2.   Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
      3.   Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with
fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
         b.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade.
         c.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices, provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
      4.   Manufactured Homes:
         a.   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on
a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
         b.   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 1)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 2) in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, 3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, or 4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a
flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
         c.   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with
zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the
provisions of this subsection B4 be elevated so that either:
            (1)   The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevation, or
            (2)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no
less than thirty six inches (36") in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
      5.   Recreational Vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days,
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
         c.   Meet the permit requirements of subsection
17.10.050C of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in subsection B4 of this section. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions.
   C.   Subdivisions:
      1.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with subsections A and B of
this section.
      2.   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development
permit requirements of subsections
17.10.040C and 17.10.050C of this chapter; and the provisions of this section.
      3.   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development, including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots
or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to
subsection
17.10.050B of this chapter or subsection B of this section.
      4.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
      5.   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage.
   D.   Areas Of Shallow Flooding: Located within the areas of special flood
hazard established in subsection
17.10.040B of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. These
areas have special flood hazard associated with base flood depths of one to
three feet (3') where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following
provisions apply:
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified).
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures:
         a.   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
         b.   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads or effects of buoyancy.
      3.   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in subsection
17.10.050C of this chapter, are satisfied.
      4.   Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
   E.   Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
subsection
17.10.040B of this chapter, are areas designated as floodways. Since the
floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters
which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
      1.   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      2.   If subsection E1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction
and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this section.
      3.   Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter I, section 65.12, of the
national flood insurance regulations, a community may permit encroachments
within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base
flood elevations, provided, that the community first applies for a conditional
FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. (Ord. 09-31, 9-16-2009)
17.10.070: PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than six
(6) months, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs
and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation. (Ord. 09-31, 9-16-2009)
CHAPTER 17.27
STORM WATER FACILITIES
SECTION:
17.27.010: Purpose
17.27.020: Impact Fees Imposed
17.27.030: Service Areas
17.27.040: Accounting, Expenditure And Refund Of Impact Fees
17.27.050: Adjustment Of Impact Fee
17.27.060: Administrative Challenges And Appeals Procedure
17.27.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and equitable means of funding
the storm water facilities which will be necessary to service anticipated
future growth and development in the city. The impact fees for storm water
facilities implemented through this chapter will help achieve an equitable
allocation of the costs of providing such facilities which are reasonably
related to and necessary to service anticipated future growth. (Ord. 01-03, 1-
17-2001)
17.27.020: IMPACT FEES IMPOSED:
The owner or developer of property located in one of the drainage basins for
which storm water facilities improvements are necessary in order to accommodate
new development shall pay an impact fee to the city for that purpose. The
amount of the fees shall be as set forth in chart 17.27.030 of this chapter.
The city council may adjust such fees for inflation by resolution on an annual
basis for each fiscal year based on a report from the department utilizing a
generally recognized construction cost index. The fees shall be paid as a
condition precedent to the issuance of a permit to build or construction of
improvements upon the property in question. Where the development is a
subdivision of a conditional use, the fee shall be paid prior to the approval
of the plat or plan by the development services department and such fees shall
be collected by the department. (Ord. 01-03, 1-17-2001)
17.27.030: SERVICE AREAS:
Each drainage basin is established as a separate service area with respect to
the provision of storm water facilities.
   CHART 17.27.030
 
   Taylorsville Basin
   (Development runoff) 1534) X $6,629,632.00 = gross fees
   Bennion Basin
   (Development runoff) 854) X $5,019,696.00 = gross fees
 
(Ord. 01-03, 1-17-2001)
17.27.040: ACCOUNTING, EXPENDITURE AND REFUND OF IMPACT FEES:
All of the impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited
into a separate interest bearing ledger account for storm water facilities and
may only be used for that purpose. The accounting, expenditure and refund of
all such impact fees collected shall be handled by the city in accordance with
the provisions of the Utah impact fees act. (Ord. 01-03, 1-17-2001)
17.27.050: ADJUSTMENT OF IMPACT FEE:
   A.   The city may adjust the impact fees imposed pursuant to this chapter as
necessary in order to:
      1.   Respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases;
      2.   Ensure that the impact fees are imposed fairly;
      3.   Permit the adjustment of the amount of the fee based upon studies
and data submitted by an applicant as approved by the department in order to
ensure that the fee represents the proportionate  share of the costs of
providing such facilities which are reasonably related to and necessary in
order to provide the services in question to anticipated future growth and
development activities; and
      4.   Allow credits against impact fees for dedication of land for,
improvement to or new construction of, any system improvements which are
identified in the capital facilities plan and required by the city as a
condition of approving the development activity. No credits shall be given for
project improvements as defined in the Utah impact fees act.
   B.   The mayor shall have the authority to make such adjustments based upon
information submitted by the applicant and the recommendations from the
department.
   C.   The city may adopt policies consistent with this chapter and any
resolutions passed by the city council to assist in the implementation,
administration and interpretation of this chapter related to storm water
facilities impact fees. (Ord. 01-03, 1-17-2001)
17.27.060: ADMINISTRATIVE CHALLENGES AND APPEALS PROCEDURE:
   A.   Any person or entity required to pay an impact fee who believes the fee
does not meet the requirements of law may file a written request for
information with the city as provided by the Utah impact fees act. Within two
(2) weeks of the receipt of the request for information, the city shall provide
the person or entity with the written analysis required by the Utah impact fees
act and any other relevant information relating to the impact fee.
   B.   Any person or entity residing in or owning property within the city who
believes the fee does not meet the requirements of the law or wishes to
challenge the fee shall file a written appeal within thirty (30) days after
payment of any impact fee with the city setting forth in detail all factual and
legal grounds in support of the appeal. Upon receipt of the appeal, the
director of the department shall make a recommendation to the mayor and
schedule a public hearing before the mayor on the appeal for the purpose of
receiving input from all interested persons. The mayor shall thereafter render
his decision on the appeal no later than thirty (30) days after the date the
appeal was filed. Any person or entity who has failed to comply with these
administrative remedies may not file or join an action challenging the validity
of any impact fee.
   C.   Any person or entity who was a party to an appeal under this section
who is adversely affected by the decision of the mayor may petition the
district court for a review of the decision within ninety (90) days of a
decision upholding an impact fee by the mayor or within one hundred twenty
(120) days after the date the challenge to the impact fee was filed, whichever
is earlier. Such a declaratory judgment action or petition for review
challenging the validity of the fee shall be filed in the third judicial
district court for Salt Lake County.
   D.   In the event a petition is filed with the court, the city shall
transmit to the reviewing court the record of its proceedings including its
minutes, findings, orders, and, if available, a true and correct transcript of
its proceedings.
   E.   If the proceeding was tape recorded, a transcript of that tape
recording is a true and correct transcript for the purposes of subsection D of
this section.
   F.   If there is a record:
      1.   The district court's review is limited to the record provided by the
city; and
      2.   The court may not accept or consider any evidence outside the city's
record unless that evidence was offered to the city and the court determines
that it was improperly excluded by the city.
   G.   If there is an inadequate record, the court may call witnesses and take
evidence.
   H.   The court shall affirm the decision of the city if the decision was
supported by substantial evidence in the record.
   I.   The judge may award reasonable attorney fees and costs to the
prevailing party in any action brought under this section (Ord. 01-03, 1-17-
2001)
CHAPTER 17.28
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
17.28.010: Administrative Responsibility
17.28.010: ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY:
The community development department shall administer the provisions of this
title and all other ordinances pertaining to drainage, flood control and water
quality management planning. (Ord. 01-03, 1-17-2001)
CHAPTER 17.29
STORMWATER MAINTENANCE
SECTION:
17.29.010: General Provisions
17.29.020: Definitions
17.29.030: UPDES Stormwater Permit
17.29.040: Land Disturbance Permits
17.29.050: Online Stormwater Management Of New Construction And Post-
Construction
17.29.060: Drainage Channels, Waterways And Sensitive Areas
17.29.070: Building Permit
17.29.080: Application For A Land Disturbance Permit
17.29.090: Permit Duration
17.29.100: Notice of Construction
17.29.110: Performance Bonds
17.29.120: Stormwater System Design And Management Standards
17.29.130: General Performance Criteria For Stormwater Management
17.29.140: Minimum Control Requirements
17.29.150: Stormwater Management Plan Requirements
17.29.160: Maintenance Easements
17.29.170: Maintenance Agreement
17.29.180: Dedication
17.29.190: Sediment And Erosion Control Plans
17.29.200: Post-Construction
17.29.210: Waivers
17.29.220: Existing Locations And Development
17.29.230: Illicit Discharges
17.29.240: Enforcement
17.29.250: Penalties
17.29.010: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to protect, maintain, and
enhance the environment of the City; establish responsibilities for controlling
and managing stormwater runoff; protect the public health, safety and the
general welfare of the citizens of the City by controlling discharges of
pollutants to the City's stormwater system; maintain and improve the quality of
the receiving waters into which the stormwater outfalls flow including, without
limitation, lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, wetlands, and groundwater of the
City; enable the City to comply with the National Pollution Discharge
Elimination System permit (NPDES/UPDES) and applicable regulations, 40 CFR
122.26 for stormwater discharges; and exercise the powers granted by Utah law,
which enables the City to regulate the planning, location, construction, and
operation and maintenance of stormwater facilities in the City, whether or not
owned and operated by the City; adopt any rules and regulations by resolution
deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, including the
adoption of a system of fees for services and permits; establish standards to
regulate the quantity and quality of stormwater discharged and to regulate
stormwater contaminants as may be necessary to protect water quality; review
and approve plans and plats for stormwater management in proposed subdivisions
or commercial developments; issue permits for discharge of stormwater from
privately held property into the City's stormwater system, or for the
construction, alteration, extension, or repair of stormwater facilities which
connect to the City stormwater system; suspend or revoke permits when it is
determined that the permittee has violated any applicable ordinance,
resolution, or condition of the permit; regulate and prohibit discharges into
City stormwater facilities which consist of sanitary, industrial, or commercial
sewage or waters that have otherwise been contaminated; and expend funds to
remediate or mitigate the detrimental effects of contaminated land or other
sources of stormwater contamination.
   B.   Administration: The City Engineer shall administer the provisions of
this chapter. This chapter shall not be construed to relieve any person from
responsibility for damage to other persons or property, nor impose upon the
City, its officers, agents or employees, any liability for damage to other
persons or property. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.020: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply. Words
used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The
word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive.
Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the meaning given
by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's
Dictionary:
AS-BUILT, RECORD PLANS: Drawings depicting conditions as they were actually
constructed.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or "BMPs": Physical, structural, and/or managerial
practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or reduce pollution
of water, that have been approved by the City, and that have been incorporated
by reference into this chapter as if fully set out therein. For purposes of
this chapter, the relevant BMPs are more particularly defined in Salt Lake
County's "Guidance Document for Stormwater Management" document.
CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that
conducts flowing water continuously or periodically.
CITY: The City of Taylorsville, a municipal corporation and political
subdivision of Salt Lake County, State of Utah, and its governing body,
employees, and authorized representatives.
CITY ENGINEER: The City Engineer of the City of Taylorsville, or its authorized
designee.
CITY STORMWATER SYSTEM: City-owned storm systems including, without limitation,
gutters, catch basins, grates, pipelines, and property encumbrances that
receive runoff from public right-of-way, private property, natural waterways,
and systems identified as City easements.
CITY REMEDY(IES): For purposes of this chapter, the term "City Remedy(ies)"
means any civil or administrative processes or penalties levied by the City
and/or the City's Administrative Law Judge.
COMMUNITY WATER: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes,
reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells and other bodies
of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming
a part of the boundaries of the City.
CONTAMINANT: Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or
matter which is not naturally occurring and introduced into the stormwater
system.
DESIGN STORM EVENT: A hypothetical storm event, of a given frequency interval
and duration, used in the analysis and design of a stormwater facility.
DISCHARGE: To dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place
by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected,
seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means including, but not limited to,
any direct or indirect entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal
separate storm sewer system.
EASEMENT: An acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a person,
party, firm, corporation, City or other legal entity has in the land of
another.
EROSION: The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or
other geological agents, whether naturally occurring or acting in conjunction
with or promoted by anthropogenic activities or effects.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A written plan (including drawings or other
graphic representations) that is designed to minimize erosion and sediment
runoff at a site during construction activities.
GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER PERMIT: A permit required by the Utah
Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Water Quality.
HOT SPOT ("PRIORITY AREA"): An area where land use or activities generate
highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of
those typically found in stormwater.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the municipal
separate stormwater system, whether or not such connections result in
discharges into that system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system
that is not composed entirely of stormwater and not specifically exempted under
section 17.29.040.
IRRIGATION DITCHES: Gravity irrigation ditches used by irrigation shareowners
having a right of water passageway by ROW, easement, or prescription.
LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT: A City land disturbance permit as adopted by the City.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any activity on property that results in a change in
the existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative) and/or the
existing soil topography. Land disturbing activities include, but are not
limited to, development, redevelopment, demolition, construction,
reconstruction, clearing, grading, filling, and excavation.
MAINTENANCE: Any activity that is necessary to keep a stormwater facility in
good working order so as to function as designed. Maintenance shall include,
but is not limited to, complete reconstruction of a stormwater facility if
reconstruction is needed in order to restore the facility to its original
operational design parameters. Maintenance shall also include, but is not
limited to, the correction of any problem on the site property that may
directly impair the functions of the stormwater facility.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT: A document recorded with the Salt Lake County Recorder's
Office that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-
term maintenance of stormwater management practices.
MANAGEMENT PERMIT: The implementation and maintenance of SWPPP BMPs, in
accordance with ordinance and state regulations. A Management Permit includes
management to the level that will effectively minimize the potential for
polluted discharges and prevent the effects of construction nuisances to the
public. A Management Permit also carries the responsibility of the project site
and the effects of persons and equipment that may enter the construction
envelope, such as, but is not limited to, employees, contractors, suppliers,
utility companies, visitors, and trespassers.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM ("MS4") ("MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER
SYSTEM"): The conveyances owned or operated by the City for the collection and
transportation of stormwater, including, but not limited to, roads and streets
and their drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, and storm drains.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT ("NPDES PERMIT"): A
permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1342.
N.O.I. EXEMPT PROJECT: A project that does not warrant compliance with UCGP but
does justify municipal oversight per MS4 regulation under the "Construction
Site Stormwater Runoff Control" section.
NOTICE OF TERMINATION ("N.O.T."): A written document which indicates the
requirements of the N.O.I. or land disturbance permit has been completed.
Issuance of this document releases the permittee of further obligation for the
management of the construction site. An N.O.T. shall be issued by both the City
and the State of Utah.
NOTICE OF VIOLATION ("N.O.V."): Written notice issued by the City Engineer
whenever the City Engineer finds that a person or entity is not compliant with
this chapter; the City Engineer shall order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person or registered agent or entity. Requirements
in this notice are at the sole discretion of the City Engineer and may include,
but are not limited to, monitoring, payment to cover costs relating to the
noncompliance, and the implementation of best management practices.
OFF-SITE FACILITY: A structural BMP located outside the subject property
boundary described in the permit application for land development activity.
ON-SITE FACILITY: A structural BMP located within the subject property boundary
described in the permit application for land development activity.
PEAK FLOW: The maximum instantaneous rate of flow of water at a particular
point resulting from a storm event.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm or association and any municipal or private corporation organized or
existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.
PREEXISTING CONDITIONS: Conditions of a property in its native state or changed
under approval by the City or changed property that is grandfathered.
PRIORITY AREA: See definition for Hot Spot.
PROPERTY OWNER: The land owner of property within the boundary of the City.
RUNOFF: That portion of the precipitation on a drainage area that is discharged
from the area into the municipal separate stormwater system. Runoff includes,
but is not limited to, water produced by storms, surface drainage, snow and ice
melt, and other water handled by the storm sewer drainage system.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water,
gravity, or ice and has come to rest on the Earth's surface either above or
below sea level.
SEDIMENTATION: Soil particles suspended in stormwater that can settle in
streambeds and disrupt the natural flow of the stream.
SOILS REPORT: A study of soils on a subject property with the primary purpose
of characterizing and describing the soils to qualify as a valid soils report
acceptable to the City. The report shall be prepared by a qualified soils
engineer, who shall be directly involved in the soil characterization either by
performing the investigation or by directly supervising employees.
STABILIZATION: Providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural, that
will prevent erosion from occurring.
STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff, street waters
related to street maintenance, infiltration and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The programs to maintain quality and quantity of
stormwater runoff to pre-development levels.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES SYSTEM: The drainage structures, conduits,
ditches, combined sewers, sewers, and all device appurtenances by means of
which stormwater is collected, transported, pumped, treated or disposed of.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: The set of drawings and other documents that
comprise all the information and specifications for the programs, drainage
systems, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques intended to maintain or
restore quality and quantity of stormwater runoff to pre-development levels.
STORMWATER MASTER PLAN: The current City stormwater master plan as adopted by
the City.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from
precipitation.
STRUCTURAL BMPs: Devices that are constructed to provide control of stormwater
runoff.
SURFACE WATER: Waters upon the surface of the Earth in bounds created naturally
or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other watercourses,
lakes and reservoirs.
TAYLORSVILLE CITY STORMWATER DESIGN STANDARDS: Current City stormwater
standards and regulations as adopted by the City.
UPDES: The Utah Pollution Discharge Elimination System, which is the state/
national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating,
monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment
requirements, under Sections 307, 318, 402, and 405 of the Clean Water Act.
WATERCOURSE: A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either
natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water.
WATERSHED: All the land area that contributes runoff to a particular point
along a waterway. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.030: UPDES STORMWATER PERMIT:
Every person or entity shall be required to obtain a UPDES Stormwater Permit
from the State of Utah in the following cases:
   A.   For a land disturbing activity which disturbs one (1) or more acres of
land; and
   B.   For a land disturbing activity which disturbs less than one (1) acre of
land if such activity is part of a larger common plan of development that
effects one (1) or more acres of land. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.040: LAND DISTURBANCE PERMITS:
Every person or entity shall be required to obtain a land disturbance permit
from the City Engineer in the following cases:
   A.   For a land disturbing activity which disturbs one (1) or more acres of
land;
   B.   For a land disturbing activity which disturbs less than one (1) acre of
land if such activity is part of a larger common plan of development that
effects one (1) or more acres of land;
   C.   For a land disturbing activity which disturbs less than one (1) acre of
land if, in the sole discretion of the City Engineer, such activity poses a
unique threat to water quality, air quality, or public health or safety;
   D.   For the creation and use of borrow pits;
   E.   For the development of a single-family home;
   F.   For processing of earthen materials such as top soil and gravel
screening; and
   G.   For the construction of parking lots. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.050: ONLINE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OF NEW CONSTRUCTION AND POST-
CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   Requirements of the general construction permit, the MS4 permit, and
the multi-sector general permit shall be managed via an Internet-based
management system which meets audit requirements for the State of Utah.
      2.   The stormwater management method and system shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer prior to the approval of projects and the
issuance of permits.
      3.   Reports and data shall be made available upon request by the City.
   B.   General Construction Permit Management: The Internet-based management
system referenced above in subsection A.1. shall incorporate the following
operations at a minimum:
      1.   Provide a SWPPP management system;
      2.   Report inspections, monitoring, training, assessment, and audit
activities;
      3.   Provide City staff access rights to post-inspections, corrective
actions, assessments, audits, SWPPP, and data;
      4.   Incorporate the use of the Utah state inspection form and criteria
as the basis for inspection;
      5.   Provide public read-only rights; and
      6.   Generate reports and histories.
   C.   Multi-Sector General Permit and MS4 Permit Post-Construction
Requirements: The online system shall incorporate the following operations at a
minimum:
      1.   Provide a SWMP and permit management system;
      2.   Report inspections, monitoring, training, assessments, and audit
activities;
      3.   Provide City staff access rights to post-inspections, corrective
actions, assessments, audits, SWMP, and data; and
      4.   Generate reports and histories. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.060: DRAINAGE CHANNELS, WATERWAYS AND SENSITIVE AREAS:
   A.   Property owners shall not alter or restrict natural channels and
waterways without proper federal, state and City permits.
   B.   Modifications of sensitive areas are subject to and governed by chapter
13.15 - Sensitive Area Overlay (OV-SA) Zone. These actions will require a land
disturbance permit and approval from all other governing agencies.
   C.   Property owners proposing to redirect runoff, surface and/or pipe flow
to properties or facilities outside City boundaries must provide written
approval from the state, county or City or their agents.
   D.   Property owners are responsible for the protection of canals per the
relevant sections of this chapter.
   E.   Discharges or modifications to the canals require written approval from
the canal owners and applicable governing agencies.(Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.070: BUILDING PERMIT:
   A.   No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has obtained a
land disturbance permit where the same is required by this chapter.
   B.   Exceptions: The following activities are exempt from the permit
requirement:
      1.   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property, or natural resources;
      2.   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted main or accessory use;
      3.   Agricultural activities that are consistent with an approved farm
conservation plan or a management plan prepared or approved by the appropriate
City, federal, or state agency;
      4.   Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures; and
      5.   Minor residential landscaping, as long as City right-of-way and
adjacent property owners are not adversely affected. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.080: APPLICATION FOR A LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT:
   A.   Each application for a land disturbance permit shall include the
following:
      1.   Name of applicant;
      2.   Business or residence address of applicant;
      3.   Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property of
record in the Salt Lake County Assessor's Office;
      4.   Address and legal description of subject property including the tax
reference number and parcel number of the subject property;
      5.   Name, address and telephone number of the contractor and any
subcontractor(s) who shall perform the land disturbing activity and who shall
implement the erosion and sediment control plan; and
      6.   A statement indicating the nature, extent and purpose of the land
disturbing activity including the size of the area for which the permit shall
be applicable and a schedule for the starting and completion dates of the land
disturbing activity.
   B.   The applicant shall obtain from any other state or federal agency any
other appropriate environmental permits that pertain to the property. However,
the inclusion of those permits in the application shall not foreclose the City
Engineer from imposing additional development requirements and conditions,
commensurate with this chapter, on the development of property covered by those
permits.
   C.   Each application shall be accompanied by:
      1.   An N.O.I., for projects that warrant compliance with the Utah
Construction General Permit ("UCGP") regulation, and a stormwater pollution
prevention plan ("SWPPP") which meets the requirements of this chapter. After
obtaining the permit(s), the permit holder must manage permits and SWPPP in
accordance to UCGP and City standards during the land disturbing activity and
after the activity has been completed. The SWPPP shall remain in place until
the operator files a notice of termination ("N.O.T.") with the state and the
City closes the land disturbance permit;
      2.   For smaller N.O.I.-exempt projects, a stormwater pollution
prevention plan ("SWPPP") that will effectively control pollutants associated
with the construction activity in accordance with City land disturbance
standards; and
      3.   Payment and other stormwater management fees, as adopted by
resolution and found in the City fee schedule.
   D.   The City Engineer will review each application for a land disturbance
permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Within
fifteen (15) business days after receiving a complete application, the City
Engineer shall provide one of the following responses in writing:
      1.   Approval of the permit application;
      2.   Approval of the permit application, subject to such reasonable
conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this
chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
      3.   Denial of the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for the
denial.
   E.   If the City Engineer has granted conditional approval of the permit,
the applicant shall submit a revised plan that conforms to the conditions
established by the City Engineer. However, the applicant may be allowed to
proceed with their land disturbing activity so long as it conforms to
conditions established by the City Engineer.
   F.   No development plans will be released until the land disturbance permit
has been approved. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.090: PERMIT DURATION:
Every land disturbance permit shall expire and become null and void if
substantial work authorized by such permit has not commenced within one hundred
eighty (180) calendar days of issuance, or is not complete within eighteen (18)
months from the date of the commencement of construction. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-
2019)
17.29.100: NOTICE OF CONSTRUCTION:
The applicant must notify the City Engineer in writing via either email or
hardcopy letter at least ten (10) working days in advance of the commencement
of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system
construction shall be conducted by the City Engineer. All inspections shall be
documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information:
   A.   The date and location of the inspection;
   B.   Whether construction is compliant with the approved stormwater
prevention pollution plan;
   C.   Variations from the approved construction specifications; and
   D.   Any violations that exist. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.110: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The City Engineer may, at his discretion:
   A.   Require the submittal of a performance bond prior to issuance of a
permit in order to ensure that the stormwater practices are installed by the
permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan.  The
amount of the installation performance bond shall be the total estimated
construction cost of the structural BMPs approved under the permit plus any
reasonably foreseeable additional related costs (e.g., for damages or
enforcement.)  The performance bond shall contain forfeiture provisions for
failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan.  The
applicant shall provide an itemized construction cost estimate complete with
unit prices which shall be subject to acceptance, amendment or rejection by the
City Engineer. Alternatively, the City Engineer shall have the right to
calculate the cost of construction cost estimates.
   B.   The performance bond shall be released in full only upon submission of
as-built, record plans and written certification by the City Engineer that the
structural BMP has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and
other applicable provisions of this chapter.
   C.   The City Engineer shall make a final inspection of the structural BMP
to ensure that it complies with the approved plan and the provisions of this
chapter. Provisions for a partial pro rata release of the performance security
or performance bond based on the completion of various development stages can
be made at the discretion of the City Engineer. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.120: STORMWATER SYSTEM DESIGN AND MANAGEMENT STANDARDS:
When a person is engaged in development activity which requires prior approval
by the City and the issuance of a land disturbance permit, the following
standards apply to the design and management of any water carrying system found
on the property disturbed by that person.  Prior to or during the site design
process, applicants for land disturbance permits shall consult with the City
Engineer to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design
requirements than described in this chapter:
   A.   Irrigation Ditches: All existing irrigation ditches located on the site
or straddling a site property boundary shall be piped with a sufficient size
pipe and shall be coordinated with water user or ditch owner. In limited
circumstances, an applicant may submit a written request to the City to leave
an irrigation ditch open. At the City Engineer's sole discretion, the City
Engineer shall determine whether a request for an open ditch may be granted. 
If the City Engineer grants a request for an open ditch, the City Engineer
shall have the authority to place conditions on the construction and
maintenance of the open ditch. 
      1.   Property owners are responsible for the protection of irrigation
ditches against any impact which may occur as a result of development activity.
      2.   Discharges to private ditches require written approval from the
ditch owners and design shall comply with the terms of approvals and the
"Taylorsville City Stormwater Design Standards" and the land disturbance permit
incorporated by reference into this chapter.
      3.   Piping of ditches and modification to the diversion boxes require
documented coordination with ditch owners or representative but are not
required to receive written approval of ditch owners. Design and coordination
requirements shall comply with the "Taylorsville City Stormwater Design
Standards" and the land disturbance permit documents.
   B.   Stormwater Design and BMP Manuals:
      1.   Design of storm drain systems and discharges into a City storm drain
system requires direct supervision of a Utah-registered professional engineer,
and shall carry the seal of the same supervising professional engineer.
      2.   The City adopts as its stormwater design and best management
practice ("BMP") manuals the following publications, which are incorporated by
reference in this chapter as if fully set out herein:
         a.   Taylorsville City Stormwater Design Standards.
         b.   Taylorsville City Stormwater Master Plan.
         c.   Salt Lake County Public Works Department "Guidance Document for
Stormwater Management."
         d.   Salt Lake Valley Health Department Stormwater Regulations. These
manuals include a list of acceptable BMPs and include specific design
performance criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each
stormwater practice. The manuals may be updated and expanded from time to time,
at the discretion of the governing body of the City, upon the recommendation of
the City Engineer, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitory and
local maintenance experience. Stormwater facilities that are designed,
constructed and maintained in accordance with these BMP criteria will be
presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. (Ord. 19-10,
8-21-2019)
17.29.130: GENERAL PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Unless granted a waiver or judged by the City Engineer to be exempt, the
following post-construction performance standards for stormwater management
shall be addressed to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Engineer:
   A.   All development shall conform to the latest revision of the "General
Permit for Discharge from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems"
("MS4s") regulating stormwater runoff quality, precipitation runoff rates, and
volumes that can be discharged from a property. Development shall conform to
the latest revision of the City Stormwater Design Standards and stormwater
master plans governing stormwater management.
   B.   To protect stream channels from degradation, specific channel
protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the BMP manual.
   C.   Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e.,
cold water fisheries, recreation areas, recharge areas, water supply
reservoirs) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to
utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices.
   D.   Stormwater discharges from "hot spots" may require the application of
specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention practices.
   E.   The calculations for determining peak flows for construction activities
as found in the "Taylorsville City Stormwater Design Standards" shall be used
for sizing all stormwater facilities. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.140: MINIMUM CONTROL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Stormwater discharge during all construction activities shall comply
with the terms of the land disturbance permit, the "Taylorsville City
Stormwater Design Standards," requirements set forth by the International
Building Code, and the state of Utah UPDES requirements.
   B.   Stormwater designs shall meet the multi-stage storm frequency storage
requirements as identified in the "Taylorsville City Stormwater Design
Standards" unless the City Engineer has granted the applicant a full or partial
waiver for a particular BMP under this section.
   C.   Runoff rates from one lot to another may not exceed preexisting
conditions or in such a manner that may unreasonably and unnecessarily cause
more harm than formerly.
   D.   If hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant modifications to the
minimum control requirements, the City Engineer may impose any and all
additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and
rate of runoff. (Ord. 19- 10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.150: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS:
Property owners are responsible to manage stormwater runoff and sediment
whether in conduit systems or on the surface that traverse or originate on
their property, unless this responsibility is relinquished through the terms
and conditions of an easement. The stormwater management plan shall include
sufficient information to allow the City Engineer to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed
development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and
the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing
stormwater generated at the project site. To accomplish this goal, the
stormwater management plan shall include the following:
   A.   Topographic base map;
   B.   Existing surface water drainage including, but not limited to, streams,
ponds, culverts, ditches, sink holes, wetlands, and the type, size, elevation,
etc., of nearest upstream and downstream drainage structures;
   C.   Current land use including, but not limited to, all existing
structures, locations of utilities, roads, and easements;
   D.   All other existing significant natural and artificial features;
   E.   Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to
be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads
and easements; the limits of clearing and grading;
   F.   Proposed structural BMPs;
   G.   A written description of the site plan and justification of proposed
changes in natural conditions shall also be required;
   H.   Hydrologic and Hydraulic Design Calculations for the Pre-Development
and Post-Development Conditions for the Design Storms Specified in the
"Taylorsville City Stormwater Design Standards."  These calculations must show
that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling
runoff from the site in compliance with this chapter and the guidelines of the
"Taylorsville City Stormwater Design Standards." Such calculations shall
include, but are not limited to:
      1.   A description of the design storm frequency, duration, and intensity
where applicable;
      2.   Time of concentration;
      3.   Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients including assumed soil
moisture conditions;
      4.   Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area;
      5.   Infiltration rates, where applicable;
      6.   Culvert, stormwater sewer, ditch and/or other stormwater conveyance
capacities;
      7.   Flow velocities; and
      8.   Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test
results.
   I.   If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic
properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit
profiles and soil survey reports. The number and location of required soil
borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine
the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the
control measure;
   J.   The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall
include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued
performance. These plans shall identify the parts or components of a stormwater
management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or
training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the
effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or
additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. A permanent
elevation benchmark shall be identified in the plan to assist in the periodic
inspection of the facility; and
   K.   The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation
at the site after construction is finished, including, but not limited to, who
will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what
practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is
preserved, where it is required by the BMP. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.160: MAINTENANCE EASEMENTS:
The applicant must ensure access to the site for the purpose of inspection and
repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed. These easements must
be binding on the current property owner and all subsequent owners of the
property and must be properly recorded in the Salt Lake County Recorder's
Office. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.170: MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT:
The owner of property to be served by an on-site stormwater management facility
must execute an inspection and maintenance agreement that shall operate as a
deed restriction binding on the current property owner and all subsequent
property owners. The maintenance agreement shall:
   A.   Assign responsibility for the maintenance and repair of the stormwater
facility to the owner of the property upon which the facility is located and be
recorded as such on the plat for the property by appropriate notation;
   B.   Provide for periodic inspections by the property owner as outlined in
the state of Utah general construction permit for the purpose of documenting
maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the purpose and
requirements of this chapter. The property owner will arrange for this
inspection to be conducted by owner or operator and provide inspection
documentation for the City Engineer. It shall also grant permission to the City
to enter the property at reasonable times and to inspect the stormwater
facility to ensure that it is being properly maintained;
   C.   Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair needs include, but are
not limited to, the removal of silt, litter and other debris, the cutting of
grass, grass cuttings and vegetation removal, and the replacement of landscape
vegetation, in detention and retention basins, and inlets and drainage pipes
and any other stormwater facilities. It shall also provide that the property
owner shall be responsible for additional maintenance and repair needs
consistent with the needs and standards outlined in the BMP manual;
   D.   Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely manner, on
a schedule to be determined by the City Engineer; and
   E.   Provide that if the property is not maintained or repaired within the
prescribed schedule, the City shall perform the maintenance and repair at the
property owner's sole expense, and bill to the property owner the reasonable
costs incurred by the City for the maintenance or repair. The maintenance
agreement shall also provide that the City's cost of performing the maintenance
or repair shall be a lien against the property. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.180: DEDICATION:
The City shall have the discretion to accept the dedication of any existing or
future stormwater management facility, provided such facility meets the
requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and
sufficient areas, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance. Any stormwater facility accepted by the City must also meet the
City's construction standards and any other standards and specifications that
apply to the particular stormwater facility in question. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-
2019)
17.29.190: SEDIMENT AND EROSION CONTROL PLANS:
The applicant must prepare a sediment and erosion control plan which meets the
requirement of the State of Utah general construction permit for all
construction activities that includes the following information:
   A.   The sediment and erosion control plan shall accurately describe the
potential for soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from land
disturbing activity and shall explain and illustrate the measures that are to
be taken to control these problems. The length and complexity of the plan is to
be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition,
and potential for off-site damage. The plan shall be sealed by a registered
professional engineer licensed in the State of Utah. The plan shall also
conform to the requirements found in the BMP manual, and shall include at least
the following:
      1.   Project Description: Briefly describe the intended project and
proposed land disturbing activity including number of units and structures to
be constructed and infrastructure required;
      2.   A topographic map with contour intervals showing present conditions
and proposed contours resulting from land disturbing activity;
      3.   All existing drainage ways, including intermittent and wet-weather.
Include any designated floodways or floodplains;
      4.   A general description of existing land cover. Individual trees and
shrubs do not need to be identified;
      5.   Stands of existing trees as they are to be preserved upon project
completion, specifying their general location on the property. Differentiation
shall be made between existing trees to be preserved, trees to be removed and
proposed planted trees. Tree protection measures must be identified, and the
diameter of the area involved must also be identified on the plan and shown to
scale. Information shall be supplied concerning the proposed destruction of
exceptional and historic trees in setbacks and buffer strips, where they exist.
Complete landscape plans may be submitted separately. The plan must include the
sequence of implementation for tree protection measures;
      6.   Approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading and filling;
      7.   Approximate flows of existing stormwater leaving any portion of the
site;
      8.   A general description of existing soil types and characteristics and
any anticipated soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from existing
characteristics;
      9.   Location, size and layout of proposed stormwater and sedimentation
control improvements;
      10.   Proposed drainage network;
      11.   Proposed drain or waterway sizes;
      12.   Approximate flows leaving site after construction and incorporating
water runoff mitigation measures. The evaluation must include projected effects
on property adjoining the site and on existing drainage facilities and systems.
The plan must address the adequacy of outfalls from the development: when water
is concentrated, what is the capacity of waterways, if any, accepting
stormwater off site; and what measures, including infiltration, sheeting into
buffers, etc., are going to be used to prevent the scouring of waterways and
drainage areas off site, etc.;
      13.   The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, drainage
and sedimentation and erosion control plans as related to other major items of
construction, beginning with the initiation of excavation and including the
construction of any sediment basins or retention facilities or any other
structural BMPs;
      14.   Specific remediation measures to prevent erosion and sedimentation
runoff. Plans shall include detailed drawings of all control measures used;
stabilization measures including vegetation and non-vegetation measures, both
temporary and permanent, will be detailed. Detailed construction notes and a
maintenance schedule shall be included for all control measures in the plan;
      15.   Specific details for: the construction of rock pads, wash down
pads, and settling basins for controlling erosion; road access points;
eliminating or keeping soil, sediment, and debris on streets and public ways at
a level acceptable to the City Engineer. Soil, sediment, and debris brought
onto streets and public ways must be removed, at minimum, by the end of the
work day by machine, broom or shovel. More frequent intervals may be required
and directed by the City Engineer if hazards or tracking nuisances are present.
Street cleaning shall be conducted in a manner as to minimize dust and airborne
emissions. Failure to remove the sediment, soil or debris shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter;
      16.   Proposed structures; location (to the extent possible) and
identification of any proposed additional buildings, structures or development
on the site; and
      17.   A description of on-site measures to be taken to recharge surface
water into the groundwater system through infiltration. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.200: POST-CONSTRUCTION:
Before final approval of the development activity is granted by the City, in
the form of a certificate of occupancy, release of development guarantees, or
otherwise, the following standards apply:
   A.   As-Built, Record Plans: All applicants are required to submit actual
as-built, record plans for any structures located on site after final
construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications
for all stormwater management facilities and must be sealed by a registered
professional engineer licensed to practice in Utah. A final inspection by the
City Engineer is required before any performance security or performance bond
will be released. The City Engineer shall have the discretion to adopt
provisions for a partial pro rata release of the performance security or
performance bond on the completion of various stages of development. In
addition, occupation permits shall not be granted until corrections to all
development requirements and BMPs have been made and accepted by the City
Engineer;
   B.   Landscaping and Stabilization Requirements: Any area of land from which
the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared by
development activities shall be revegetated according to a schedule approved by
the City Engineer. The following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts:
      1.   Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop
accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient
coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established
over ninety percent (90%) of the seeded area;
      2.   Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be
accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient
coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable
of controlling erosion;
      3.   Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of
seventy-five percent (75%) of the cover crop throughout the year immediately
following revegetation. Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until
the minimum seventy-five percent (75%) survival for one (1) year is achieved;
and
      4.   In addition to the above requirements, a stabilization or
landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design describing the
vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after
construction is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be
stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance
of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that
adequate vegetative cover is preserved.
   C.   Inspection of Stormwater Management Facilities: Periodic inspections of
facilities shall be performed as provided for in this section;
   D.   Records of Installation and Maintenance Activities: Parties responsible
for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall
make records of the installation of the stormwater facility, and of all
maintenance and repairs to the facility, and shall retain the records for at
least three (3) years. These records shall be made available to the City
Engineer during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon
request; and
   E.   Failure to Meet or Maintain Design or Maintenance Standards: If a
responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance standards
required for stormwater facilities under this chapter, the City Engineer, after
reasonable notice, may cause to be corrected a violation of the design
standards or maintenance needs by ensuring all necessary work to place the
facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater
management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the
City Engineer shall notify in writing the party responsible for maintenance of
the stormwater management facility. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have seven (7) days to effect maintenance and repair
of the facility in an approved manner. In the event that corrective action is
not undertaken within that time, the City Engineer may take necessary
corrective action. The cost of any action by the City under this section shall
be charged to the responsible party. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.210: WAIVERS:
   A.   General: Every applicant shall provide for post-construction stormwater
management as required by this chapter, unless a written request is filed to
waive
   this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan
requirements shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval.
   B.   Conditions for Waiver: The minimum requirements for stormwater
management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the
applicant; provided, that at least one (1) of the following conditions applies:
      1.   It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter;
      2.   Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of
stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan
that has been approved by the City Engineer; or
      3.   Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility.
The off-site facility must be in place and designed to provide the level of
stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be
afforded by on-site practices. Further, the facility must be operated and
maintained by an entity that is legally obligated to continue the operation and
maintenance of the facility.
   C.   Downstream Damage Prohibited: In order to receive a waiver, the
applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that the
waiver will not lead to any of the following conditions downstream:
      1.   Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures;
      2.   Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
      3.   Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; or
      4.   Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property.
   D.   Land Disturbance Permit Not to Be Issued Where Waiver Has Been
Requested: No land disturbance permit shall be issued where a waiver has been
requested until the waiver is granted. If no waiver is granted, the plans must
be resubmitted with a stormwater management plan. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.220: EXISTING LOCATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Requirements for All Existing Locations and Developments: The following
requirements shall apply to all locations and development at which land
disturbing activities have occurred previous to the enactment of this chapter:
      1.   Denuded areas must be vegetated or covered under the standards and
guidelines specified in the BMP manual and on a schedule acceptable to the City
Engineer;
      2.   Cuts and slopes must be properly covered with appropriate vegetation
and/or retaining walls constructed;
      3.   Drainage ways shall be properly covered in vegetation or secured
with rip-rap, channel lining, etc., to prevent erosion;
      4.   Trash, junk, rubbish, etc., shall be cleared from drainage ways;
      5.   Stormwater runoff shall be controlled to the extent reasonable to
prevent pollution of local waters. Such control measures may include, but are
not limited to, the following:
         a.   Ponds:
         (1)   Detention pond;
         (2)   Extended detention pond;
         (3)   Wet pond;
         (4)   Alternative storage measures.
         b.   Constructed wetlands.
         c.   Infiltration systems:
         (1)   Infiltration/percolation trench;
         (2)   Infiltration basin;
         (3)   Drainage (recharge) well;
         (4)   Porous pavement;
         d.   Filtering Systems:
         (1)   Catch basin inserts/media filter;
         (2)   Sand filter;
         (3)   Filter/absorption bed;
         (4)   Filter and buffer strips;
         e.   Open channel:
         (1)   Swale.
   B.   Requirements for Existing Problem Locations: The City Engineer shall in
writing notify the owners of existing locations and developments of specific
drainage, erosion or sediment problem affecting such locations and
developments, and the specific actions required to correct those problems. The
notice shall also specify a reasonable time for compliance.
   C.   Inspection of Existing Facilities: The City Engineer may, to the extent
authorized by state and federal law, establish inspection programs to verify
that all stormwater management facilities, including those built before as well
as after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, are
functioning within design limits. These inspection programs may be established
on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections;
random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of
possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as
higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants;
inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than
usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type
which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of the
City's UPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are
not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges,
surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control
facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and
other BMPs. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.230: ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
   A.   Scope: This section shall apply to all water generated on developed or
undeveloped land and entering the City's storm sewer system.
   B.   Prohibition of Illicit Discharges: No person shall introduce or cause
to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system any discharge
that is not composed entirely of stormwater. The commencement, conduct or
continuance of any non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm
sewer system is prohibited except as described as follows:
      1.   Uncontaminated discharges from the following sources:
         a.   Water line flushing or other potable water sources;
         b.   Uncontaminated landscape irrigation;
         c.   Diverted stream flows;
         d.   Rising groundwater;
         e.   Groundwater infiltration to storm drains;
         f.   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
         g.   Foundation or footing drains;
         h.   Crawl space pumps;
         i.   Uncontaminated air conditioning condensation;
         j.   Springs;
         k.   Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;
         l.   Swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one (1)
PPM chlorine); and
         m.   Firefighting activities.
      2.   Discharges specified in writing by the City Engineer as being
necessary to protect public health and safety;
      3.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge if the City Engineer has so
specified in writing;
      4.   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under an UPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the State of Utah Division
of Water Quality; provided, that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations; and provided, that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system;
   C.   Prohibition of Illicit Connections:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the separate municipal storm sewer system is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
   D.   Reduction of Stormwater Pollutants by the Use of Best Management
Practices: Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the
person's expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all
terms and conditions of a valid UPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
   E.   Notification of Spills: Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as
soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting in, or may result in,
illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, and the municipal
separate storm sewer system, the person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of
such a release of hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify
emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.
In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, the person shall notify
the City Engineer in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the City Engineer within three (3)
business days of the telephone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator
of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall
be retained for a minimum of three (3) years. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-2019)
17.29.240: ENFORCEMENT:
The City Engineer or his designees shall have the authority to issue notices of
violation, stop work orders, and citations, and to pursue the civil penalties
provided in this section.
   A.   With the issuance of a City land disturbance permit, building permit,
conditional use permit or other permits issued by the City, the City Engineer
shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to this chapter at
all reasonable times and as often as necessary to determine compliance. Failure
to comply with the terms of this chapter may result in punitive actions by
Taylorsville City ordinance enforcement, by the Salt Lake Valley health
department (SLVHD), Utah State Division of Water Quality or by other means
identified in permits or terms set forth in development applications.
   B.   Notification of Violation (N.O.V.):
      1.   Written Notice: Whenever the City Engineer finds that any permittee
or any other person discharging stormwater has violated or is violating this
chapter or a permit or order issued hereunder, the City Engineer may serve upon
such person written notice of the violation. Within seven (7) days of this
notice or the time frame specified in N.O.V., an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted to the City Engineer. Submission
of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
      2.   Consent Orders: The City Engineer is empowered to enter into consent
orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance.
Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the person to correct
the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent
orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued
pursuant to this section.
      3.   Show Cause Hearing: The City Engineer may order any person who
violates this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder appear at a hearing
before the City's Administrative Law Judge to show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the person
specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action
and the reasons for such action, and a request that the violator show cause why
this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the ALJ
hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
      4.   Compliance Order: When the City Engineer finds that any person has
violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued
hereunder, he may issue an order to the violator directing that, following a
specific time period, adequate structures or devices be installed or procedures
implemented and properly operated. Orders may also contain such other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the
noncompliance, including the construction of appropriate structures,
installation of devices, self-monitoring, and management practices.
      5.   Cease and Desist Orders: When the City Engineer finds that any
person has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or order
issued hereunder, the City Engineer may issue an order to cease and desist all
such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to:
         a.   Comply forthwith; or
         b.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and terminating the discharge into the City storm drain
system. In the event the owner refuses to or is unable to provide measures to
bring the site into compliance, the City Engineer will, at the owner's expense,
take necessary remedial or preventative actions.
   C.   Conflicting Standards: Whenever there is a conflict between any
standard contained in this chapter and in the BMP manual adopted by the City
under this chapter, the strictest standard shall prevail. (Ord. 19-10, 8-21-
2019)
17.29.250: PENALTIES:
   A.   Consistent with the provisions of Utah Code Ann. § 19-5-115, the City
declares that any person, or the officers or employees of any person, who
violates stormwater ordinances or any lawful notice or order issued pursuant to
the aforementioned ordinances is guilty of an infraction.
   B.   Any person, or the officers or employees of any person, shall be liable
for any expenses incurred by the City in abating any violation of this chapter.
   C.   A penalty assessment or criminal conviction under this chapter shall
not relieve the person assessed or convicted from civil liability for claims
arising out of any act which was also a violation.
   D.   In assessing either a civil or a criminal penalty, the Taylorsville
City judge may consider:
      1.   The harm done to the public health or the environment;
      2.   Whether the civil penalty imposed will be a substantial economic
deterrent to the illegal activity;
      3.   The economic benefit gained by the violator;
      4.   The amount of effort put forth by the violator to remedy this
violation;
      5.   Any unusual or extraordinary enforcement costs incurred by the City;
      6.   The amount of penalty established by ordinance or resolution for
specific categories of violations; and
      7.   Any equities of the situation which outweigh the benefit of imposing
any penalty or damage assessment.
   E.   In addition to the civil penalty in subsection D. of this section, the
City may recover: all damages proximately caused by the violator to the City,
which may include any reasonable expenses incurred in investigating violations
of, and enforcing compliance with, this chapter, or any other actual damages
caused by the violation including, but not limited to, the costs of the City's
maintenance of stormwater facilities when the user of such facilities fails to
maintain them as required by this chapter.
   F.   The City may bring legal action to enjoin the continuing violation of
this chapter, and the existence of any other remedy, at law or equity, shall be
no defense to any such actions.
   G.   The remedies set forth in this section shall be cumulative, not
exclusive, and it shall not be a defense to any action, civil or criminal, that
one or more of the remedies set forth herein has been sought or granted. (Ord.
19-10, 8-21-2019)
CHAPTER 17.30
STORM SEWER UTILITY
SECTION:
17.30.010: Purpose
17.30.030: Definitions
17.30.050: Storm Sewer Utility Established
17.30.070: Storm Sewer Utility Charge
17.30.075: Area Abatement
17.30.076: Individual Abatement
17.30.090: Annual Transfer
17.30.110: Severability
17.30.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the city and its inhabitants by efficiently operating the storm sewer system,
managing and controlling storm water runoff, protecting property, preventing
polluted waters from entering the water supply and other receiving waters, and
establishing a viable and equitable method of financing the storm water system
long term improvement, operation, and maintenance. (Ord. 07-19, 5-16-2007, eff.
7-1-2007)
17.30.030: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms and phrases and words shall
mean:
DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has been altered from its natural conditions
by grading, filling, or the construction of improvements or other impervious
surfaces.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The average amount of impervious surfaces,
expressed in square feet, on developed single-family residential parcels in the
city. One ERU equals three thousand eight hundred (3,800) square feet of
impervious surface.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES: Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that
prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes
reduced quality of runoff water or causes water to run off in greater
quantities or at greater rates of flow than the natural surface.
MITIGATION: On site facilities or practices which reduce storm water quantity
or improve storm water quality.
PARCEL: The smallest, separately segregated unit of land having an owner. A
parcel has boundaries and surface area and is documented with a property
identification number by Salt Lake County.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PARCEL OR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS: Any
parcel of land or the owner of land containing a detached single-family home or
a duplex.
STORM DRAIN FACILITY: Any facility, improvement, development, or property made
for controlling storm water quantity and quality. Storm drain facilities do not
include government owned streets or those storm sewer facilities operated by or
for the utility, Salt Lake County, or the state of Utah.
STORM SEWER SYSTEM: All manmade storm sewer facilities and conveyances and
natural storm sewer systems, including, but not limited to, designated open
spaces owned and maintained by the city that stores, controls, treats, and/or
conveys storm water.
STORM SEWER UTILITY: The utility created by this chapter which operates,
maintains, regulates, and improves storm drain facilities and programs within
the city.
STORM WATER: Water produced by storm, surface drainage, snow and ice melt, and
other water handled by the storm drain system.
UNDEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has not been altered, graded, filled, or
constructed. (Ord. 07-19, 5-16-2007, eff. 7-1-2007)
17.30.050: STORM SEWER UTILITY ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created and established a storm sewer utility
operated by the city that includes a service charge rate structure.
   B.   Enterprise Fund: There is hereby established a storm sewer utility
enterprise fund to handle all income, expenses, and other financial
transactions related to the storm sewer utility. All charges collected with
respect to the storm sewer utility shall be deposited in the storm sewer
utility enterprise fund. Money in the storm sewer utility enterprise fund shall
not be commingled with other city funds and may be transferred to other city
funds as allowed by the uniform fiscal procedures act for Utah cities.
   C.   Facilities And Assets: The city shall determine which storm drain
facility assets will be transferred to the storm drain utility. Until such
transfer, the utility shall operate, maintain, and improve all existing storm
drain facilities.
   D.   Administration: The storm sewer utility shall be administered by the
city administrator or designee. (Ord. 07-19, 5-16-2007, eff. 7-1-2007)
17.30.070: STORM SEWER UTILITY CHARGE:
   A.   Imposed: All owners of impervious surfaces within the city which
contribute runoff water to the storm sewer system or who otherwise use or
benefit from the storm sewer system or the storm water utility will be
responsible for paying the storm water utility charge as set forth in this
chapter.
   B.   Amount Of Charge: The charge shall be based on the number of equivalent
residential units (ERUs) contained in the parcel. An "ERU" is the average
amount of impervious surfaces in a single- family residential parcel and is
based on a statistical analysis of homes within the city. One ERU equals three
thousand eight hundred (3,800) square feet of impervious surface area.
   C.   Calculation: Each single-family residential parcel contributes
approximately the same amount of storm water runoff; therefore, each single-
family residential parcel shall pay a base rate equal to one ERU. All other
parcels (except undeveloped parcels) shall pay a multiple of this base rate,
expressed in ERUs, according to the measured impervious area on the parcel.
Total ERUs are calculated by dividing the total square feet of impervious
surface by three thousand eight hundred (3,800).
   D.   Charge Per ERU: The service charge imposed hereby for each ERU shall be
four dollars ($4.00) per month.
   E.   Credits: A service charge credit shall be available for nonsingle-
family residential customers that: 1) exceed the city's standards for reducing
the amount of storm water discharged from their parcel, 2) improve the quality
of storm water runoff based on implementing source or treatment controls which
reduce or eliminate pollutants from the parcel's storm water runoff, and/or 3)
implement on site activities that can be shown to reduce the city's costs to
provide the storm sewer utility services. Provided, however, if this chapter is
amended or the city standards are changed, then only those parcels that then
satisfy the standards will be eligible for the service charge credit. "Reducing
the amount of storm water discharge" generally means holding runoff for a
period of time and then releasing it at a controlled rate to the storm water
sewer system ("detention") or holding water until it evaporates or infiltrates
into the ground water ("retention"). "Improving quality" generally means
improving the quality of storm water runoff based on implementation of source
or treatment controls (best management practices) which reduce or eliminate
pollutants from the storm water runoff.
   F.   Policies: The city may adopt rules and policies to assist in applying,
administering, and interpreting the service charge credit and other provisions
related to the storm sewer utility.
   G.   Appeals: Any person or entity who is aggrieved by the provisions of
this chapter or the application and calculation of the service charge to their
property may appeal to the city administrator. The appeal shall be in writing,
shall state all facts supporting the appeal, and shall be made within thirty
(30) days of the receipt of the bill or event giving rise to the appeal. The
city administrator shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days of
receipt of the complete appeal. Appeals of the city administrator's decision
may be made to the mayor, within thirty (30) days of the city administrator's
decision. The mayor may elect to hold a hearing on the appeal. The mayor's
decision shall be final and conclusive.
   H.   Billing And Collection: The city shall bill, or cause to be billed,
property owners of impervious surfaces for the storm sewer utility service
charge. Charges and fees shall be considered delinquent if not paid as
determined by rules and procedures established by the city and will be
considered to be a debt of the city, which shall be subject to recovery by
civil action or otherwise. (Ord. 07-19, 5-16-2007, eff. 7-1-2007)
17.30.075: AREA ABATEMENT:
   A.   The mayor is hereby authorized to adopt rules to abate the storm sewer
utility charge for an area that includes multiple residents such as mobile home
parks, based on the following criteria:
      1.   The rule requires that abatement be an area within a census track
that qualifies for community development block grants or is a low income census
track.
      2.   The rule requires that a significant portion of the inhabitants of
the area include inhabitants who live on limited fixed incomes and/or low
incomes.
      3.   The rule requires that a significant portion of the inhabitants of
the area qualify for the municipal energy sales and use tax and municipal
telecommunications license tax abatement.
      4.   The rule requires a finding that the abatement will promote
affordable housing.
      5.   The rule requires implementation on a uniform and consistent basis.
(Ord. 07-35, 11-7-2007)
17.30.076: INDIVIDUAL ABATEMENT:
   A.   The mayor is hereby authorized to adopt rules to abate the storm sewer
utility charge for individual residents, based on the following criteria:
      1.   The rule requires that the applicant be elderly and/or living on
limited fixed income and/or low income.
      2.   The rule requires that the applicant qualify for the municipal
energy sales and use tax and municipal telecommunications tax abatement.
      3.   The rule requires a finding that the abatement will promote
affordable housing.
      4.   The rule requires implementation on a uniform and consistent basis.
(Ord. 07-35, 11-7-2007)
17.30.090: ANNUAL TRANSFER:
There shall be, each fiscal year, an in lieu of tax transfer from the city's
storm sewer utility fund to the city's general fund of 7.5 percent of total
actual revenues as determined according to applicable standards. The in lieu of
tax transfers do not prohibit the storm sewer utility from providing funds or
services to other city departments, or receiving funds or services from other
city departments. (Ord. 07-19, 5-16-2007, eff. 7-1-2007)
17.30.110: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter is determined to be, or is rendered, illegal,
invalid, or superseded by other lawful authority, including any state or
federal, legislative, regulatory, or administrative authority having
jurisdiction thereof, or determined to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such section shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such determination shall
have no effect on the validity of any other section. (Ord. 07-19, 5-16-2007,
eff. 7-1-2007)
CHAPTER 17.32
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
17.32.010: Violation Deemed Misdemeanor
17.32.020: Penalty
17.32.030: Additional Sanctions Against Corporation Or Association
17.32.040: Removal Of Obstruction
17.32.010: VIOLATION DEEMED MISDEMEANOR:
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, association, partnership or
governmental instrumentality to violate any of the provisions of this title, or
to aid or cause the violation of any of said provisions. (Ord. 01-03, 1-17-
2001)
17.32.020: PENALTY:
Any person who is convicted of violating any of the provisions of this title
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as set out in chapter
1.08 of this code. (Ord. 01-03, 1-17-2001)
17.32.030: ADDITIONAL SANCTIONS AGAINST CORPORATION OR ASSOCIATION:
   A.   When a corporation or association is convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this title, the court may, in addition to or in lieu of imposing
other authorized penalties, require the corporation or association to give
appropriate publicity of the conviction by notice to the class or classes or
persons or sections of the public interested in or affected by the conviction,
by advertising in designated areas, or by designated media or otherwise.
   B.   When an executive or high managerial office of a corporation or
association is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this title,
committed in furtherance of the affairs of the corporation or association, the
court may include in the sentence an order disqualifying him from exercising
similar functions in the same or other corporations or associations for a
period not exceeding five (5) years if it finds the scope or wilfulness of his
illegal actions make it dangerous or inadvisable for such functions to be
entrusted to him. (Ord. 01-03, 1-17-2001)
17.32.040: REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTION:
In addition to any penalties which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter, the
community development department may do the following:
   A.   Remove any obstructions, pipelines or other devices installed in
violation thereof; and/or
   B.   Give written notice to persons in violation of the provisions of this
chapter requiring the removal of offending installations from natural channels
or other storm drainage facilities. Notices may be personally served or may be
mailed to violators by registered mail provided that a copy is also posted on
offending installations for a period of ten (10) days. If such installations
are not removed within ten (10) days after notice is given, the community
development department may effect removal at the expense of the person in
violation and may recover its costs and expenses therefor; and/or
   C.   Bring an action for the abatement of the nuisance caused by the
offending installation, or for the recovery of the city's costs and expenses
incurred in removing the offending installation pursuant to subsection A or B
of this section. (Ord. 01-03, 1-17-2001)
TITLE 18
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
General Provisions   18.01
Definitions   18.02
Administrative Code Enforcement Procedures   18.03
Administrative Citations   18.04
Administrative Civil Penalties   18.05
Recordation Of Notices Of Violation   18.06
Emergency Abatement   18.07
Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
Procedures   18.08
Administrative Enforcement Appeals   18.09
Bonds   18.10
CHAPTER 18.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
18.01.010: Purpose
18.01.015: Scope
18.01.020: Existing Law Continued
18.01.025: Nonexclusive Remedies
18.01.030: Validity Of Title; Severability
18.01.035: No Mandatory Duty; Civil Liability
18.01.040: General Rules Of Interpretation Of Ordinances
18.01.045: Responsibility For Nuisances
18.01.050: Service Of Process
18.01.055: Constructive Notice Of Recorded Documents
18.01.060: General Enforcement Authority
18.01.065: Adoption Of Policy And Procedures
18.01.070: Authority To Inspect
18.01.075: False Information Or Refusal Prohibited
18.01.080: Failure To Obey A Subpoena
18.01.085: Recovery Of Costs
18.01.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to provide a means for timely abatement of code
enforcement violations in order to protect the health and safety of the public,
to foster neighborhood stability, to preserve the appearance, character and
beauty of neighborhoods, to encourage community pride, to preserve the value of
property, and to protect the general welfare of the city and its citizens,
businesses and visitors. This title provides for progressive enforcement
measures to abate violations; the most aggressive forms of enforcement are
generally reserved for the most recalcitrant violators. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.015: SCOPE:
The provisions of this title may be applied to any violation of title 5, 8, 9,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, or 17 of this code. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.020: EXISTING LAW CONTINUED:
The provisions of this title do not invalidate any other title or ordinance,
but shall be read in conjunction with those titles and ordinances as an
additional remedy available for enforcement of those ordinances. (Ord. 08-14,
7-9-2008)
18.01.025: NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDIES:
Notwithstanding anything contained to the contrary, the city may proceed
pursuant to Utah code sections 10-11-1 through 10-11-4 without complying with
any of the provisions of this title. In addition, the city may take any or all
of the remedies identified in this code (administrative, civil or criminal) to
abate a violation and/or to punish any person or entity who creates, causes or
allows a violation to exist. The abatement of a nuisance does not prejudice the
right of the city or any person to recover damages or penalties for its past
existence. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.030: VALIDITY OF TITLE; SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, portion, or provision of
this title is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this title. This section shall apply
to all amendments heretofore or hereafter made to this title. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-
2008)
18.01.035: NO MANDATORY DUTY; CIVIL LIABILITY:
In establishing performance standards or establishing an obligation to act by a
city officer or employee, these standards shall not be construed as creating a
mandatory duty for purposes of tort liability if the officer or employee fails
to perform directed duty or duties. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.040: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION OF ORDINANCES:
For purposes of this title, certain words and terms are defined as set forth in
chapter 18.02 of this title. Words used in the present tense include the
future; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
Shall is mandatory and may is permissive; any gender includes the other gender.
(Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.045: RESPONSIBILITY FOR NUISANCES:
The responsible person(s) is responsible for abating nuisances pursuant to this
title. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or occupant, who creates, aids in
creating, or contributes to a nuisance, or who supports, continues, or retains
a nuisance, is responsible for the nuisance and is a responsible person
pursuant to this title. Every successive owner or tenant of a property or
premises who fails to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such
property or premises caused by a former owner or tenant is a responsible person
and is therefore responsible in the same manner as the one who first created
the nuisance. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.050: SERVICE OF PROCESS:
   A.   Whenever service is required to be given under this title for
enforcement purposes, the document shall be served by one of the methods of
service provided for in the Utah rules of civil procedure.
   B.   The failure to serve all responsible persons shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.055: CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE OF RECORDED DOCUMENTS:
Whenever a document is recorded with the county recorder as authorized or
required by this title or applicable state codes, recordation shall provide
constructive notice of the information contained in the recorded documents.
(Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.060: GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
Whenever an enforcement official finds that a violation of this code has
occurred or continues to exist from the titles identified in section
18.01.015 of this chapter, the appropriate administrative enforcement procedure
may be used as outlined in this title. The director or any designated
enforcement official has the authority necessary to gain compliance with the
provisions of this code. These powers include the power to issue notices of
violation and administrative citations, inspect public and private property,
abate public and private property, and use whatever judicial and administrative
remedies are available under this code. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.065: ADOPTION OF POLICY AND PROCEDURES:
The hearing officer is authorized to develop policies and procedures relating
to the hearing procedures, scope of hearings, subpoena powers, and other
matters relating to the administrative code enforcement program. The policy and
procedures shall be approved by the city council. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.070: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT:
All inspections, entries, examinations, and surveys shall be done in a
reasonable manner based upon cause. If the responsible person refuses to allow
the enforcement official to enter the property and the violation is not visible
from an adjacent property, the enforcement official shall obtain a search
warrant. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.075: FALSE INFORMATION OR REFUSAL PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully make a false statement or
refuse to give his or her name or address with intent to deceive or interfere
with an enforcement official who is enforcing the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.080: FAILURE TO OBEY A SUBPOENA:
It is unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to obey a subpoena issued for
an administrative code enforcement hearing. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.01.085: RECOVERY OF COSTS:
The city shall be authorized to recover all associated costs, fines, penalties,
etc., following whatever legal means necessary. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
CHAPTER 18.02
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
18.02.005: Abatement
18.02.010: Administrative Code Enforcement Order
18.02.015: Code Enforcement Performance Bond
18.02.020: Director
18.02.025: Enforcement Official
18.02.030: Good Cause
18.02.035: Hearing Officer
18.02.040: Imminent Life Safety Hazard
18.02.045: Legal Interest
18.02.050: Notice Of Compliance
18.02.055: Notice Of Violation
18.02.060: Property Owner
18.02.065: Responsible Person
18.02.070: Written
18.02.005: ABATEMENT:
"Abatement" means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, correct or otherwise
remedy a condition which constitutes a violation of this code by such means, in
such a manner and to such an extent as the city designated representative
determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and
welfare of the community. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.010: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
"Administrative code enforcement order" means an order issued by a hearing
officer. The order may include an order to abate the violation, pay civil
penalties and administrative costs, or take any other action as authorized or
required by this title and applicable state codes. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.015: CODE ENFORCEMENT PERFORMANCE BOND:
"Code enforcement performance bond" means a bond posted by a responsible person
to ensure compliance with this code, applicable state titles, a judicial
action, or an administrative code enforcement order. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.020: DIRECTOR:
"Director" means the city's community development director or designee. (Ord.
08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.025: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
"Enforcement official" means any person authorized to enforce violations of
this code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.030: GOOD CAUSE:
"Good cause" means an incapacitating illness; death; lack of proper notice;
unavailability due to unavoidable, unpreventable, or extenuating emergency or
circumstance; if a required act causes an imminent and irreparable injury; and
acts of nature adverse to performing required acts. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.035: HEARING OFFICER:
"Hearing officer" means an administrative law judge who presides over an
administrative hearing. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.040: IMMINENT LIFE SAFETY HAZARD:
"Imminent life safety hazard" means any condition that creates a present,
extreme, and immediate danger to life, property, health, or public safety.
(Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.045: LEGAL INTEREST:
"Legal interest" means any interest that is represented by a document, such as
a deed of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment
lien, mechanic's lien, or other similar instrument that is recorded with the
county recorder. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.050: NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE:
"Notice of compliance" means a document issued by the city, representing that a
property complies with the requirements outlined in the notice of violation.
(Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.055: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
"Notice of violation" means a written notice prepared by an enforcement
official that informs a responsible person of violations and orders them to
take certain steps to correct the violations. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.060: PROPERTY OWNER:
"Property owner" means the owner of record of real property based on the county
assessor's records. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.065: RESPONSIBLE PERSON:
"Responsible person" means a person who is responsible for causing or
maintaining a violation of this code or applicable state codes. The property
owner, tenant, business, person with a legal interest in the real property, or
person in possession of the real property may be considered a responsible
person. In all cases, the property owner shall be considered a responsible
person. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.02.070: WRITTEN:
"Written" means any handwritten, typewritten, photocopied, or computer printed
communication. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
CHAPTER 18.03
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
18.03.010: Authority
18.03.020: Courtesy Notice
18.03.030: Notice Of Violation
18.03.040: Failure To Bring Property Into Compliance
18.03.050: Inspections
18.03.010: AUTHORITY:
Any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist in violation of any
provisions of this code as defined in section
18.01.015 of this title that constitutes a violation may be abated by the city
pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 13-36, 12-18-2013)
18.03.020: COURTESY NOTICE:
Whenever the director or any designated enforcement official determines that a
violation of this code as defined in section
18.01.015 of this title has occurred or continues to exist, the director or
enforcement official may choose to proceed pursuant to the provisions of this
title. If the provisions of this title are used except as provided below, a
courtesy notice shall be sent to a responsible person via regular mail at the
last known post office address as disclosed by the records of the county
assessor or by personal service. If the responsible person identified in the
courtesy notice fails to bring the violation into compliance within ten (10)
days of the date of the courtesy notice or as stated in the ordinance that is
being violated, the city shall issue a notice of violation. The courtesy notice
shall include the following information:
   A.   Name of property owner;
   B.   Street address of violation;
   C.   Date violation observed;
   D.   All code sections violated and description of condition of the property
that violates the applicable codes;
   E.   A statement explaining the type of remedial action required to
permanently correct outstanding violations, which may include corrections,
repairs, demolition, removal, or other appropriate action;
   F.   Notice that a failure to bring the violation into compliance within the
established deadline could result in further legal action.
The director or authorized code enforcement official shall have the authority
to extend the deadline set forth in the courtesy notice for good cause. The
director or authorized code enforcement officer shall also have authority to
waive the requirements to send a courtesy notice to a responsible person if the
responsible person has had at least two (2) separate violations of this title
in the two (2) years immediately preceding the courtesy notice that is being
waived pursuant to this provision. (Ord. 13-36, 12-18-2013)
18.03.030: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
If a responsible person who is served a courtesy notice as described in section
18.03.020 of this chapter fails to bring the violation into compliance within
the established deadline, or if the courtesy notice is waived as described in
section
18.03.020 of this chapter, a notice of violation shall be issued to a
responsible person. The notice of violation shall include the following
information:
   A.   Name of property owner;
   B.   Street address of violation;
   C.   Date violation observed;
   D.   All code sections violated and description of condition of the property
that violates the applicable codes;
   E.   A statement explaining the type of remedial action required to
permanently correct outstanding violations, which may include corrections,
repairs, demolition, removal, or other appropriate action;
   F.   Specific date to correct the violations listed in the notice of
violation, which date shall be at least ten (10) days from the date of service
of the notice of violation or as stated in the ordinance that is being
violated;
   G.   Explanation of the consequences should the responsible person fail to
comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the notice of violation,
which may include, but is not limited to, criminal prosecution; civil
penalties; revocation of permits; recordation of the notice of violation;
withholding of future municipal permits; abatement of the violation; costs;
administrative fees; and any other legal remedies;
   H.   That civil penalties will begin to accrue immediately on expiration of
the date to correct violations;
   I.   The amount of the civil penalty on each violation and that the penalty
will accrue daily until the property is brought into compliance;
   J.   That only one notice of violation is required for any twelve (12) month
period, and that civil penalties begin immediately upon any subsequent
violations of the notice. The responsible person may request a hearing on the
renewed violations by following the same procedure as provided for the original
notice;
   K.   Procedures to request a hearing as provided in section
18.08.020 of this title and consequences for failure to request one;
   L.   That a reinspection fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) may be assessed if
more than one inspection is required to determine if a violation has been
abated;
   M.   The notice of violation shall be served on a responsible person using
one of the methods of service listed in section
18.01.050 of this title;
   N.   More than one notice of violation may be issued against the same
responsible person, if it encompasses different dates, or different violations.
(Ord. 13-36, 12-18-2013)
18.03.040: FAILURE TO BRING PROPERTY INTO COMPLIANCE:
If a responsible person who is served with a notice of violations as described
in section
18.01.050 of this title fails to bring a violation into compliance within ten
(10) days of service of the notice of violation, civil penalties shall be owed
to the city for each and every subsequent day of violation. The director or
authorized code enforcement official shall have the authority to extend the
deadline set forth in the notice of violation or stay imposition of penalties
for good cause. (Ord. 13-36, 12-18-2013)
18.03.050: INSPECTIONS:
The city shall inspect each property one time after the deadline on any notice
or order. If additional inspections are required, a reinspection fee of thirty
dollars ($30.00) may be added to the civil penalties. (Ord. 13-36, 12-18-2013)
CHAPTER 18.04
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
SECTION:
18.04.010: Authority
18.04.020: Procedures
18.04.030: Contents Of Administrative Citation
18.04.040: Administrative Citation Penalties Assessed
18.04.010: AUTHORITY:
   A.   The procedures established in this chapter may be in addition to
criminal, civil, or any other legal remedy established by law that may be
pursued to address violations of this code or applicable state codes.
   B.   Any person violating any provision of this code or applicable state
codes may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement official as
provided in this chapter.
   C.   A civil penalty may be assessed by means of an administrative citation
issued by the enforcement official, and shall be payable directly to the city.
   D.   Penalties assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be
collected in accordance with the procedures set forth in this title. (Ord. 08-
14, 7-9-2008)
18.04.020: PROCEDURES:
Upon discovering any violation of this code or applicable state codes an
enforcement official may issue an administrative citation to a responsible
person. The administrative citation shall be served on a responsible person
using one of the methods of service listed in section
18.01.050 of this title. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.04.030: CONTENTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
   A.   Name of property owner;
   B.   Street address of violation;
   C.   Date violation observed;
   D.   All code sections violated and description of condition of the property
that violates the applicable codes;
   E.   A statement explaining the type of remedial action required to
permanently correct outstanding violations, which may include corrections,
repairs, demolition, removal, or other appropriate action;
   F.   Specific date to correct the violations listed in the notice of
violation, which date shall be at least ten (10) days from the date of service
of the notice of violation or as stated in the ordinance that is being
violated;
   G.   Explanation of the consequences should the responsible person fail to
comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the notice of violation,
which may include, but is not limited to, criminal prosecution; civil
penalties; revocation of permits; recordation of the notice of violation;
withholding of future municipal permits; abatement of the violation; costs;
administrative fees; and any other legal remedies;
   H.   That civil penalties will begin to accrue immediately on expiration of
the date to correct violations;
   I.   The amount of the civil penalty on each violation and that the penalty
will accrue daily until the property is brought into compliance;
   J.   That only one notice of violation is required for any twelve (12) month
period, and that civil penalties begin immediately upon any subsequent
violations of the notice. The responsible person may request a hearing on the
renewed violations by following the same procedure as provided for the original
notice;
   K.   Procedures to request a hearing as provided in section
18.08.020 of this title and consequences for failure to request one;
   L.   That a reinspection fee will be assessed if more than one inspection is
required to determine if a violation has been abated;
   M.   The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive
notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this title.
(Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.04.040: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PENALTIES ASSESSED:
   A.   Administrative citation penalties shall be assessed immediately
following the deadline for each violation listed on the administrative
citation. The penalties are as follows:
      1.   If the violation is corrected within ten (10) days after the
deadline, there is no fine.
      2.   If the violation is corrected eleven (11) to twenty (20) days after
the deadline, the fine is fifty dollars ($50.00).
      3.   If the violation is corrected twenty one (21) to thirty (30) days
after the deadline, the fine is one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      4.   After thirty (30) days, the fine shall double every thirty (30) days
thereafter to a maximum of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
   B.   Each violation listed on an administrative citation is considered a
separate offense and penalties are assessed per violation.
   C.   Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the
violations, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. (Ord. 08-
14, 7-9-2008)
CHAPTER 18.05
ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES
SECTION:
18.05.010: Authority
18.05.020: Assessment Of Civil Penalties
18.05.030: Modification Of Civil Penalties
18.05.040: Failure To Pay Penalties
18.05.050: Civil Penalties Chart
18.05.010: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Any person violating any provision of this code or applicable state
codes may be subject to the assessment of civil penalties for each violation as
provided in this chapter.
   B.   Each and every day a violation of any provision of this code or
applicable state codes exists is a separate violation subject to the assessment
of civil penalties and shall continue to accrue until the violation has been
brought into compliance.
   C.   Civil penalties may not be pursued for a civil violation herein that
occurs in conjunction with another criminal violation as part of a single
criminal episode that will be prosecuted in criminal proceedings. (Ord. 08-14,
7-9-2008)
18.05.020: ASSESSMENT OF CIVIL PENALTIES:
If a responsible person fails to bring a violation into compliance that is
identified in the notice of violation within ten (10) days of service of the
notice of violation, civil penalties shall be assessed and due to the city as
set forth in the chart in section
18.05.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.05.030: MODIFICATION OF CIVIL PENALTIES:
Upon bringing the violation into compliance the hearing officer may modify the
civil penalties on a finding of good cause. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.05.040: FAILURE TO PAY PENALTIES:
The failure of any person to pay civil penalties assessed within the specified
time may result in the city pursuing any legal remedy to collect the civil
penalties as provided in the law. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.05.050: CIVIL PENALTIES CHART:
CIVIL PENALTIES
 
    Per Day 
Title 8, Animals                                                       
                                 All violations                     $25.00
Title 9, Health And Safety                                             
                                 First 7 days                       100.00
                                 After 7 days                       200.00
Title 13, Land Development Code                                        
   All R-1; R-2; R-4-8.5; RMH  Nonpermitted use; violation of     50.00
zones                              permit or approval
                                 Conditional use without a permit;  25.00
                                   all other violations
   All MD; OP; R-M zones       Nonpermitted use; violation of     100.00
                                   permit or approval
                                 Conditional use without a permit;  50.00
                                   all other violations
   All C and M zones           Nonpermitted use; violation of     200.00
                                   permit or approval
                                 Conditional use without a permit;  100.00
                                   all other violations
   All A zones                 Nonpermitted use; violation of     50.00
                                   permit or approval
                                 Conditional use without a permit;  25.00
                                   all other violations
Other                                                                  
   All other violations of city ordinances                         25.00
Total accrued fines for any violation shall not exceed $5,000.00 per
violation.
 
(Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008; amd. Ord. 12-15, 7-11-2012)
CHAPTER 18.06
RECORDATION OF NOTICES OF VIOLATION
SECTION:
18.06.010: Authority
18.06.020: Procedures For Recordation
18.06.030: Service Of Notice Of Recordation
18.06.040: Notice Of Compliance Procedures
18.06.050: Prohibition Against Issuance Of Municipal Permits
18.06.060: Cancellation Of Recorded Notice Of Violation
18.06.010: AUTHORITY:
Whenever the director determines that a property or violation has not been
brought into compliance as required in this title, the director has the
authority to record notice of the administrative code enforcement order against
the property with the recorder's office of Salt Lake County. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-
2008)
18.06.020: PROCEDURES FOR RECORDATION:
   A.   If an administrative hearing is held, and an order is issued in the
city's favor, the city may record notice of the administrative code enforcement
order with the recorder's office of Salt Lake County.
   B.   The recordation does not encumber the property, but merely places
future interested parties on notice of any continuing violation found upon the
property. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.06.030: SERVICE OF NOTICE OF RECORDATION:
A notice that the administrative code enforcement order has been recorded
against the property shall be served on the responsible person and the property
owner pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in section
18.01.050 of this title. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.06.040: NOTICE OF COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES:
   A.   When the violations have been corrected, the responsible person may
request an inspection of the property from the director.
   B.   Upon receipt of a request for inspection, the director shall inspect
the property as soon as practicable to determine whether the violations listed
in the administrative code enforcement order have been corrected and whether
all necessary permits have been issued and final inspections have been
performed.
   C.   The director shall cause a notice of compliance to be sent to the
responsible person and property owner by any of the methods listed in section
18.01.050 of this title if the director determined that:
      1.   All violations listed in the administrative code enforcement order
have been corrected;
      2.   All necessary permits have been issued and finalized;
      3.   All civil penalties assessed against the property have been paid or
satisfied; and
      4.   The party requesting the notice of compliance has paid all
administrative fees and costs.
   D.   If a notice of compliance is issued and fines have been accruing, then
the date that the inspection was requested shall serve as the day that fines
stop accruing.
   E.   If the director denies a request to issue a notice of compliance, then
the director shall serve the responsible person with a written explanation of
the reasons for denial to be served on the responsible person. The written
explanation shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in section
18.01.050 of this title. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.06.050: PROHIBITION AGAINST ISSUANCE OF MUNICIPAL PERMITS:
The city may withhold business licenses, animal permits, or permits for any
alteration, repair, or construction pertaining to any existing or new
structures or signs on the property, or any permits pertaining to the use and
development of real property or the structure until all violations are abated
and a notice of compliance has been issued by the director. The city may not
withhold permits that are necessary to obtain a notice of compliance or that
are necessary to correct serious health and safety violations. (Ord. 08-14, 7-
9-2008)
18.06.060: CANCELLATION OF RECORDED NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
The city shall cause the notice of compliance to be recorded with the county
recorder's office if a notice of violation was recorded and the violation has
been corrected and all fines, penalties, etc., have been paid to the city.
Recordation of the notice of compliance shall have the effect of canceling the
recorded notice of violation. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
CHAPTER 18.07
EMERGENCY ABATEMENT
SECTION:
18.07.010: Authority
18.07.020: Procedures
18.07.030: Notice Of Emergency Abatement
18.07.010: AUTHORITY:
   A.   Whenever the director determines that an imminent life safety hazard
exists that requires immediate correction or elimination, the director or
designated enforcement official may exercise the following powers without prior
notice to the responsible person:
      1.   Order the immediate vacation of any tenants, and prohibit occupancy
until all repairs are completed;
      2.   Post the premises as unsafe, substandard, or dangerous;
      3.   Board, fence, or secure the building or site;
      4.   Raze and grade that portion of the building or site to prevent
further collapse, and remove any hazard to the general public;
      5.   Make any minimal emergency repairs as necessary to eliminate any
imminent life safety hazard; or
      6.   Take any other action appropriate to eliminate the emergency.
   B.   The director has the authority with a court order to accomplish the
above listed acts to abate the safety hazard. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.07.020: PROCEDURES:
   A.   The director shall pursue only the minimum level of correction or
abatement as necessary to eliminate the immediacy of the hazard. Costs incurred
by the city during the emergency abatement process shall be assessed and
recovered against the responsible person by appropriate legal procedures.
   B.   The director may also pursue any other administrative or judicial
remedy to abate any remaining violations. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.07.030: NOTICE OF EMERGENCY ABATEMENT:
After an emergency abatement, the city shall notify the owner and other
responsible person(s) of the abatement action taken. This notice shall be
served using one of the methods of service listed in section
18.01.050 of this title within ten (10) days of completion of the abatement.
(Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
CHAPTER 18.08
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
18.08.010: Purpose
18.08.020: Request For Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
18.08.030: Default Hearings, Orders, And Relief From Orders
18.08.040: Notification Of Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
18.08.050: Appointment, Qualifications, And Disqualification Of Hearing Officer
18.08.060: Powers Of The Hearing Officer
18.08.070: Procedures At Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
18.08.080: Failure To Attend Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
18.08.090: Administrative Code Enforcement Order
18.08.100: Failure To Appear At Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing
18.08.010: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish uniform procedures for
administrative code enforcement hearings conducted pursuant to this code. It is
the purpose of this chapter to afford due process of law to any person who is
directly affected by an administrative action. Due process of law includes
notice, an opportunity to participate in the administrative hearing, and an
explanation of the reasons justifying the administrative action. These
procedures are also intended to establish a forum to efficiently,
expeditiously, and fairly resolve issues raised in any administrative code
enforcement action. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.08.020: REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
   A.   A person served with one of the following documents or notices has the
right to request an administrative code enforcement hearing, if the request is
filed within ten (10) calendar days from the date of service of a:
      1.   Notice of violation;
      2.   Administrative citation;
      3.   Notice of emergency abatement.
   B.   The request for hearing shall be made in writing and filed with the
hearing officer. The request shall contain the case number, the address of the
violation, and the signature of the person requesting the hearing.
   C.   As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of the
request for hearing, the hearing officer shall schedule a date, time, and place
for the hearing and notify the person requesting the hearing.
   D.   Failure to request a hearing within ten (10) calendar days as provided
in this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and a
waiver of the right to challenge the action. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.08.030: DEFAULT HEARINGS, ORDERS, AND RELIEF FROM ORDERS:
   A.   If a person served with one of the documents in section
18.08.020 of this chapter fails to request a hearing within ten (10) days of
the date of service the case shall be set for a default hearing. The hearing
officer shall schedule a default hearing. The person served with one of the
documents in section
18.08.020 of this chapter shall be notified of the date, time, and place of the
hearing by one of the methods listed in section
18.01.050 of this title.
   B.   A default hearing shall be held for all cases that have outstanding or
unpaid civil penalties, fines, fees and/or costs due to the city before
collection, if a hearing on that case has not already been held.
   C.   On motion and upon such terms as are just the hearing officer may set
aside an order obtained pursuant to this title for the following reasons:
      1.   Mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect;
      2.   Newly discovered evidence which by due diligence could not have been
discovered in time for a new hearing;
      3.   Fraud, misrepresentation, or other misconduct of an adverse party;
      4.   The order is void;
      5.   The order has been satisfied, released, or discharged, or a prior
order upon which it is based has been reversed or otherwise vacated, or it is
no longer equitable that the order should have prospective application;
      6.   Any other reason justifying relief from the operation of order.
   D.   If the evidence shows that the violations exist or existed after the
deadline on any notice, the hearing officer shall enter an order requiring
abatement of the violations, and the payment of all fines and fees. Fines shall
run until the city issues a notice of compliance stating when the violations
were actually abated. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.08.040: NOTIFICATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
   A.   Notice of the day, time, and place of the hearing shall be served to a
responsible person at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
   B.   The notice of hearing shall be served by any of the methods of service
listed in section
18.01.050 of this title. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.08.050: APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS, AND DISQUALIFICATION OF HEARING
OFFICER:
   A.   The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall
appoint a Hearing Officer to preside at administrative enforcement hearings.
   B.   The Hearing Officer may be removed by the Mayor. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.08.060: POWERS OF THE HEARING OFFICER:
   A.   The Hearing Officer has the authority to hold hearings, determine if
violations of City ordinances exist, order compliance with City ordinances, and
enforce compliance as provided in this title on any matter subject to the
provisions of this title.
   B.   A Hearing Officer may, for good cause shown by one of the parties or if
the hearing examiner independently determines that due process has not been
adequately afforded to such party, continue a hearing.
   C.   The Hearing Officer, at the request of any party to the hearing, may
sign subpoenas for witnesses, documents, and other evidence where the
attendance of the witness for the admission of evidence is deemed necessary to
decide the issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including
witness and mileage fees, shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena.
The Hearing Officer shall develop policies and procedures relating to the
issuance of subpoenas in administrative Code enforcement hearings, including
the form of the subpoena and related costs.
   D.   The Hearing Officer has continuing jurisdiction over the subject matter
of an administrative Code enforcement hearing for the purposes of granting a
continuance; ordering compliance by issuing an administrative Code enforcement
order using any remedies available under the law; ensuring compliance of that
order, which includes the right to authorize the City to enter and abate a
violation; modifying an administrative Code enforcement order; or, where
extraordinary circumstances exist, granting a new hearing.
   E.   The Hearing Officer has the authority to require a responsible person
to post a Code enforcement bond to ensure compliance with an administrative
Code enforcement order.
   F.   A Hearing Officer shall not make determinations as to the existence of
a nonconforming structure or use. If a responsible person claims such a right
as a defense, the Hearing Officer shall not continue and refer the matter to
the Appeal Authority for a determination as to the existence of the
nonconforming structure or use. The Appeal Authority's decision shall be
binding on the Hearing Officer. The responsible person shall bear the costs of
the referral to the Appeal Authority. (Ord. 18-09, 2-28-2018)
18.08.070: PROCEDURES AT ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
   A.   Hearings shall be conducted with appropriate formality and decorum so
that due process rights are protected. Utah rules of evidence and rules of
civil procedure are used as guidelines but need not be strictly followed or
applied. Rules of evidence regarding authorization, foundation, hearsay or
relevance need not be strictly applied.
   B.   The City bears the burden of proceeding and proof at an administrative
Code enforcement hearing to establish the existence of a violation of this Code
or applicable State Codes.
   C.   The standard of proof to be used by the Hearing Officer in deciding the
issues at an administrative hearing is whether the preponderance of the
evidence shows that the violations exist.
   D.   All administrative enforcement hearings shall be open to the public and
shall be recorded.
   E.   The responsible person has a right to be represented by an attorney.
(Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.08.080: FAILURE TO ATTEND ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
Any party whose property or actions are the subject of any administrative Code
enforcement hearing and who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to waive
the right to a hearing, and will result in a default judgment for the City,
provided that proper notice of the hearing has been provided and the violation
has been properly documented. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.08.090: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT ORDER:
   A.   The parties may enter into a stipulated agreement, which must be signed
by both parties. This agreement shall be entered as the administrative Code
enforcement order. Entry of this agreement shall constitute a waiver of the
right to a hearing and the right to appeal.
   B.   Once all evidence and testimony are completed, the Hearing Officer
shall issue an administrative Code enforcement order that affirms, modifies or
rejects the notice or citation. The Hearing Officer may increase or decrease
the total amount of civil penalties and costs that are due pursuant to the
procedures in this title.
   C.   The Hearing Officer may order the City to enter the property and abate
all violations, which may include removing animals kept in violation of this
Code.
   D.   The Hearing Officer may revoke any animal permit, an animal license, or
the right to possess animals as provided in this Code.
   E.   As part of an administrative enforcement order, a hearing examiner may
establish specific deadlines for the payment of fees and costs, and condition
the total or partial assessment of civil fees on the responsible person's
ability to take necessary corrective actions by the specified deadlines.
   F.   The Hearing Officer may schedule subsequent review hearings as may be
necessary or as requested by a party to the hearing to ensure compliance with
the administrative Code enforcement order.
   G.   The Hearing Officer may order the responsible person to post a bond to
ensure compliance with the order.
   H.   The administrative code enforcement order shall become final on the
date of the signing of the order.
   I.   The administrative code enforcement order shall be served on all
parties by any one of the methods listed in section
18.01.050 of this title. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
18.08.100: FAILURE TO APPEAR AT ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING:
A responsible person who fails to appear at an administrative enforcement
hearing shall be deemed to have waived the right to such hearing, the
adjudication of issues related to the hearing, and the right to appeal;
provided, that proper notice of the hearing has been given as provided in
section
18.01.050 of this title. (Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
CHAPTER 18.09
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT APPEALS
SECTION:
18.09.010: Appeal Of Administrative Code Enforcement Hearing Decision
18.09.010: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT HEARING DECISION:
Any person adversely affected by an administrative enforcement order of any
other provision of this title may petition the third district court of Salt
Lake County for relief as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-703.7.
(Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
CHAPTER 18.10
BONDS
SECTION:
18.10.010: Generally
18.10.010: GENERALLY:
   A.   As part of any notice, order, or action, the administrative code
enforcement hearing officer has the authority to require responsible persons to
post a cash bond, an escrow agreement, or an irrevocable letter of credit in a
form acceptable to the city attorney to ensure compliance with this code or
applicable state codes.
   B.   If the responsible person posts a bond and fails to comply with the
notice, order, or action, then the bond will be forfeited to the city. The bond
will be used by the city to correct the violation for which the bond was
posted. Any unused funds after correction of the violation will be returned to
the person posting the bond.
   C.   The bond shall be equal to the projected total cost to correct a
violation of this code.
   D.   The bond shall be released, in full, once the corrective action
necessary to abate a violation has been satisfied by the responsible party.
(Ord. 08-14, 7-9-2008)
TITLE 19
ANTIDISCRIMINATION
General Provisions   19.01
Employment Discrimination   19.02
Housing Discrimination   19.03
Offenses, Investigation, And Enforcement   19.04
CHAPTER 19.01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
19.01.010: Purpose
19.01.020: Administration
19.01.030: Antidiscrimination Investigator
19.01.040: No Private Right Of Action; No Special Rights
19.01.050: Severability
19.01.060: Definitions
19.01.010: PURPOSE:
   A.   Every individual in the city has the right to work and earn wages
through gainful employment. Discriminatory employment practices are detrimental
because they impede the social and economic progress of the city by preventing
all of the city's citizens from contributing to or fully participating in the
cultural, spiritual, social and commercial life of the community, which is
essential to the growth and vitality of the city's neighborhoods and
businesses. The Utah antidiscrimination act, Utah Code Annotated section 34A-5-
101 et seq., addresses employment related discrimination based on race; color;
sex; pregnancy; childbirth, or pregnancy related conditions; religion; national
origin; age (if 40 years of age or older); and disability, but does not address
discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity.
   B.   Every individual in the city has the right to seek housing.
Discriminatory housing practices are detrimental because they impede the social
and economic progress of the city by preventing all of the city's citizens from
contributing to or fully participating in the cultural, spiritual, social and
commercial life of the community, which is essential to the growth and vitality
of the city's neighborhoods and businesses.
The Utah fair housing act, Utah Code Annotated section 57-21-1 et seq.,
addresses housing related discrimination based on race; color; religion; sex;
national origin; familial status; source of income; and disability, but does
not address discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity.
   C.   The city has found that discrimination in employment and housing on the
basis of sexual orientation and gender identity must be addressed. The denial
or deprivation of employment rights and access to housing because of an
individual's sexual orientation or gender identity is detrimental to the
health, safety, and welfare of the city's citizens and damages the city's
economic well being. The purpose of this title is to provide a clear and
comprehensive mandate for the prevention and elimination of discrimination in
employment and housing in the city against individuals based upon sexual
orientation or gender identity and this title shall be liberally construed to
achieve that purpose. (Ord. 10-23, 8-4-2010)
19.01.020: ADMINISTRATION:
The mayor is responsible for administering and implementing this title. (Ord.
10-23, 8-4-2010)
19.01.030: ANTIDISCRIMINATION INVESTIGATOR:
   A.   The mayor is authorized to appoint one or more investigators to
investigate violations of this title.
   B.   Any investigator may be removed by the mayor at any time. (Ord. 10-23,
8-4-2010)
19.01.040: NO PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION; NO SPECIAL RIGHTS:
This title does not create a private cause of action, nor does it create any
right or remedy that is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies
provided under federal or state law. This title does not create any special
rights or privileges which would not be available to all of the city's citizens
because every person has a sexual orientation and a gender identity. (Ord. 10-
23, 8-4-2010)
19.01.050: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this
title is for any reason determined to be illegal, invalid, superseded by other
authority or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any
state or federal regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such
determination shall have no effect on the validity of any other section,
sentence, paragraph, term, definition or provision of this chapter, all of
which will remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 10-23, 8-4-2010)
19.01.060: DEFINITIONS:
In this title:
ANTIDISCRIMINATION INVESTIGATOR OR INVESTIGATOR: The investigator(s) appointed
by the mayor and operating as set forth in this title.
CITY: City of Taylorsville, Utah.
CITY ATTORNEY: The duly appointed Taylorsville city attorney and includes the
city attorney's designated subordinate attorneys.
COMPLAINANT: A person, including the investigator or a member of the
investigator, who files a complaint under this title.
CONCILIATION: The attempted resolution of issues raised in a complaint filed
under this title, or raised in the investigation of the complaint, through
informal negotiations involving the complainant, the respondent, and the
investigator.
CONCILIATION AGREEMENT: A written agreement setting forth the resolution of
issues by conciliation under this title.
DISCRIMINATION: Any direct or indirect exclusion, distinction, segregation,
limitation, refusal, denial, or other differentiation in the treatment of a
person because of a person's actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender
identity or because of a person's association with any such person.
Discrimination shall not be interpreted to require or to grant or accord
preferential treatment to any person because of that person's sexual
orientation or gender identity.
DWELLING: Any building or structure, or a portion of a building or structure,
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence of one or
more families inside the city and vacant land that is offered for sale or lease
for the construction or location of a dwelling inside the city.
EMPLOYEE: Any individual applying with or employed by an employer. The term
does not include an elected official.
EMPLOYER: Any person employing fifteen (15) or more employees in the city for
each working day in each of twenty (20) or more calendar weeks in the current
or preceding calendar year, and includes any agent of such a person.
EMPLOYMENT AGENCY: Any person, and any agent of a person, undertaking to
procure employees or opportunities to work for any other person in the city or
holding itself out to be equipped to procure employees or opportunities to work
for any other person in the city.
GENDER IDENTITY: A person's actual or perceived gender identity, appearance,
mannerisms, or other characteristics of an individual with or without regard to
the person's sex at birth.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: Any organization that exists for the purpose in whole or in
part of collective dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or
conditions of employment; or other mutual aid or protection in connection with
employment.
MAYOR: The duly elected or appointed mayor of the city of Taylorsville.
OTHERWISE QUALIFIED: A person who possesses the following required by an
employer for any particular job, job classification, or position:
   A.   Education;
   B.   Training;
   C.   Ability;
   D.   Moral character;
   E.   Integrity;
   F.   Disposition to work;
   G.   Adherence to reasonable rules and regulations; and
   H.   Other job related qualifications required by an employer.
PERSON: One or more individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations,
legal representatives, trusts or trustees, receivers and the city.
REAL ESTATE BROKER OR SALESPERSON: A principal real estate broker, an associate
real estate broker, or a real estate sales agent as those terms are defined in
Utah Code Annotated section 61-2-2 or any successor provision.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: A religious corporation, association, educational
institution, society, trust or any entity or association which is a wholly
owned or controlled subsidiary or agency of any religious corporation,
association, society, trust or corporation sole.
RENT: To lease, sublease, let, or otherwise grant for a consideration the right
to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE RELATED TRANSACTION: The making or purchasing of loans
or providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing,
improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or secured by residential real
estate; or selling, brokering, or appraising residential real property inside
the city.
RESPONDENT: A person identified in a complaint as having committed an unlawful
practice under this chapter.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION: A person's actual or perceived orientation as heterosexual,
homosexual, or bisexual.
UNLAWFUL PRACTICE: A discriminatory act or practice relating to employment or
housing that is prohibited under this chapter. (Ord. 10-23, 8-4-2010)
CHAPTER 19.02
EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION
SECTION:
19.02.010: Unlawful Employment Practices
19.02.020: Exemptions
19.02.030: Unlawful Intimidation, Retaliation, And Coercion
19.02.040: Procedures For Filing Complaints
19.02.010: UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES:
   A.   Employers: An employer may not refuse to hire, promote, discharge,
demote, or terminate any person, and may not retaliate against, harass, or
discriminate in matters of compensation or in terms, privileges, and conditions
of employment against any person otherwise qualified because of a person's
sexual orientation or gender identity.
   B.   Employment Agencies: An employment agency may not refuse to list and
properly classify for employment, or refuse to refer a person for employment,
in a known available job for which the person is otherwise qualified because of
a person's sexual orientation or gender identity.
   C.   Labor Organizations: A labor organization may not exclude any person
otherwise qualified from full membership rights in the labor organization,
expel the person from membership in the labor organization, or otherwise
discriminate against or harass any of the labor organization's members in full
employment of work opportunity, or representation, because of a person's sexual
orientation or gender identity.
   D.   Training Programs: An employer, labor organization, joint
apprenticeship committee, or vocational school, providing, coordinating, or
controlling apprenticeship programs, or providing, coordinating, or controlling
on the job training programs, instruction, training, or retraining programs may
not deny to, or withhold from, any qualified person, the right to be admitted
to, or participate in any apprenticeship training program, on the job training
program, or other occupational instruction, training or retraining program
because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity.
   E.   Notices And Advertisements: Unless based upon a bona fide occupational
qualification, or required by and given to an agency of government for security
reasons, an employer, employment agency, or labor organization may not print,
or circulate, or cause to be printed or circulated, any statement,
advertisement, or publication, use any form of application for employment or
membership, or make any inquiry in connection with prospective employment or
membership that expresses, either directly or indirectly any limitation,
specification, or discrimination because of a person's sexual orientation or
gender identity.
   F.   Joint Labor-Management Committee: It is unlawful for a joint labor-
management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining
(including on the job training programs) to print or publish, or cause to be
printed or published, any notice or advertisement relating to admission to, or
employment in, any program established to provide apprenticeship or other
training by the joint labor-management committee that indicates any preference,
limitation, specification, or discrimination based on sexual orientation or
gender identity.
   G.   Occupational Qualification: Nothing in this chapter prohibits a notice
or advertisement from indicating a preference, limitation, specification, or
discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity when sexual
orientation or gender identity is a bona fide occupational qualification for
employment.
   H.   No Preferential Treatment: Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted
to require any employer, employment agency, labor organization, vocational
school, joint labor-management committee, or apprenticeship program subject to
this chapter to grant preferential treatment to any person because of the
person's sexual orientation or gender identity on account of an imbalance which
may exist with respect to the total number or percentage of persons of any
sexual orientation or gender identity employed by any employer, referred or
classified for employment by an employment agency or labor organization,
admitted to membership or classified by any labor organization, or admitted to
or employed in, any apprenticeship or other training program, in comparison
with the total number or percentage of persons of that sexual orientation or
gender identity available in the city's available work force. (Ord. 10-23, 8-4-
2010)
19.02.020: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter does not apply to:
   A.   A religious organization;
   B.   An expressive association whose employment of a person protected by
this chapter would significantly burden the association's rights of expressive
association under Boy Scouts Of America v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640 (2000); or
   C.   The United States government, any of its departments or agencies, or
any corporation wholly owned by it; or the state of Utah or any of its
departments, agencies, or political subdivisions except for the city. (Ord. 10-
23, 8-4-2010)
19.02.030: UNLAWFUL INTIMIDATION, RETALIATION, AND COERCION:
It is unlawful for any person to discriminate against, harass, threaten, harm,
damage, or otherwise penalize another person for opposing an unlawful practice,
for filing a complaint, or for testifying, assisting, or participating in any
manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter. (Ord.
10-23, 8-4-2010)
19.02.040: PROCEDURES FOR FILING COMPLAINTS:
Any person who claims to have been injured by an unlawful employment practice
subject to the city's jurisdiction under this chapter may file a complaint in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 19.04 of this title. (Ord. 10-23, 8-
4-2010)
CHAPTER 19.03
HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
SECTION:
19.03.010: Unlawful Housing Practices
19.03.020: Exemptions
19.03.030: Unlawful Intimidation, Retaliation, And Coercion
19.03.040: Procedures For Filing Complaints
19.03.010: UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICES:
   A.   Discriminatory Housing Practices: It is a discriminatory housing
practice to do any of the following:
      1.   Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, refuse
to negotiate for the sale or rental, or otherwise deny or make unavailable any
dwelling from any person because of the person's sexual orientation or gender
identity;
      2.   Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or
privileges of the sale or rental of any dwelling or in providing facilities or
services in connection with the dwelling because of the person's sexual
orientation or gender identity;
      3.   Represent to any person that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale, or rental when in fact the dwelling is available;
      4.   To make a representation orally or in writing or make, print,
circulate, publish, post, or cause to be made, printed, circulated, published,
or posted any notice, statement, or advertisement, or to use any application
form for the sale or rental of a dwelling, that directly or indirectly
expresses any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on sexual
orientation or gender identity, or expresses any intent to make any such
preference, limitation, or discrimination;
      5.   To induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to buy, sell,
or rent any dwelling by making representations about the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of persons of a particular sexual orientation or
gender identity;
      6.   Engage in any discriminatory housing practices because of sexual
orientation or gender identity based upon a person's association with another
person.
   B.   Broker/Salesperson Discriminatory Practices: It is a discriminatory
housing practice for a real estate broker or salesperson to do any of the
following because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity:
      1.   To discriminate against any person in making available a residential
real estate transaction, or in the terms or conditions of the transaction,
inside the city, because of a person's sexual orientation or gender identity;
      2.   To deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, any
multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service,
organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings inside the city or to discriminate against any person in the terms or
conditions of access, membership, or participation in the organization,
service, or facility inside the city because of a person's sexual orientation
or gender identity; or
      3.   Engage in any discriminatory housing practices inside the city
because of sexual orientation or gender identity based upon a person's
association with another person.
   C.   Exceptions: This chapter does not apply to the following:
      1.   The sale or rental of any single-family dwelling, if the owner:
         a.   Does not own an interest in or title to four (4) or more single-
family dwellings held for lease or sale at one time located inside the city;
         b.   Has not sold two (2) or more single-family dwellings inside the
city in which the owner did not reside in the dwelling within the twenty four
(24) month period preceding the sale or rental of the dwelling; and
         c.   Does not use the services or facilities of any real estate
broker, agent, or salesperson, or of any other person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings, in connection with the sale or rental of the
dwelling inside the city.
      2.   The rental of a dwelling that is occupied or intended to be occupied
by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, when the
owner actually maintains and occupies part of the dwelling as a residence.
      3.   Nothing in this section prohibits conduct against a person because
of the person's conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal
manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance under state or federal
law. (Ord. 10-23, 8-4-2010)
19.03.020: EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   This chapter does not apply to a temporary or permanent residence
facility operated by a nonprofit organization; a charitable organization; or a
person in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society,
including any dormitory operated by a public or private educational
institution, if the discrimination is based on sexual orientation or gender
identity for reasons of personal modesty or privacy or in the furtherance of a
religious organization's sincerely held religious beliefs.
   B.   This chapter does not prohibit or restrict a religious organization or
any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled
by or in conjunction with a religious organization from limiting the sale,
rental, or occupancy of dwellings it owns or operates for primarily
noncommercial purposes to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preference to such persons.
   C.   This chapter does not prohibit distinctions based on a person's
inability or failure to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial
obligations, of a lease, rental agreement, contract of purchase or sale,
mortgage, trust deed, or other financing agreement.
   D.   This chapter does not apply to: 1) the United States government, any of
its departments or agencies, or any corporation wholly owned by it; or 2) the
government of the state of Utah or any of its departments, agencies, or
political subdivisions, except for the city. (Ord. 10-23, 8-4-2010)
19.03.030: UNLAWFUL INTIMIDATION, RETALIATION, AND COERCION:
It is unlawful for any person to discriminate against, harass, threaten, harm,
damage, or otherwise penalize another person for opposing an unlawful practice,
for filing a complaint, or for testifying, assisting, or participating in any
manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this chapter. (Ord.
10-23, 8-4-2010)
19.03.040: PROCEDURES FOR FILING COMPLAINTS:
Any person who claims to have been injured by an unlawful housing practice may
file complaint in accordance with the provision of chapter 19.04 of this title.
(Ord. 10-23, 8-4-2010)
CHAPTER 19.04
OFFENSES, INVESTIGATION, AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
19.04.010: Offenses And Penalties
19.04.020: Complaint
19.04.030: Investigation
19.04.040: Conciliation
19.04.050: Enforcement
19.04.010: OFFENSES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   A person commits an unlawful practice and violates this title if the
person intentionally or knowingly violates a provision of this title or if the
person intentionally or knowingly obstructs or prevents compliance with this
title.
   B.   An unlawful practice committed under this title by a respondent owning
or operating twenty (20) or fewer dwellings or employing fifty (50) or fewer
employees is punishable by a civil fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
   C.   An unlawful practice committed under this title by a respondent owning
or operating twenty one (21) or more dwellings or employing fifty one (51) or
more employees or by a real estate broker or salesperson is punishable by a
civil fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 10-23, 8-4-
2010)
19.04.020: COMPLAINT:
   A.   Any person who claims to have been injured by an unlawful practice may
file a complaint with the city recorder, and the city recorder shall forward
the complaint to the investigator. A complaint must be filed within one hundred
eighty (180) calendar days after an alleged unlawful practice has occurred.
   B.   A complaint must be in writing on a form provided by the investigator,
made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following information:
      1.   The complainant's name, address, and signature;
      2.   The date the alleged unlawful practice occurred;
      3.   A statement of the facts upon which the allegation of an unlawful
practice are based; and
      4.   The respondent's name and address.
   C.   Promptly after the filing of a complaint, the investigator shall:
      1.   Provide the respondent named in the complaint written notice that a
complaint alleging the commission of an unlawful practice has been filed
against the respondent;
      2.   Furnish a copy of the complaint to the respondent; and
      3.   Advise the respondent of the respondent's procedural rights and
obligations, including the right to file a written, signed, and verified
informal answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) calendar days after
service of notice of the complaint.
   D.   Not later than the fifteenth day after service of the notice and copy
of the complaint, a respondent may file an answer to the complaint. The answer
must be in writing, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following
information:
      1.   The respondent's name, address, telephone number, and signature of
the respondent or the respondent's attorney, if any; and
      2.   A concise statement of facts in response to the allegations in the
complaint, including facts of any defense or exception. (Ord. 10-23, 8-4-2010)
19.04.030: INVESTIGATION:
   A.   Upon the filing of a complaint, the investigator shall commence an
investigation to determine the facts behind the complaint and whether there is
reasonable cause to believe the respondent committed an unlawful practice,
except that no investigation may commence if, after reviewing the allegations
of the complaint, the investigator determines that the complaint does not come
within the scope of this title. Upon determining that a particular complaint
does not come within the scope of this title, the investigator shall dismiss
the complaint, notify the complainant and the respondent and take no further
action.
   B.   In connection with any investigation of a complaint filed under this
chapter, the investigator shall seek the voluntary cooperation of any person
to:
      1.   Obtain access to premises, records, documents, individuals, and any
other possible source of information;
      2.   Examine, record, and copy necessary materials; and
      3.   Take and record testimony or statements of any person reasonably
necessary for the furtherance of the investigation.
   C.   The investigator may dismiss a complaint during the investigation and
prior to referral to the city attorney if the investigator determines that:
      1.   The complaint was not filed within the required time period;
      2.   The location of the alleged unlawful practice is not within the
city's jurisdiction;
      3.   The alleged unlawful practice is not a violation of this title;
      4.   The complainant refuses to cooperate with the investigator in the
investigation of the complaint or enforcement of an executed conciliation
agreement;
      5.   The complainant cannot be located after the investigator has
performed a reasonable search; or
      6.   A conciliation agreement has been executed by the complainant and
respondent. (Ord. 10-23, 8-4-2010)
19.04.040: CONCILIATION:
   A.   During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the
notice of the complaint to the respondent, the investigator shall, if it
appears that the respondent has committed an unlawful practice, attempt to
conciliate the complaint. In conciliating a complaint, the chair of the
investigator, or a member of the investigator designated by the chair, shall
try to achieve a just resolution and obtain assurances that the respondent will
satisfactorily remedy any violation of the complainant's rights and take action
to ensure the elimination of both present and future unlawful practices. A
conciliation agreement may include: sensitivity training for the respondent
and/or the respondent's employees; the respondent's agreement to adopt and
pursue a policy of nondiscrimination in its practices; and the respondent's
agreement to not engage in discriminatory practices in the future.
   B.   A conciliation agreement executed under this section must be in writing
in a form approved by the city attorney and must be signed and verified by the
respondent and the complainant, subject to approval of the chair of the
investigator who shall indicate approval by signing the agreement.
   C.   If a respondent voluntarily enters into a conciliation agreement, the
investigator shall immediately dismiss the complaint. (Ord. 10-23, 8-4-2010)
19.04.050: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   If, upon completion of an investigation of a complaint, the
investigator determines that an unlawful practice has occurred and is unable to
secure an acceptable conciliation agreement from the respondent, then the
investigator shall refer the case to the city attorney.
   B.   The investigator shall refer the entire file to the city attorney, who
shall determine how best to pursue further action, if any, on the complaint.
   C.   If the city attorney determines that cause exists that an unlawful
practice occurred and the facts are sufficient to warrant the initiation of an
action through Taylorsville's administrative code enforcement hearing program,
then the city attorney shall provide written notification to the respondent and
the complainant that an action to enforce this title will be initiated. The
enforcement process and proceedings shall be in compliance with the rules and
provisions with respect to a "notice of violation" to the extent applicable and
the "administrative code enforcement process", set forth in title 18 of this
code.
   D.   If the city attorney determines that there is no cause that an unlawful
practice occurred or that the facts are insufficient to warrant the initiation
of an action as set forth herein, the city attorney shall provide written
notification to the respondent and the complainant and notify the investigator.
(Ord. 10-23, 8-4-2010)
 
