TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1-01: GENERAL CITY PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1-03: GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1-06: DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 1-09: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 1-12: VIOLATIONS
CHAPTER 1-01: GENERAL CITY PROVISIONS
1-01-010. Incorporation.
1-01-020. Classification.
1-01-030. City Seal.
1-01-040. Boundary Adjustments.
1-01-010. Incorporation.
Woods Cross City was incorporated as a municipal corporation on the 23rd day of
October, 1961, and is a political subdivision of the State of Utah, and may be referred to as
AWoods Cross City, a municipal corporation."
1-01-020. Classification.
Woods Cross City is classified as a "third class city" under Utah Code Ann. ' 10-2-301,
as amended, as it has more than eight hundred (800) and less than sixty thousand (60,000)
inhabitants. Any change in classification of the City shall be made pursuant to Utah Code Ann. ''
10-2-301 through -306, as amended.
1-01-030. City Seal.
The corporate seal of Woods Cross City, established and declared to be the seal of the
City, is circular in form, one and three-fourths inch (1-3/4") in diameter, with the words AWoods
Cross City, Davis County, Utah@ inscribed in an outer circle with two small stars, and the words
ACorporate Seal@ inscribed in the center circle.
1-01-040. Boundary Adjustments.
Woods Cross City may annex, deannex, or otherwise adjust the corporate boundaries of the City
in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Utah Code Ann. '' 10-2-401
through 10-2-614, as amended, including the notice procedures set forth in Utah Code Ann. ' 10-
1-116, as amended.
CHAPTER 1-03: GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS
1-03-010. Title.
1-03-020. Citation.
1-03-030. Amendments.
1-03-040. Updates to Code Books.
1-03-050. Repealer.
1-03-060. Accrued Rights.
1-03-070. Continuation of Prior Ordinances.
1-03-080. Omission of General Law Not Waiver.
1-03-090. Severability Clause.
1-03-010. Title.
The Ordinances set forth herein shall be known as the AWoods Cross Municipal Code"
and may be so cited.
1-03-020. Citation.
Any provision of state law adopted herein by reference as a City ordinance shall be cited
by adding the number of the Title in this Code in front of the section number assigned in the Utah
Code Annotated. For example, Utah Code Ann. ' 76-1-101 adopted by reference in Title 13 of
this Code shall be cited as 13/76-1-101. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter
and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section
itself, when reference is made to this Code by title in any legal documents.
1-03-030. Amendments.
Any ordinances adding to, deleting from, or altering any part of this Code shall constitute
an amendment thereto and shall be adopted by ordinance of the City Council.
1-03-040. Updates to Code Books.
The City Recorder shall ensure appropriate procedures are provided to assure
replacement pages are properly inserted in official copies of the Code. Any person having
custody of an official copy of the Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code current as to
the most recent ordinances passed and shall follow all instructions for immediate insertion of
replacement pages. Copies of official Code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other employees, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to the office
of the City Recorder when directed to do so by the City.
1-03-50. Repealer.
Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, all general ordinances of the City passed
prior to the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed. The following ordinances are not hereby
repealed: tax levy ordinances, appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the
issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or
vacating streets, alleys or public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City; and all special ordinances.
1-03-060. Accrued Rights.
The repeal of ordinances provided in Section 1-03-050, nor any provisions of this Code
and any amendments thereto, shall not affect any debt or fee which is accrued, any right which is
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding commenced at
the time when this Code or any amendments thereto takes effect, nor shall the repeal of any
ordinance hereby have the right of reviving any ordinances already repealed or superseded,
unless the ordinance containing the amendment or repealer indicates otherwise.
1-03-070. Continuation of Prior Ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this Code, shall be construed as
continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
1-03-080. Omission of General Law Not Waiver.
The omission to specify or enumerate in this Code those provisions of the general law
applicable to all cities shall not be construed as a waiver of the benefits of any such provision.
1-03-090. Severability Clause.
If any title, chapter, section, subsection, sentence, or provision of this Code is, for any reason,
held to be unconstitutional, invalid, void or unlawful by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code.
CHAPTER 1-06: DEFINITIONS
1-06-010. Definitions.
1-06-010. Definitions.
In the construction of this Code, all ordinances of the City, and any amendments thereto,
the following words and terms shall have the meaning indicated, unless such definition or
construction would be inconsistent with or contrary to the context of the Ordinance.
(a) "City" shall mean Woods Cross City, Davis County, Utah.
(b) "City Council" shall mean the Woods Cross City Council.
(c) "Code" shall mean the Woods Cross Municipal Code.
(d) ACounty@ shall mean Davis County, Utah.
(e) "Officers" and "Employees" shall mean officers and employees of Woods Cross
City.
(f) "Ordinances" shall mean the ordinances of Woods Cross City.
(g) "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, association, organization, trust,
partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other association however designated.
(h) AState@ shall mean the State of Utah.
CHAPTER 1-09: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
1-09-010. Rules of Construction.
1-09-020. Common Usage.
1-09-030. Use of Number.
1-09-040. Use of Gender.
1-09-050. Verb Tense.
1-09-060. Mandatory Language.
1-09-070. Headings.
1-09-080. Computation of Time.
1-09-010. Rules of Construction.
In the construction or interpretation of this Code, all ordinances of the City and any amendments
thereto, the following rules of construction shall be observed when necessary or applicable, unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council or contrary to the context of
the Ordinance.
1-09-020. Common Usage.
All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common use and
understanding of the language, but technical words and phrases as may have acquired a particular
meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such particular meaning.
1-09-030. Use of Number.
Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, whenever any provision of this Code refers to the
plural number in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or
person shall be deemed to be included, and vice versa.
1-09-040. Use of Gender.
Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, whenever any provision of this Code refers to the
masculine in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, the feminine shall be deemed to
be included, and vice versa.
1-09-050. Verb Tense.
Unless otherwise specifically provided herein, the use of any verb in the present tense shall be
deemed to include the future and past tense of such verb, when applicable, and vice versa.
1-09-060. Mandatory Language.
The term "shall" as used in this Code is mandatory and the terms "may" and Ashould@ as used
herein are merely permissive.
1-09-070. Headings.
Title, chapter or section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this
Code.
1-09-080. Computation of Time.
Unless otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday,
Sunday or holiday, then the last day shall be the next following business day.
CHAPTER 1-12: VIOLATIONS
1-12-010. Violations.
1-12-020. Criminal Penalties.
1-12-030. Civil Penalties.
1-12-040. Continuing Violation.
1-12-050. Other Relief.
1-12-010. Violations.
Unless otherwise specifically provided herein or provided by law, any person who violates
any provision of this Code shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
1-12-020. Criminal Penalties.
(a) Class B Misdemeanors. Persons found guilty of a Class B misdemeanor shall be
subject to fines, forfeitures, penalties and/or imprisonment as provided by law for Class B
misdemeanors, including, but not limited to Utah Code Ann. '' 76-3-204 and -301, as amended.
(b) Class C Misdemeanors. Persons found guilty of a Class C misdemeanor shall
be subject to fines, forfeitures, penalties and/or imprisonment as provided by law for Class C
misdemeanors, including, but not limited to Utah Code Ann. '' 76-3-204 and -301, as amended.
(c) Infractions. Persons found guilty of an infraction may not be imprisoned but shall
be subject to fines, forfeitures and/or penalties as provided by law for infractions, including, but
not limited to Utah Code Ann. ' 76-3-205 and -301, as amended.
(d) Corporate Penalties. Corporations, associations, partnerships or governmental
instrumentalities shall be subject to fines and sanctions for violations as set forth in Utah Code
Ann. '' 76-3-302 and -303, as amended.
1-12-030. Civil Penalties.
The City may establish and impose a civil penalty for the unauthorized use of municipal
property, including, but not limited to, the use of parks, streets and other public grounds or
equipment, in accordance with the provisions of Utah Code Ann. ' 10-3-703, as amended.
1-12-040. Continuing Violation.
In instances where the violation of this Code is a continuing violation, a separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each day in which the violation occurs or continues to occur.
1-12-050. Other Relief.
This Chapter shall not limit the authority of the City or any court of competent jurisdiction
to impose any other sanction or order any other relief as may be appropriate and lawful under the
laws of the State of Utah.
TITLE 2
GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER 2-01: CITY COUNCIL
CHAPTER 2-03: MAYOR
CHAPTER 2-06: ELECTION AND QUALIFICATION
CHAPTER 2-09: LEGISLATION
TITLE 2
GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER 2-01: CITY COUNCIL
CHAPTER 2-03: MAYOR
CHAPTER 2-06: ELECTION AND QUALIFICATION
CHAPTER 2-09: LEGISLATION
CHAPTER 2-01: CITY COUNCIL
2-01-010. Governing Body.
2-01-020. Powers and Duties.
2-01-030. Meetings.
2-01-040. Open Meetings Law.
2-01-050. Notice of Meetings.
2-01-060. Agenda.
2-01-070. Minutes.
2-01-080. Mayor Presides.
2-01-090. Quorum.
2-01-100. Voting.
2-01-110. Reconsideration.
2-01-120. Rules of Procedure.
2-01-130. Council Committees.
2-01-140. Attendance.
2-01-150. Disorderly Conduct.
2-01-160. Required Attendance of Witnesses and Production of Evidence.
2-01-010. Governing Body.
The governing body of Woods Cross City shall be a council composed of six (6)
members, one of whom shall be the Mayor and five (5) of whom shall be Council Members, which
council is hereinafter referred to as the “City Council”.
2-01-020. Powers and Duties.
The City Council shall exercise the legislative and executive powers of the city and may
perform such other functions as may be specifically provide or necessarily implied by law.
2-01-030. Meetings.
(a) Regular Meetings. The City Council shall hold regular meetings to conduct the
business of the City at least once each month and shall prescribe by ordinance the time and
place for holding its regular meetings. Unless otherwise provided, regular meetings of the City
Council shall be held on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at the hour of 6:30 p.m. at the
offices of Woods Cross City, 1555 South 800 West, Woods Cross, Utah.
(b) Special Meetings. If at any time the business of the City requires a special
meeting of the City Council, such a special meeting may be ordered by the Mayor or any two
Council Members. Notice of the special meeting shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Utah Code Ann. § 10-3-502, as amended. The order of the special meeting shall be
entered into the minutes of the City Council.
(c) Closed Meetings. The affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the City Council
present at an open meeting for which notice is given and a quorum is present may call a closed
meeting to discuss certain items as provided under Utah Code Ann. § 52-4-5, as amended. The
Woods Cross Municipal Code October 2006
Title 2, Page 1
reason or reasons for holding a closed meeting and the vote, either for or against the proposition
to hold such a meeting, cast by each member by name shall be entered on the minutes of the
meeting. No ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation, contract, or appointment shall be approved at
a closed meeting.
(d) Electronic Meetings.
(1) Definitions. As used in this Ordinance:
(i) “Anchor location” means the physical location from which the
electronic meeting originates or from which the participants are connected.
(ii) “Electronic meeting” means a City Council meeting convened or
conducted by means of a conference using electronic communications.
(iii) “Electronic notice” means electronic mail or fax.
(iv) “Monitor” means to hear or observe, live, by audio or video
equipment, all of the public statements of each member of the City Council who
is participating in a meeting.
(v) “Participate” means the ability to communicate with all of the
members of the City Council, either verbally or electronically, so that each
member of the City Council can hear or observe the communication.
(vi) “Public hearing” means a portion of a meeting at which
comments from the public will be accepted.
(vii) “Public statement” means a statement made in the ordinary
course of business of the City Council with the intent that all other members of
the City Council receive it.
(2) Procedures. The City Council may, be following the procedures and
requirements of this Ordinance, convene and conduct an electronic meeting. The City
Council convening or conducting an electronic meeting shall:
(i) Give public notice of the meeting pursuant to Utah Code Ann.
§ 52-4-202 by posting written notice at the anchor location; and
(ii) Providing written or electronic notice to at least one newspaper
of general circulation within the state; and a local media correspondent;
(iii) In addition to giving public notice required by Subsection (i),
provide:
Notice of the electronic meeting to the members of the City Council at
least 24 hours before the meeting so that they may participate in and be counted
as present for all purposes, including the determination that a quorum is present;
and
A description of how the members will be connected to the electronic
meeting.
(3) Procedures Governing Electronic Meeting. The procedures to be followed at the
electronic meeting shall be the same as those followed by the City Council in a non-electronic
Woods Cross Municipal Code October 2006
Title 2, Page 2
open and public meeting of the City Council. The Mayor shall conduct the meeting and the
meeting shall be held pursuant to the agenda posted for that meeting. Prior to commencing the
electronic meeting, an electronic link shall be established with all participants and the anchor
location. Minutes shall be kept for the meeting in accordance with the requirements of the Open
Meetings Law. Following passage of a motion to adjourn, the electronic link shall be terminated
and the meeting shall be deemed concluded. The initial anchor location for meetings of the City
Council shall be the Woods Cross City Hall located at 1555 South 800 West, Woods Cross, Utah
84087. If the meeting is a public hearing, space and facilities will be provided at the anchor
location so that interested persons and the public ma attend, monitor and participate in the open
portions of the meeting.
2-01-040. Open Meeting Law.
All meetings for the City Council shall be open to the public, except closed meetings, and
shall be conducted in accordance with the Open and Public Meetings Act as set forth in Utah
Code Ann. §§ 52-4-1, et seq., as amended.
2-01-050. Notice of Meetings.
The City shall give public notice at least once each year of its annual meeting schedule
and shall give not less than twenty-four (24) hours public notice of the agenda, date, time and
place of each of its meetings, other than emergency meetings, in accordance with Utah Code
Ann. § 52-4-6, as amended.
2-01-060. Agenda.
A written agenda for each regular meeting shall be prepared by the City Administrator or
his or her designee. Any member of the City Council may place items on the agenda.
2-01-070. Minutes.
Written minutes shall be kept of all meetings of the City Council in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Utah Code Ann. § 52-4-7, as amended.
2-01-080. Mayor Presides.
The Mayor shall be the chairperson and preside at the meetings of the City Council. In
the absence of the Mayor or because of his or her inability or refusal to act, the City Council may
elect a member of the City Council to preside over the meeting as Mayor pro tempore in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 2-03 of this Title.
2-01-090. Quorum.
No action of the City Council shall be official or of any effect except when a quorum of the
Council Members are present, except as otherwise provided by law. Three (3) or more members
of the City Council shall constitute a quorum.
2-01-100. Voting.
(a) How Taken. A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded for all ordinances,
resolutions, and any action which would create a liability against the city and in any other case at
the request of any member of the City Council by a “yes” or a “no” vote. Every resolution or
ordinance shall be in writing before the vote is taken.
(b) Number Required. The minimum number of “yes” votes required to pass any
ordinance, resolution, or to take any action by the City Council, unless otherwise prescribed by
Woods Cross Municipal Code October 2006
Title 2, Page 3
law, shall be a majority of the members of the quorum, but shall never be less than three (3). Any
ordinance, resolution, or motion of the City Council having fewer favorable votes than required
herein shall be deemed defeated and invalid; except in the following: fewer votes may compel
attendance of absentees, may adjourn a meeting from time to time, and may fill a vacancy in the
City Council.
(c) Mayor Voting. The Mayor shall not vote except in cases of a tie vote of the City
Council as more particularly discussed in Chapter 2-03 of this Title.
2-01-110. Reconsideration.
Any action taken by the City Council shall not be reconsidered or rescinded at any
special meeting unless the number of members of the City Council present at the special meeting
is equal to or greater than the number of members present at the meeting when the action was
approved.
2-01-120. Rules of Procedure.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the City Council may determine its own rules of
procedure for the proper conduct of its meetings. In general, the City Council follows Robert’s
Rules of Order for the conduct of its business.
2-01-130. Council Committees.
The City Council may from time to time delegate portions of its authority by resolution to
committees composed of at least two (2) members of the City Council. Committees of the City
Council shall be limited in authority to the specific assignment of the City Council and shall
exercise their authority subject to a standard by the Council in making the delegation.
2-01-140. Attendance.
The City Council shall have the power to compel the attendance of its own members and
to provide such penalties as it deems necessary for the failure to comply therewith.
2-01-150. Disorderly Conduct.
The City Council on a two-thirds vote of its members may expel any person who is
disorderly and/or disruptive during the meeting of the City Council. The City Council may also on
a two-thirds vote of its members expel or fine any Council Member for disorderly and/or disruptive
conduct. This Section or any action taken by the governing body pursuant hereto shall not
preclude prosecution under any other provision of the law.
2-01-160. Required Attendance of Witnesses and Production of Evidence.
The City Council may require the attendance of any person to give testimony or produce
records, documents or things for inspection, copying or examination necessary or useful for the
governance of the City. The City Council shall issue subpoenas in its own name in the manner
provided in the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure or may by ordinance establish its own procedure for
issuing subpoenas under this Section.
Woods Cross Municipal Code October 2006
Title 2, Page 3a
CHAPTER 2-03: MAYOR
2-03-010. Administrative Powers.
2-03-020. General Powers.
2-03-030. Presiding Officer.
2-03-040. Voting Authority.
2-03-050. Veto Authority.
2-03-060. Mayor Pro Tempore.
2-03-070. Restrictions.
2-03-010. Administrative Powers.
The administrative powers, authority, and duties of Woods Cross City are vested in the
Mayor, except as delegated to the City Administrator.
2-03-020. General Powers.
The Mayor shall have such duties as set forth in Utah Code Ann. ' 10-3-809, as
amended, and such additional duties, powers and responsibilities as the City Council may by
resolution prescribe which are not prohibited by law.
2-03-030. Presiding Officer.
The Mayor shall be the chairperson and preside at the meetings of the City Council.
2-03-040. Voting Authority.
The Mayor shall not vote at meetings of the City Council, except in case of a tie vote of
the City Council or as otherwise provided by law.
2-03-050. Veto Authority.
The Mayor shall have no power to veto any act of the City Council unless otherwise
specifically authorized by statute.
2-03-060. Mayor Pro Tempore.
In the absence of the Mayor or because of his or her inability or refusal to act, the City
Council may elect a member of the City Council to preside over the meeting as Mayor pro
tempore, who shall have all of the powers and duties of the Mayor during his or her absence or
disability. The election of a Mayor pro tempore shall be entered in the minutes of the City Council
meeting at which he or she is elected. Any member of the City Council elected as Mayor pro
tempore shall still retain his or her power and authority as a member of the Council and shall be
entitled to vote as a member of the City Council on all matters.
2-03-070. Restrictions.
The Mayor may not serve as the City Recorder or as the City Treasure
CHAPTER 2-06: ELECTION AND QUALIFICATION
2-06-010. Elections.
2-06-020. Declaration of Candidacy.
2-06-030. Nomination Petition.
2-06-040. Residency and Registered Voter Requirements.
2-06-050. Employee Status.
2-06-060. Term of Office.
2-06-070. Vacancies.
2-06-080. Oath of Office.
2-06-090. Bond.
2-06-100. Salaries.
2-06-110. Transfer of Records.
2-06-120. Campaign Finance Disclosure.
2-06-010. Elections.
The offices of Mayor and Council Member shall be filled by election of the registered voters of
Woods Cross City in an at-large municipal election held on the Tuesday after the first Monday in
November, as provided in Chapter 3, Title 10 of the Utah Code Annotated. Municipal elections for the
offices of Mayor or Council Member shall be conducted in the manner provided in the Utah Election
Code, set forth in Title 20A of the Utah Code Annotated.
2-06-020. Declaration of Candidacy.
Any eligible and qualified person desiring to run for the elected municipal offices of Mayor or
Council Member shall file a declaration of candidacy with the City Recorder in accordance with the filing
requirements set forth in Title 20A, Chapter 9 of the Utah Code Annotated.
2-06-030. Nomination Petition.
Any resident of the City may nominate a candidate for elected municipal office by filing a
nomination petition with the City Recorder in accordance with the filing requirements set forth in Title 20A,
Chapter 9 of the Utah Code Annotated.
2-06-040. Residency and Registered Voter Requirements.
Persons eligible to file a declaration of candidacy or to be nominated for the elected office of
Mayor or Council Member shall have been a resident of Woods Cross City for at least one (1) year
immediately before the election and shall be a registered voter of Woods Cross. Each person elected to
the office of Mayor or Council Member shall maintain residency within the boundaries of the City during
his or her term of office. If a person elected to the office of Mayor or Council Member establishes his or
her principal place of residence outside the municipality during his or her term of office, the office is
automatically vacant. If a person elected to the office of Mayor or Council Member is absent from the City
anytime during his or her term of office for a continuous period of more than sixty (60) days without the
consent of the City Council, that person's elected office is automatically vacant.
2-06-050. Employee Status.
No member of the City Council shall, upon taking office, be an employee of Woods Cross
City. Any employee of Woods Cross City shall be entitled to run for office as a member of the
City Council but, if elected, shall comply with the provisions of this Section prior to taking office.
2-06-060. Term of Office.
Persons elected to the office of Mayor or Council Member shall begin their term of office
at 12:00 noon on the first Monday in January following their election, and shall continue in office
for four (4) years thereafter and until their respective successors are chosen and qualified, except
in case of death, resignation, removal, or disqualification from office.
2-06-070. Vacancies.
Vacancies in the offices of Mayor or Council Member shall be filled in accordance with
the provisions set forth in Title 20A of the Utah Code Annotated.
2-06-080. Oath of Office.
(a) Required. All elected officials shall take the oath of office before entering upon
the duties of their respective offices. Elected officials shall take their oath of office at 12:00 noon
on the first Monday in January following their election or as soon thereafter as is practical.
(b) Administered. The oath of office shall be administered by the City Recorder, any
judge, or any notary public.
(c) Filed. All oaths of office shall be filed with the City Recorder.
(d) Failure to Comply. No official act of any officer shall be invalid for the reason that
he or she failed to take the oath of office.
2-06-090. Bond.
(a) Required. Before commencing his or her duties, every elected officer shall
execute and file with the City Recorder an official bond with good and sufficient sureties payable
to Woods Cross City in the amount of $10,000.00, conditioned for the faithful performance of the
duties of his or her office, and the payment of all monies received by such officer according to the
law and the ordinances of Woods Cross City.
(b) Approval. The bonds of Council Members shall be approved by the Mayor, and
the bond of the Mayor shall be approved by the City Council, at the first meeting of the City
Council in January following a municipal election.
(c) Premium Charge. The premium charge by a corporate surety for any official
bond shall be paid by Woods Cross City.
(d) Additional Bonds. The City Council may at any time require further and
additional bonds of any elected officers of the City.
2-06-100. Salaries.
Elected officers shall receive such compensation for their services as the Mayor and City
Council may fix or amend by ordinance in accordance with the notice and hearing requirements
set forth in Utah Code Ann. ' 10-3-818, as amended. The compensation of elected officers shall
be paid at least monthly out of the City Treasury.
2-06-110. Transfer of Records.
Every officer of the City upon expiration of his or her term for any cause whatsoever shall,
within five (5) days after notification and request to do so, deliver to his or her successor all books
and records which may be the property of the City.
2-06-120. Campaign Finance Disclosure.
(a) Disclosure Required. Each candidate for municipal office shall file a Campaign
Financial Disclosure report, in substantially the same form as provided by the City, disclosing his
or her itemized and total campaign contributions and expenditures.
(b) Time for Filing. Each candidate shall file one Campaign Financial Disclosure
report no sooner than fourteen (14) days and no later than seven (7) days before the primary
election. Candidates who are eliminated at the primary election shall file another Campaign
Financial Disclosure report not later than thirty (30) days after the primary election. Candidates
who are not eliminated at the primary election shall file another Campaign Financial Disclosure
report no sooner than fourteen (14) days and no later than seven (7) days before the general
election and another report not later than thirty (30) days after the general election. Each report
shall be successive; i.e., each report shall disclose the contributions and expenditures not
reported on the previous report.
(c) Definitions. "Contribution" and "expenditure" shall include the reporting of nonmonetary
contributions such as in-kind contributions and contributions of tangible things.
(d) Campaign Financial Disclosure Report. The financial disclosure report shall be
signed and dated by the candidate, filed with the City Recorder, and identify:
(1) the total campaign contributions received from donors who gave more
than fifty dollars ($50.00);
(2) the total campaign contributions received from donors who gave less
than fifty dollars ($50.00);
(3) the total campaign expenditures made during the campaign period;
(4) an itemized report of all campaign contributions over fifty dollars
($50.00), including the name of the donor, the date the contribution was received, and the
amount of the contribution; and
(5) an itemized report of all expenditures for political purposes made during
the campaign period including the name of the recipient and the date, purpose, and
amount of the expenditure.
(e) Violations. Any person who fails to comply with this Section shall be guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with the laws of the State of Utah, and subject to any
other remedy available to the City by law or ordinance for such violation.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 2, Page 1
CHAPTER 2-09: LEGISLATION
2-09-010. Ordinances.
2-09-020. Resolutions.
2-09-030. Public Records.
2-09-010. Ordinances.
(a) Legislative Power. Except as otherwise specifically provided, the City Council shall
exercise its legislative powers through ordinances.
(b) Extent of Power. The City Council may pass any ordinance to regulate, require, prohibit,
govern, control or supervise any activity, business, conduct or condition authorized by law.
(c) Form. Any ordinance passed by the City Council shall contain and be in substantially the
order and form as set forth in Utah Code Ann. ' 10-3-704, as amended. No ordinance shall be void or
unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to certain provisions of said law.
(d) Effective Date. Unless otherwise provided in the ordinance, ordinances shall become
effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting, or thirty (30) days after final passage by the City
Council, whichever is sooner. Ordinances may become effective at an earlier or later date after
publication or posting if so provided in the ordinance.
(e) Signed. Ordinances passed or enacted by the City Council, before taking effect, shall be
signed by the Mayor, or if he is absent, by the Mayor pro tempore or by a quorum of the Council Members
as required by law.
(f) Publication. All ordinances, before taking effect, shall be posted and/or published as
required by law.
(g) Copies of Codes. At least three (3) copies of the Code and any State Codes or
Standards adopted by reference herein shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of
the City Recorder.
(h) Recording. The City Recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose,
all ordinances passed by the City Council. The City Recorder shall give each ordinance a number, if the
City Council has not already done so. The City Recorder shall make or cause to be made a certificate
stating the date of passage and the date of publication or posting of the ordinance, as required.
(i) Prima Facia Evidence. The record and certificate prepared by the City Recorder, or a
certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and publication or posting
of the ordinance or codification. In addition, the ordinances printed and published by the authority of the
City Council, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and legal publication of such
ordinances, as of the dates mentioned in the publication in all courts and administrative proceedings.
(j) Proved Under Seal. The contents of all Woods Cross City ordinances, the dates of
passage, and the dates of publication or posting, may be proved by the certification of the City Recorder
under the seal of Woods Cross City.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 2, Page 2
2-09-020. Resolutions.
(a) Administrative Powers. Unless otherwise required by law, the City Council may
exercise all administrative powers by resolution.
(b) Form. Any resolution passed by the City Council shall be in a form and contain
sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
(c) Effective Date. Resolutions may take effect on passage or at a later date as the
City Council may determine, but resolutions may not become effective more than three (3)
months from the date of passage.
(d) Publication. Resolutions need not be published or posted.
(e) Limitation. No punishment, fine, or forfeiture may be imposed by resolution.
2-09-030. Public Records.
The ordinances, resolutions, and any other books, records, accounts or documents of the
City shall be kept at the office of the City Recorder. Approved copies shall be open and available
to the public during regular business hours for examination and copying in accordance with the
Utah Government Records Access and Management Act, as adopted by the City.
TITLE 3
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 3-01: APPOINTED OFFICES
CHAPTER 3-03: DEPARTMENTS AND DIVISIONS
CHAPTER 3-06: BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
CHAPTER 3-09: PERSONNEL
CHAPTER 3-12: GOVERNMENT RECORDS
CHAPTER 3-15: PROCUREMENT
CHAPTER 3-18: PRIVATE PROPERTY PROTECTION
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 3, Page 1
CHAPTER 3-01: APPOINTED OFFICES
3-01-010. Appointed Offices.
3-01-020. Appointment and Vacancies.
3-01-030. Oath of Office.
3-01-040. Bond.
3-01-050. Salaries.
3-01-060. Transfer of Records.
3-01-070. Conflicts of Interest.
3-01-080. City Administrator.
3-01-090. City Recorder.
3-01-100. City Treasurer.
3-01-110. City Attorney.
3-01-120. City Engineer.
3-01-130. City Chief of Police.
3-01-140. City Justice Court Judge.
3-01-010. Appointed Offices.
The City Council may create any appointed office deemed necessary for the government of the
City and shall prescribe the powers and duties to be performed by appointed officials, including, but not
limited to, the City Administrator, the City Recorder, the City Treasurer, the City Attorney, the City
Engineer, the City Police Chief, the City Justice Court Judge and Department Heads.
3-01-020. Appointment and Vacancies.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may appoint and fill vacancies in all
appointed offices provided for by law or ordinance. Unless sooner removed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the City Council, all appointed officers shall continue in office until their successors are
appointed and qualified. Unless otherwise provided by law, appointed officers shall serve at the pleasure
of the City Council and may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the City Council.
3-01-030. Oath of Office.
(a) Required. Before entering on their respective duties, all appointed officers of the City
shall take the constitutional oath of office as set forth in Article IV, Section 10 of the Utah Constitution.
(b) Administered. The oath of office shall be administered by the City Recorder or any judge,
justice court judge, or notary public.
(c) Filed. All oaths of office shall be filed with the City Recorder, except that of the City
Recorder, which shall be filed with the City Treasurer.
(d) Failure to Comply. No official act of any officer shall be invalid for the reason that he or
she failed to take the oath of office.
3-01-040. Bond.
(a) Required. Before commencing the duties of office, the City Recorder and City Treasurer
shall execute a bond with good and sufficient sureties payable to the City or shall be included within
public employee blanket bonds conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 3, Page 2
and the payment of all monies received by such officer according to the law and the ordinances of the
City in the applicable amount set forth by the State Money Management Council.
(b) Limitation on Treasurer's Bond. The City Treasurer's bond may not be set at an amount
less than that established by the State Money Management Council pursuant to Utah Code Ann.  51-7-
15, as amended.
(c) Filed. All bonds shall be filed with the City Recorder, except the City Recorder's bond,
which shall be filed with the City Treasurer.
(d) Premium Charge. The premium charge by a corporate surety for any official bond shall
be paid by the City.
(e) Additional Bonds. The City Council may at any time require further and additional bonds
of any or all appointed officers of the City by resolution or ordinance.
3-01-050. Salaries.
(a) Salary. Appointed officers shall receive such compensation for their services as the City
Council may fix or amend by ordinance in accordance with notice and hearing requirements set forth in
Utah Code Ann.  10-3-818, as amended.
(b) Monthly Compensation. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, the compensation of
municipal officers shall be paid at least monthly.
3-01-060. Transfer of Records.
Every officer of the City, upon expiration of his or her term for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver
to his or her successor all books and records which may be the property of the City immediately after
notification and/or request to do so.
3-01-070. Conflicts of Interest.
All appointed officers of the City shall disclose conflicts of interest and otherwise adhere to
provisions of the Utah Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act, set forth at Utah Code Ann.  10-3-1301, et
seq., as amended, hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein.
3-01-080. City Administrator.
(a) Office Created. The office of City Manager has been heretofore created and established
and shall continue in force and effect as an appointed office of the City. The City Manager shall be
designated as and is referred to in this Code as the "City Administrator."
(b) Office. The City Administrator shall maintain an office in City Hall and shall spend such
time in the performance of his or her duties as is necessary or as may be required from time to time by
the City Council, but not less than forty (40) hours per week.
(c) Term of Office. The City Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and
may be terminated at any time with or without cause.
(d) Resignation. Before voluntarily resigning from the position of City Administrator, the City
Administrator shall give the City Council at least thirty (30) days notice in writing of his or her intent to
resign.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 3, Page 3
(e) Other Employment. The City Administrator shall not accept any outside employment in
addition to employment by the City without prior annual written approval of the City Council.
(f) Powers of Mayor Not Delegated. The legislative and judicial powers of the Mayor, his or
her position as chairman of the City Council, and any ex officio position he or she may hold, shall not be
delegated to the City Administrator.
(g) Duties. The City Administrator shall at all times be under the control and supervision of
the City Council, and shall administer the day-to-day operations of the City and its services according to
the policies and programs established by the City Council. The following duties and the authority to
perform them are hereby delegated to the City Administrator.
(1) Appoint and Remove Employees. Unless otherwise delegated to the Mayor, the
City Administrator shall have the authority to appoint, employ and remove employees as provided
herein. The City Administrator shall also be responsible for reviewing the status and performance
of any personnel being considered for discharge, transfer, or demotion from appointment or
employment with the City.
(2) Supervise Department Heads. The City Administrator shall provide direct
supervision of and have direct responsibility over the offices of City Recorder, City Treasurer, and
other Department Heads.
(3) Personnel Director. The City Administrator shall be the personnel director, and
as such shall be responsible for implementing and enforcing the personnel policies and
procedures of the City.
(4) Inventory Property. The City Administrator shall keep or cause to be kept a
current inventory showing all real and personal property of the City and its location. The City
Administrator shall be responsible for the care and custody of all such property, including
equipment, buildings, parks and all other City property which is not by law assigned to some other
officer or body for care and control.
(5) Purchasing and Claims. The City Administrator shall act as purchasing agent for
the City, and as such shall implement and enforce all provisions of the ordinances of the City
relating to purchasing.
(6) Council Meetings. The City Administrator shall attend meetings of the City
Council and may take part in the discussion and recommend to the City Council adoption of such
measures as the City Administrator may deem necessary or expedient.
(7) Budget Officer. The City Administrator shall act as the budget officer for the City
and shall perform or cause to be performed all of the duties of such office as set forth in the Utah
Uniform Municipal Fiscal Procedures Act. The City Administrator shall also ensure that all
executive procedures and activities of the City are in compliance with such Act.
(8) Review Contracts. The City Administrator shall review and make
recommendations to the City Council concerning all proposed contracts to which the City may be
a party, and shall see that the terms of any contract to which the City is a party are fully
performed by all parties thereto.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 3, Page 4
(9) Propose Plans and Programs. The City Administrator shall propose plans and
programs concerning the development, operation and needs of the City and submit such plans to
the City Council to be approved and developed as policy.
(10) Implement Policy. The City Administrator shall implement all policy changes and
directives of the Mayor and the City Council through regularly scheduled staff meetings.
(11) Management Controls. The City Administrator shall set performance standards
and exercise managerial control to ensure that the City government is functioning in the most
efficient and effective manner.
(12) Organization. The City Administrator shall recommend creation and organization
of all necessary departments, divisions, bureaus and offices necessary for the government of the
City to the City Council for its approval prior to implementation.
(13) Records. The City Administrator shall examine the books, records, and official
papers of the City's departments and offices.
(14) Additional Duties. The City Administrator shall have such other powers and shall
perform such other duties and obligations as may be required of him or her by State law or by
ordinance, resolution, or policy of the City Council.
3-01-090. City Recorder.
(a) Appointment. On or before the first Monday in February following a municipal election,
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall appoint a qualified person to the office of
City Recorder.
(b) Office. The City Recorder shall occupy an office in the City offices or at some other place
convenient thereto as the City Council may direct.
(c) City Auditor. The City may engage the services of an independent auditor to perform
audit services for the City from time to time, however, if no such independent auditor is engaged, the City
Recorder shall be ex officio City Auditor, and shall perform the duties of such office.
(d) Corporate Seal. The City Recorder shall keep the Corporate Seal. When certified by the
City Recorder under the Corporate Seal, copies of all papers filed in the City Recorder's office and
transcripts from all records of the City Council shall be admissible in all courts as originals.
(e) Meetings of City Council. The City Recorder, or his or her designee, shall attend
meetings and keep the record of the proceedings of the City Council.
(f) Actions of City Council. The City Recorder shall record all ordinances, resolutions, and
regulations passed by the City Council.
(g) Contracts. The City Recorder shall countersign all contracts made on behalf of the City
or to which the City is a party and shall maintain a properly indexed record of all such contracts.
(h) Accounting. The City Recorder shall maintain the general books for each fund of the City
and shall keep accounts with all receiving and disbursing officers of the City including all subsidiary
records relating thereto.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 3, Page 5
(i) Bonds. The City Recorder shall maintain a list of all outstanding bonds of the City,
including their purpose, amount, terms, date and place payable.
(j) Claims. The City Recorder shall pre-audit all claims and demands against the City before
they are allowed.
(k) Payments. The City Recorder shall prepare and certify the necessary checks in payment
pursuant to Utah Code Ann.  10-6-139, as amended.
(l) Warrants. In the event the City is without funds on deposit in one of its appropriate bank
accounts with which to pay any lawfully approved claim, the City Recorder shall draw and sign a warrant
upon the City Treasurer for the payment of the claim and tender the warrant to the payee named thereon.
(m) Elections and Appointments. The City Recorder shall manage all municipal election
procedures and requirements as provided in the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, and shall keep a
record of all persons elected or appointed to any office within the City, including the date of appointment
or election, term of office, date of death, resignation, or removal, and name of person appointed to fill any
vacancy.
(n) Records of the City. The City Recorder shall keep all of the books, records, accounts and
documents of the City at the Recorder's Office. Such records shall be open for public inspection pursuant
to the provisions of the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act.
(o) Limitations. The City Recorder shall not serve as the City Treasurer.
(p) Additional Duties. The City Recorder shall perform such other and further duties as the
City Council may provide by ordinance, resolution, regulation or directive.
3-01-100. City Treasurer.
(a) Appointment. On or before the first Monday in February following a municipal election,
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall appoint a qualified person to the office of
City Treasurer.
(b) Custodian. The City Treasurer shall be the custodian of all money, bonds, or other
securities belonging to the City.
(c) Collections. The City Treasurer shall collect and receive all monies payable to the City,
including taxes, assessments, licenses, fines, forfeitures, service charges, fees and other revenues of the
City. The City Treasurer shall keep an accurate account of all monies received hereunder and shall
promptly deposit all such monies in the appropriate bank accounts of the City.
(d) Receipts. The City Treasurer shall give or cause to be given to every person paying
money to the City Treasury, a receipt or other evidence of payment therefor, specifying the date of
payment and the account paid. The City Treasurer shall file the duplicate of such receipt, a summary
report, or other evidence of payment in the office of the City Recorder.
(e) Checks. The City Treasurer, or other designated person, shall sign all checks prepared
by the City Recorder and shall, prior to affixing said signature, determine or cause to be determined that
sufficient funds are on deposit in the appropriate bank account of the City to honor such check.
(f) Warrants. The City Treasurer shall pay all warrants in the order in which presented and
as money becomes available for payment thereof in the appropriate funds of the City. The City Treasurer
shall note upon the back of each warrant presented the date of presentation and the date of payment.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 3, Page 6
(g) Special Assessments. All monies received by the City Treasurer on any special
assessment shall be applied to the payment of the improvement for which the assessment was made.
(h) Accounting. The City Treasurer shall keep an accurate and detailed accounting of all
transactions, receipts, collections, disbursements and other matters within the Treasurer's charge as
provided by State law or as the City may by ordinance or resolution direct.
(i) Limitations. The City Treasurer shall not serve as the City Recorder.
(j) Additional Duties. The City Treasurer shall perform such other and further duties as the
City Council may provide by ordinance, resolution, regulation or directive.
3-01-110. City Attorney.
(a) Appointment. The City Council may contract with, retain, or appoint an attorney licensed
to practice law in the State of Utah to the office of City Attorney to provide such legal assistance to the
City as may be necessary. The City Attorney shall act as legal advisor to the City in all matters pertaining
to contracts with or by the City or questions of legality arising out of any law, ordinance or otherwise, and
shall advise all City officers in relation to their official duties.
(b) Criminal Prosecutor. The City may make a separate contract with an attorney or
attorneys for the performance of criminal prosecutorial legal services.
3-01-120. City Engineer.
(a) Appointment. The City Council may contract with, retain, or appoint an engineer licensed
to practice engineering in the State of Utah to the office of City Engineer. Any person appointed or
retained as City Engineer shall be a registered professional engineer under Title 58, Chapter 22 of the
Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
(b) Records. The City and/or the City Engineer shall maintain all maps, plans, plats, profiles,
drawings, final estimates, specifications and contracts which in any way relate to the public improvements
and engineering affairs of the City and the holder of such records shall ensure public accessibility to the
same as required by law.
(c) Recording. The City Engineer shall record and file all drawings and documents
pertaining to public lands and improvements of the City, and shall maintain such records and files in good
condition allowing no alteration, mutilation or changes to be made. The recording or filing of any drawing
or instrument with the City shall not conflict in any way with the recording or filing of the same in other
offices of record.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 3, Page 7
(d) Fees. The City Engineer shall not record any drawings or instruments, file any
papers or notices, furnish any copies, or render any service connected with his or her official
duties, until the required fees for the same are paid or tendered.
(e) Seal. The City Engineer shall have a seal for his or her use, which seal shall be
affixed to every certification approval.
(f) Additional Duties. The City Engineer shall perform such other and further duties
as the City Council may provide by ordinance, resolution, regulation or directive.
3-01-130. City Chief of Police.
(a) Appointment. The Mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the City Council,
appoint a qualified person to the office of City Chief of Police.
(b) Supervised by Administrator. The Chief of Police shall be under the direction,
control and supervision of the City Administrator, as delegated from the Mayor, and shall exercise
and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the City Council.
(c) Duties. The Chief of Police shall have the same authority and responsibilities as
sheriffs and constables of Davis County, Utah, as provided by law, and shall:
(1) suppress riots, disturbances, and breaches of the peace;
(2) apprehend all persons violating State laws or City ordinances;
(3) diligently discharge his or her duties and enforce all ordinances of the
City to preserve the peace, good order, and protection of the rights and property of all
persons;
(4) attend the municipal Justice Court of the City when required, provide
security for such Court, and obey its orders and directions; and
(5) perform such other and further duties as the City Council may provide by
ordinance, resolution, regulation or directive.
3-01-140. City Justice Court Judge.
The office of City Justice Court Judge is hereby created, who shall act as the Justice
Court Judge of the Woods Cross City Justice Court. The Justice Court Judge shall be appointed
and shall have such powers and duties as set forth in Title 4 of this Code and as otherwise
designated or assigned to him or her by the City Council.
CHAPTER 3-03: DEPARTMENTS AND DIVISIONS
3-03-010. Departments.
3-03-020. Department Heads.
3-03-030. Public Works Department.
3-03-040. Public Works Director.
3-03-050. Community Development Department.
3-03-060. Community Development Director.
3-03-070. Police Department.
3-03-080. Chief of Police.
3-03-010. Departments.
The City Council may create any department, division or section deemed necessary or
appropriate for the administration of the City and shall prescribe the organization, powers and duties of
such departments, divisions and sections.
3-03-020. Department Heads.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall appoint a qualified person to
direct and administer each department, to be known and referred to as Department Heads. The City
Council shall prescribe the powers and duties of the Department Heads. Unless otherwise provided by
law, Department Heads shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed with or
without cause by a majority vote of the City Council. Department Heads shall obtain annual written
approval from the City Administrator prior to accepting or pursuing employment outside his or her duties
as a City Department Head.
3-03-030. Public Works Department.
There is hereby created and established a Public Works Department within Woods Cross City
which shall be responsible for maintaining public properties of the City including, but not limited to,
streets, parks, recreational areas, storm drains, and water systems of the City. There is hereby
established within the Public Works Department a Water Division, Street Division, and Parks Division.
3-03-040. Public Works Director.
There is hereby created the position of Public Works Director who shall act as the Department
Head of the Public Works Department. The Public Works Director shall have such powers and duties as
designated and assigned to him or her by the City Council.
3-03-050. Community Development Department.
There is hereby created and established a Community Development Department within Woods
Cross City which shall be responsible for the planning and zoning of the City and which shall oversee and
regulate all building, construction and development activities within the City. There is hereby created
within the Community Development Department a Planning Division and Building Division.
3-03-060. Community Development Director.
There is hereby created the position of Community Development Director who shall act
as the Department Head of the Community Development Department. The Community
Development Director shall have such powers and duties as set forth in Title 12 hereof and as
otherwise designated or assigned to him or her by the City Council.
3-03-070. Police Department.
There is hereby created and established a Police Department within Woods Cross City
which shall be responsible for enforcing the traffic and criminal ordinances of the City and
protecting the lives and property within the City.
3-03-080. Chief of Police.
There is hereby created the position of Chief of Police who shall act as the Department
Head of the Police Department. The Chief of Police shall be appointed and have such powers
and duties as set forth in Chapter 3-01 regarding appointed offices.
CHAPTER 3-06: BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
3-06-010. Boards and Committees.
3-06-010. Boards and Committees.
The City Council may create any agencies, boards, bureaus, committees or commissions deemed
necessary or appropriate for the administration of the City and shall prescribe by resolution or ordinance
the organization, powers and duties of such bodies.
CHAPTER 3-09: PERSONNEL
3-09-010. Personnel System.
3-09-020. Personnel Director.
3-09-030. Personnel Policies and Procedures.
3-09-040. Equal Opportunity Employer.
3-09-050. Rules of Conduct.
3-09-060. Personnel Records.
3-09-070. Compensation.
3-09-080. Benefits.
3-09-090. Sexual Harassment.
3-09-100. Grievances.
3-09-110. Discipline.
3-09-120. Separation from Service.
3-09-130. Appeals from Discharge or Transfer.
3-09-140. Appeals Board.
3-09-010. Personnel System.
The City Council may adopt and maintain a classification plan setting forth the personnel system
of the City.
3-09-020. Personnel Director.
The City Administrator is hereby designated as the Personnel Director to ensure just and
equitable employment conditions and to promote positive and efficient working morale for all City
personnel. As Personnel Director, the City Administrator shall implement and maintain the provisions of
this Chapter and perform other duties as required by ordinance, resolution or policy of the City Council.
3-09-030. Personnel Policies and Procedures.
The City may establish and adopt personnel policies and procedures consistent with the
ordinances, laws, and regulations of the City, State and federal government for the efficient
administration, organization, operation, and conduct of its personnel.
3-09-040. Equal Opportunity Employer.
Woods Cross City is an "Equal Opportunity Employer" and as such does not discriminate in the
hiring, employment or promotion of its employees on the basis of race, sex, color, national origin, age,
religion, disability or status as a veteran in accordance with applicable State and federal laws.
3-09-050. Rules of Conduct.
All employees of the City shall conduct themselves in an appropriate manner in accordance with
the standards set forth in the personnel policies and procedures adopted by the City. Employees shall be
subject to and shall comply with the conflict of interest provisions of the Utah Officers' and Employees'
Ethics Act, set forth at Utah Code Ann.  10-3-1301, et seq., as amended, hereby adopted by reference as
if fully set forth herein.
3-09-060. Personnel Records.
The City shall retain personnel records and documents regarding hiring, compensation, holiday,
vacation or sick leave, awards, grievances, disciplinary actions, education, training programs, and any
other relevant personnel records. All personnel records shall be maintained, classified and accessed in
accordance with the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act, as adopted by the City.
3-09-070. Compensation.
Woods Cross City employees shall be compensated in accordance with a schedule of salary
rates or ranges for each job classification as adopted by the City Council. In arriving at the salary rates or
ranges, the City Council may consider the prevailing rates of pay and working conditions for comparable
work in other public agencies and private employment, current costs of living, suggestions of Department
Heads, City financial condition, policies, procedures and other relevant considerations.
3-09-080. Benefits.
Woods Cross City employees may receive such benefits as set forth in the personnel policies and
procedures adopted by the City and as otherwise required by law.
3-09-090. Sexual Harassment.
Sexual harassment is prohibited as a form of sex discrimination and shall be addressed in
accordance with the sexual harassment policy set forth in the personnel policies and procedures adopted
by the City.
3-09-100. Grievances.
Employees shall have the right to appeal decisions or disciplinary actions by the City which affect
their employment. Any employee with a grievance may pursue the matter through informal or formal
grievance procedures set forth in the personnel policies and procedures adopted by the City.
3-09-110. Discipline.
Employees may be disciplined for good cause through informal or formal disciplinary action in
accordance with the personnel policies and procedures adopted by the City, including, but not limited to
oral or written reprimand, suspension, demotion, transfer, probation, or dismissal.
3-09-120. Separation from Service.
Employees may be separated from service with the City in the following manner:
(a) Resignation. An employee desiring to discontinue his or her employment with the City
shall file a written resignation with his or her Department Head stating the effective date of resignation
and the reasons for resignation at least two (2) weeks prior to the effective date of resignation.
(b) Reduction in Force. An employee may be laid off by the City due to change in the
organization of City personnel, material change in the duties of the employee's position, shortage in the
work requirements of the City, shortage in the funding of the City, or when otherwise necessary in the
best interest of the City.
(c) Dismissal. An employee may be dismissed by the City for any reason permitted by law,
provided however, that any such dismissal shall be accomplished in accordance with the dismissal
procedures set forth in the personnel policies and procedures adopted by the City and the appeals
procedures provided herein.
3-09-130. Appeals from Discharge or Transfer.
All appointed officers and employees of the City, other than members of the Police Department,
Department Heads and the City Administrator, shall hold their employment without limitation of time,
being subject to discharge or dismissal only as provided in Utah Code Ann.  10-3-1106, as amended.
Any appointed officer or employee covered herein discharged or transferred to a position with less
remuneration for any reason, shall have the right to appeal the discharge or transfer to the City Appeals
Board in accordance with the provisions of Utah Code Ann.  10-3-1106, as amended.
3-09-140. Appeals Board.
(a) Created. There is hereby created an Appeals Board as required by Utah Code Ann.  10-
3-1106, as amended, to hear appeals of non-exempt officers and employees who have been terminated
or transferred.
(b) Members. The Appeals Board shall consist of five (5) members, three (3) of whom shall
be chosen by and from the appointed officers and employees of the City and two (2) of whom shall be
members of the City Council.
(c) Selection of Members and Alternates.
(1) Council Members and Alternates. The City Council shall designate two (2) of its
members to serve on the Appeals Board, hereinafter referred to as the "Council Members," and
two (2) of its members to serve as Alternate Council Members.
(2) Officer and Employee Members and Alternates. The appointed officers and
employees of the City shall elect three (3) of its members to serve on the Appeals Board,
hereinafter referred to as "Employee Members," and three (3) of its members to serve as
Alternate Employee Members in the following manner.
(i) Nomination. The City Administrator shall send written notice to all
appointed officers and employees of the City that they may make written nominations for
officer and employee candidates to serve on the Appeals Board and the closing date for
filing such nominations with the City Recorder. Nominations received by the City
Recorder after the closing date will not be considered.
(ii) Voting. Upon the closing of nominations, an election shall be held by all
appointed officers and employees of the City to elect three (3) Employee Members of the
Board and three (3) Alternate Employee Members. The election shall be by secret ballot.
The three (3) individuals receiving the highest number of votes shall be deemed elected
as Employee Members, and the next three (3) individuals receiving the highest number of
votes shall be deemed elected as Alternate Employee Members.
(d) Limitation on Members. No person may sit on the Appeals Board who also sat on a predisciplinary
hearing of the appealing employee or whose employment with the City has terminated.
(e) Term. Appeals Board Members shall serve for a term of two (2) years from the date of
their election or appointment. Members may serve additional terms in accordance with the election and
appointment procedures set forth herein.
(f) Vacancies. Any vacancy in an Employee Member position shall be first filled by
an Alternate Employee Member by drawing lots, and if no Alternate Employee Member is
available, by nomination and election as provided herein at the time such vacancy occurs. Any
vacancy in a Council Member position shall be filled first by an Alternate Council Member by
drawing lots, and if no Alternate Council Member is available, by appointment as provided herein
at the time such vacancy occurs.
CHAPTER 3-12: GOVERNMENT RECORDS
3-12-010. Government Records.
3-12-020. Retention Schedule.
3-12-030. Records Requests.
3-12-040. Fees.
3-12-050. Fee Waiver.
3-12-060. Appeals.
3-12-010. Government Records.
All government records of the City shall be maintained, classified and accessed in accordance
with the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act set forth at Utah Code Ann.  63-2-101,
et seq., as amended.
3-12-020. Retention Schedule.
All government records of the City shall be retained in accordance with the Utah Municipal
General Records Retention Schedule (1998), which is hereby adopted by reference as the Woods Cross
City Records Retention Schedule.
3-12-030. Records Requests.
Any person requesting a record shall file a written Government Records Access and
Management Request Form as provided by the City. Such request shall be submitted and processed in
accordance with the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act, as adopted by the City.
3-12-040. Fees.
The City may charge reasonable fees to cover the City’s actual cost of duplicating a record, which
fees shall be adopted and may be amended as part of the City’s Fee Schedule, hereby adopted by
reference. The City may require payment of past fees and future estimated fees before beginning to
process a request if the requester has not paid fees from previous requests and/or the fees for the current
request are expected to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). Any prepaid amount in excess of fees due shall be
returned to the requester.
3-12-050. Fee Waiver.
In accordance with Utah Code Ann.  63-2-203, as amended, the City may fulfill a record request
without charge when it determines that:
(a) releasing the record primarily benefits the public rather than a person;
(b) the individual requesting the record is the subject of the record, or an individual specified
in Subsections 63-2-202(1) or (2); or
(c) the requesters legal rights are directly implicated by the information in the record and
the requester is impecunious.
3-12-060. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the Citys access determination made under this Chapter may appeal
the determination within thirty (30) days to the City Administrator in accordance with the provisions set
forth in Utah Code Ann.  63-2-401, as amended.

Woods Cross Municipal Code February 2004
Title 3, Page 17
CHAPTER 3-15: PROCUREMENT
3-15-010. Procurement System.
3-15-020. Compliance.
3-15-030. Definitions.
3-15-040. Purchasing Agent.
3-15-050. Budget Limitation.
3-15-060. Purchase Requisition.
3-15-070. Classification of Expenditures.
3-15-080. Formal Bidding Procedure.
3-15-090. Informal Bidding Procedure.
3-15-100. Additional Data.
3-15-110. Delivery.
3-15-120. Petty Cash.
3-15-130. Disposal of Surplus Property.
3-15-140. Ethics.
3-15-150. Records.
3-15-160. Violations.
3-15-170. Appeals.
3-15-010. Procurement System.
There is hereby established a procurement system to provide procedures and guidelines for the procurement
of supplies, services, and construction for the City, and to ensure that all such purchases or encumbrances are made
equitably, efficiently and economically.
3-15-020. Compliance.
All expenditures of the City shall conform to the provisions of this Chapter and applicable provisions of State
law including, but not limited to, the Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act set forth at Utah Code Ann.  10-6-101, et seq.,
as amended. Any expenditures of the City involving federal assistance funds shall comply with applicable federal
laws and regulations. Any expenditure of the City involving the construction, maintenance or improvement project of
a Class C road shall comply with applicable provisions of the State Highway Code including but not limited to Utah
Code Ann.  27-12-108.1 and 108.2, as amended. No check or warrant to cover any claim against appropriations
may be drawn until the claim has been processed according to the relevant provisions provided herein.
3-15-030. Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following words shall mean:
(a) "Construction" means the process of building, renovation, alteration, improvement, or repair of any
public building or public work. "Construction" does not mean the routine operation, routine repair, or routine
maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real property.
(b) "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, trust, limited liability company, corporation or other
entity however designated.
(c) "Procurement" means buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, leasing with an option to purchase, or
otherwise acquiring any supplies, services, or construction, and all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any
supply, service, or construction, including the solicitation of sources, selection, award, and all phases of contract
administration.
Woods Cross Municipal Code February 2004
Title 3, Page 18
(d) "Professional Services" means the furnishing of services for auditing, banking, insurance,
engineering, legal, architectural, and other forms of professional consulting.
(e) "Responsible Bidder" means a person who submits a bid to furnish supplies, services or
construction for the City pursuant to and in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Chapter and
who furnishes, when requested, sufficient information and data to prove his or her financial resources,
production or service facilities, service reputation and experience are adequate to the satisfaction of the City.
(f) "Services" means the furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor, not involving the
delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance.
"Services" does not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
(g) "Supplies" means all property, including but not limited to equipment, materials, and
printing. "Supplies" does not include real property or any interest therein.
3-15-040. Purchasing Agent.
The City Administrator is hereby designated as the Purchasing Agent for the City. The Purchasing
Agent shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the City Council and shall have the powers and
duties concerning procurement as established in this Chapter, including but not limited to:
(a) Administer and interpret the procurement system provided herein, in accordance with any
rules and regulations established by the City;
(b) Procure or supervise the procurement of all supplies, services, and construction needed by
the City, including preparation of specifications and negotiation of contracts connected therewith;
(c) Exercise general supervision and control over all inventories or supplies of the City and the
inspection of and accounting for all such inventories or supplies;
(d) Prepare and maintain forms and reports as are reasonably necessary to the operation of
this Chapter and other rules and regulations of the City;
(e) Keep generally informed of current developments in the field of procurement, including but
not limited to, market conditions and new products; and
(f) Recommend to the City Council from time to time such new or revised procurement rules
and regulations as are desirable and in conformance with other statutory requirements.
3-15-050. Budget Limitation.
No expenditure or encumbrance shall be made for any supplies, services or construction for the City
in excess of total appropriations in the budget, as adopted or subsequently amended by the City, without
prior written approval from the City Administrator or the City Council.
3-15-060. Purchase Requisition.
Before any order may be placed for the purchase of any supply, service or construction having a
unit value in excess of $1,000.00, a Purchase Requisition Form shall be submitted to the Purchasing
Agent. The Purchasing Agent shall review all Purchase Requisitions and determine whether the
expenditure requested is for a City purpose, properly budgeted, and in compliance with City ordinances
and State law. If the Purchasing Agent determines the expenditure requested complies with these
requirements, he or she shall sign the Purchase Requisition and initiate the appropriate procedures set
Woods Cross Municipal Code February 2004
Title 3, Page 19
forth herein for procurement of the supply, service or construction. A Purchase Requisition shall not be
required for service contracts entered into between the City and the contracting party specifying the cost of
service.
3-15-070. Classification of Expenditures.
(a) Large Expenditures. Except as otherwise provided herein, any expenditure of the City of
$25,000.00 or more, or any expenditure for a Class C Road or paid for out of the Water Fund of
$100,000.00 or more, shall be referred to as a "large expenditure" and shall be made pursuant to formal
bidding procedures set forth in Section 3-15-080. No large expenditure shall be made without prior
approval from the City Council.
(b) Small Expenditures. Except as otherwise provided herein, any expenditure of the City of
less than $25,000.00, or any expenditure for a Class C Road or paid for out of the Water Fund of less than
$100,000.00, shall be referred to as a "small expenditure" and may be made pursuant to formal bidding
procedures set forth in Section 3-15-080 or pursuant to informal bidding procedures set forth in Section 3-
15-090. Small expenditures may be made by the Purchasing Agent without prior approval from the City
Council, but any such expenditure shall be reviewed by the City Council at its next regular meeting. It
shall be unlawful to artificially divide a purchase or expenditure so as to constitute a small expenditure
under this Section.
(c) Exempt Expenditures. The following expenditures of the City shall be referred to as
"exempt expenditures" and may be made without formal or informal bidding procedures, but should be
made with as much competition as practicable under the circumstances. The Purchasing Agent shall
determine in writing that an expenditure falls within one of these exemptions, and shall maintain a record
of all contracts made hereunder, including each supplier's name, the amount and type of contract, and the
supplies, services, or construction procured. All exempt expenditures shall be reviewed by the City
Council on at least a quarterly basis.
(1) Minor. Any expenditure amounting to less than $1,000.00;
(2) Single Source. Any expenditure for goods or services which by their nature are
not reasonably adapted to award by competitive bidding. These expenditures include, but are not
limited to, goods or services which can only be purchased from a single source, contracts for
additions to and repair and maintenance of equipment already owned by the City which may be
more efficiently added to, repaired or maintained by a certain person or firm, and equipment
which, by reason of the training of the personnel or an inventory of replacement parts is
compatible with the existing equipment owned by the City.
(3) Professional Services. Any expenditure for professional services which by their
nature are not reasonably adapted to award by competitive bidding. Such expenditures shall be
awarded at the discretion of the City Council based on the City Council's evaluation of the
professional qualifications, service ability, experience, cost of services and other applicable
criteria.
(4) Emergency. Any expenditure made under the existence of an emergency
condition threatening the public health, welfare, or safety.
(5) State Bidding. Any expenditure for which competitive bidding or price negotiation
has already occurred on the State level.
Woods Cross Municipal Code February 2004
Title 3, Page 20
(6) Interlocal Cooperation. Any expenditure made in conjunction with an agreement
approved by resolution of the City Council between the City and another city or governmental
entity.
(7) Special Sale. Any expenditure made in conjunction with any public auction,
closeout sale, bankruptcy sale or other similar sale when the Purchasing Agent determines in
writing that such purchase may be made at a cost below the market cost for the same or similar
goods and such determination is reviewed and approved by the City Council.
(8) Exchanges. Any exchange of supplies, materials, property, or equipment
between the City and any other public or private party made by mutual agreement of the
respective parties.
3-15-080. Formal Bidding Procedure.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all large expenditures shall be made by written contract
between the City and the lowest responsible bidder according to the following procedure:
(a) Specifications. Specifications shall be prepared by or under the direction of the
Purchasing Agent and submitted to the City Council for approval and authorization prior to any
advertisement for bids.
(b) Invitation for Bids. An invitation for bids shall be prepared by or under the direction of the
Purchasing Agent which invitation shall:
(1) Describe the goods or services to be purchased or work to be performed;
(2) Set forth all contract terms, conditions and bond requirements applicable to the
purchase or work;
(3) Set forth the criteria that will be used to evaluate the bid;
(4) State where plans, specifications and other information may be obtained;
(5) State the time and place of the bid opening; and
(6) Reserve for the City the right to reject any and all bids for any reason without
liability.
(c) Notice. The invitation for bids shall be published at least twice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the jurisdiction of the City at least five (5) days prior to the opening of bids. In the event there
is no newspaper of general circulation printed or published within the jurisdiction of the City, the notice
shall be posted at least five (5) days prior to the opening of bids in at least five (5) public places in the City
which notice shall remain posted for at least three (3) days.
(d) Amending Invitation. The invitation to bid may be amended, supplemented, or canceled
at any time prior to the opening of bids when the Purchasing Agent determines that such action is in the
best interest of the City. The reasons for the amendment or cancellation of the invitation shall be in writing
and shall be made a part of the City's records.
(e) Sealed Bids. All bids shall be received by the City in sealed envelopes labeled "Bid for
(item)" which shall not be opened prior to the time set for opening of the bids, except as provided in
Subsection (f).
Woods Cross Municipal Code February 2004
Title 3, Page 21
(f) Correction of Bids. The Purchasing Agent may permit correction or withdrawal of
inadvertently erroneous bids in appropriate circumstances, provided that no changes in bid prices or other
provisions of bids which are prejudicial to the interest of the City or fair competition shall be permitted.
Any decision to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids shall be supported by a written determination
prepared by the Purchasing Agent.
(g) Opening Bids. The bids shall be opened publicly by the Purchasing Agent in the
presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids.
(h) Recording Bids. The amount of each bid and the name of the bidder shall be read aloud
as the bids are opened, and such information shall be recorded and open to public inspection during
regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) days after the bid opening.
(i) Evaluating Bids. The bids shall be evaluated within a reasonable time by the Purchasing
Agent to determine the lowest responsible bidder based upon the following objectively measurable criteria
as set forth in the invitation for bids:
(1) Price. The total price of the bid.
(2) Quality. The overall quality of the goods or work to be provided and/or the ability,
capacity and skill of the bidder to provide any services or work required.
(3) Conditions. The number and scope of any conditions or qualifications set forth in
the bid.
(4) Time. The time limit within which the bidder can provide the goods, services or
work.
(5) Reputation. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder and the quality of previous goods, services or work obtained from the
bidder.
(6) Compliance. The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the goods, services or work.
(7) Financial Resources. The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to provide the goods, services or work.
(8) Future Service. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service and the local availability of parts, materials, etc.
(j) Determination. The Purchasing Agent shall determine the lowest responsible bidder and
communicate such determination, in writing, to the City Council. The City Council may accept, reject, or
modify the Purchasing Agent's determination and thereupon award the contract or reject any and all bids.
All information relating to the selection of the lowest responsible bidder shall be retained by the City in
accordance with the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act, as adopted by the City.
(k) Cancellation and Rejection of Bids. The City reserves the right to cancel an invitation for
bids or to reject any or all bids for any reason. Such cancellation or rejection shall be in writing and shall
be made part of the City's records. In the event all bids are rejected and the City determines to make the
improvement or purchase, it shall advertise anew as provided herein. If after twice advertising, no
satisfactory bid is received, the City Council may proceed to negotiate or make the improvement or
acquisition or enter such other agreements as it deems necessary or desirable.
Woods Cross Municipal Code February 2004
Title 3, Page 22
(l) Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality
and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the City
Council shall accept the lowest bid made by and after negotiation with the tie bidders after the time of the
bid opening.
(m) Bonds. Prior to entering any contract hereunder, the City Council may require
performance and payment bonds to be provided in such form and amounts as required by law and by the
City Council as reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the City.
(n) Responsibility of Bidder. The Purchasing Agent may request additional information with
respect to the responsibility of a bidder. The unreasonable failure of a bidder to promptly supply
information in connection with a request of the Purchasing Agent regarding responsibility may be grounds
for a determination of nonresponsibility and/or nonresponsiveness of the bidder.
3-15-090. Informal Bidding Procedure.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all small expenditures of the City may be awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder according to the formal bidding procedure set forth above or to the lowest
responsible bidder according to the following procedure:
(a) Invitation of Bids. The Purchasing Agent shall invite bids from at least three (3) potential,
responsible providers of the supplies, services or construction needed or desired. Such invitations may be
made in writing or orally, including by telephone, and shall be made without unfair favoritism or bias. A
record of all invitations and bids made hereunder shall be kept by the Purchasing Agent.
(b) Evaluation. The Purchasing Agent shall evaluate the bids to determine the lowest
responsible bidder based upon the criteria set forth in Section 3-15-080(i).
(c) Determination. The Purchasing Agent shall determine the lowest responsible bidder and
award the contract to such bidder, unless otherwise directed by the City Council. All information relating to
the bids obtained and the selection of the lowest responsible bidder shall be retained by the City in
accordance with the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act, as adopted by the City.
3-15-100. Additional Data.
Any additional relevant data pertaining to the selected bidder shall be added to the Purchase
Requisition or contract documents. If required by law, a written contract shall be entered into between the
City and the selected bidder. Contracts involving construction work shall further provide for a bid security
in the amount equal to at least five percent (5%) of the amount of the bid.
3-15-110. Delivery.
When supplies ordered are delivered, the Purchasing Agent, or the employee who requested the
supplies, shall inspect the supplies received to assure that the correct quantity and quality have been
delivered. If the supplies delivered are satisfactory, the supplies shall be accepted and a copy of the
packing slip, invoice, or other delivery document shall be stapled to the Purchase Requisition and
forwarded to the appropriate employee for review, payment, and filing.
3-15-120. Petty Cash.
(a) Fund. The City shall maintain a petty cash fund, the total amount of cash, vouchers, and
receipts of which shall not exceed $250.00.
Woods Cross Municipal Code February 2004
Title 3, Page 23
(b) Limits. Any employee of the City may receive up to $75.00 from the petty cash fund for
any lawful and necessary expenditure to be made on behalf of the City. Employees shall not receive any
money from the petty cash fund for personal use.
Woods Cross Municipal Code February 2004
Title 3, Page 24
(c) Procedure. Any employee receiving money from the petty cash fund shall sign a Petty
Cash Voucher showing the amount received and an explanation of the intended use of the money. After
making the expenditure, the employee shall return any excess money to the petty cash fund and shall
staple the receipt for the expenditure to the Petty Cash Voucher.
(d) Replenishing Fund. When money in the petty cash fund becomes less than
approximately $75.00, the Purchasing Agent shall draft a check to the petty cash fund to raise the amount
of currency in the fund to $250.00.
3-15-130. Disposal of Surplus Property.
(a) For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
(1) A “significant parcel of real property” shall mean a parcel of one acre or more
in size or a parcel having a value of more than $150,000 as determined by the City Council.
(2) “Reasonable notice” shall mean publishing a notice of the proposed
disposition and of a public hearing before the City Council to consider such disposition once
in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.
(b) The City shall have the authority to sell, lease, convey and dispose of real and
personal property for the benefit of the City as provided by Utah Code Ann. § 10-8-2, as amended.
(c) Before the City may dispose of a significant parcel of real property, the City shall:
(1) Provide reasonable notice of the proposed disposition at least 14 days
before a scheduled meeting at which the City will hear public comment; and
(2) Hold a meeting at which the City Council accepts public comment on the
proposed disposition.
(d) All disposal, leases, or subleases of such property of the City other than a significant
parcel of real property, shall be made, as nearly as possible, under the same conditions and
limitations as required by this chapter for the purchase of property including notice and bidding
procedures.
(e) The City Council may also authorize at its discretion and under such terms and
conditions as it may deem desirable, fair and appropriate, considering intended use, property tax
value, and the interests of the City, the sale of any surplus property, through public auction or other
method designed to best serve the interests of City residents and produce a fair return; the trade or
exchange of any surplus property; and the lease or sublease of any surplus property.
3-15-140. Ethics.
(a) Conflicts of Interest. No officer or employee of the City may have a direct or indirect
pecuniary interest in any contract entered into by the City and all officers and employees are required to
comply with applicable provisions of State law regarding ethics including, but not limited to, the Utah
Municipal Officers' and Employees' Ethics Act set forth at Utah Code Ann.  10-3-1301, et seq., as
amended.
(b) Collusion. Any agreement or collusion among bidders or prospective bidders to bid a
fixed price or to otherwise restrain competition shall render the bids of such bidders void.
Woods Cross Municipal Code February 2004
Title 3, Page 25
(c) Personal Use. Any purchase of supplies or equipment by the City for the personal use of
any officer or employee of the City is prohibited.
(d) Violation. Any violation of this Section by an officer or employee of the City shall be cause
for disciplinary action, up to and including termination, in accordance with the disciplinary procedures of
the City.
3-15-150. Records.
All procurement records of the City shall be retained and disposed of in accordance with the Utah
Government Records Access and Management Act, as adopted by the City.
3-15-160. Violations.
Any purchase or contract executed in violation of the provisions of this Chapter or applicable State
law shall be void as to the City, and any funds expended thereupon may be recovered by the City through
appropriate action.
3-15-170. Appeals.
(a) Determinations Final. Determinations of the Purchasing Agent and the City Council
required herein shall be final and conclusive.
(b) Appeal. Any person aggrieved of a determination of the Purchasing Agent or City Council
in connection with the provisions of this Chapter may appeal the determination or action within ten (10)
working days after the aggrieved person knows or should have known of the facts giving rise thereto by
filing a written protest and the reasons therefor with the City Council. A protest with respect to an
invitation for bids shall be submitted in writing prior to the opening of bids unless the aggrieved person did
not know or could not have known of the facts giving rise to the protest prior to bid opening.
(c) Decision. The City Council shall promptly issue a written decision regarding any protest
stating the reasons for the decision and informing the protestor of any right to judicial review as provided
by law. A copy of the decision shall be provided to all parties.
(d) Settlement. The City Council shall have the authority, prior to the commencement of an
action in court concerning the controversy, to settle and resolve the protest.
CHAPTER 3-18: PRIVATE PROPERTY PROTECTION
3-18-010. Purpose and Intent.
3-18-020. Definitions.
3-18-030. Guidelines.
3-18-040. Appeals.
3-18-050. Limitations.
3-18-010. Purpose and Intent.
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide advisory guidelines to assist the City in identifying and
reviewing actions by officials, employees, boards, commissions and councils of the City which may
involve the physical taking or exaction of private real property without just compensation.
3-18-020. Definitions.
(a) As used herein "constitutional taking" means actions involving the physical or regulatory
taking of private real property by any official, employee, board, commission or council of the City that
might require compensation to a private real property owner under:
(1) The Fifth or Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution of the United States;
(2) Article I, Section 22 of the Utah Constitution; or
(3) Any recent court rulings governing the physical or regulatory taking of private real
property by a governmental entity.
(b) Actions by the City involving the physical taking or exaction of private real property is not
a constitutional taking if the physical taking or exaction:
(1) Bears an essential nexus;
(2) To a legitimate governmental interest; and
(3) Is roughly proportionate and reasonably related, on an individualized property
basis, both in nature and extent, to the impact of the proposed development on the legitimate
government interest.
3-18-030. Guidelines.
The following guidelines should be considered by any official, employee, board, commission or
council of the City when taking any action that might result in the physical or regulatory taking of private
real property without just compensation.
(a) Identification. The acting body should review the following items to determine and
identify whether a proposed governmental action raises constitutional taking issues.
(1) Does the action result in a permanent physical occupation of private property?
(2) Does the action require a property owner to dedicate property or grant an
easement to the City?
(3) Does the action deprive the property owner of all economically viable
uses of the property?
(4) Does the action have a severe impact on the property owner's economic
interest?
(5) Does the action deny a fundamental attribute of ownership?
(b) Analysis. If the acting body determines that a governmental action involves
constitutional taking issues, the proposed action should be reviewed further to determine
appropriate action. In reviewing the proposed action, the following factors may be analyzed:
(1) The affect the potential taking would have on the use or value of the
private property;
(2) The likelihood that the action may result in a constitutional taking;
(3) Any alternatives to the proposed action that would fulfill the City's lawful
objectives and reduce the risk of a constitutional taking;
(4) The cost to the City for payment of compensation if a taking is
determined;
(5) The governmental interest involved and its nexus to the potential taking;
and
(6) The proportionality and relationship between the proposed governmental
action and the proposed development.
3-18-040. Appeals.
(a) Application. Any owner of private property whose interest in the property is
subject to a physical or regulatory taking by the City, pursuant to a final and authoritative decision
or action by any official, employee, board, commission or council of the City, may appeal the
acting body's decision or action by filing a written notice of appeal and statement of the grounds
for the appeal with the City Recorder within thirty (30) days from the date of the acting body's
decision or action. Additional information regarding the claim, such as property valuation and
ownership, may be required in conjunction with the application as deemed necessary by the City
for proper review of the action.
(b) Review. The City Council or its designee shall hear all evidence regarding the
appeal and determine whether or not the action by the City constitutes a constitutional taking as
defined herein. The reviewing body shall render its decision and findings in writing within
fourteen (14) days from the date the appeal was filed. The decision of the reviewing body shall
be given to the applicant and the official, employee, board, commission or council that rendered
the final decision giving rise to the appeal. When determined to be necessary and appropriate,
the reviewing body shall make a recommendation to the official, employee, board, commission or
council that made the decision giving rise to the appeal.
(c) Failure to Render Decision. If the City fails to hear and decide the appeal within
fourteen (14) days, the acting body's decision or action is presumed to be approved.
3-18-050. Limitations.
The guidelines set forth herein are advisory only and shall not be construed to expand
nor limit the scope of the City's liability for a constitutional taking. The City shall have no legal
liability to any person, firm or entity of any nature whatsoever and a court may not impose liability
upon the City for failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 1
TITLE 4
JUDICIAL CODE
CHAPTER 4-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 4-03: JUSTICE COURT
CHAPTER 4-06: JUSTICE COURT JUDGE AND STAFF
CHAPTER 4-09: SMALL CLAIMS
CHAPTER 4-12: CITATIONS AND COMPLAINTS
CHAPTER 4-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-01-010. Title.
4-01-020. Intent.
4-01-030. Conflict.
4-01-010. Title.
This Title shall be known as the Woods Cross City Judicial Code, hereinafter referred to as the
"Judicial Code."
4-01-020. Intent.
It is the intent of the City Council that this Judicial Code comply with and be interpreted in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Utah Code Annotated, particularly Chapters 5 through 7
of Title 78, as amended, regarding the jurisdiction, venue, procedure and conduct of Justice Courts and
Justice Court Judges, as well as the relevant portions of Title 77, as amended, regarding general criminal
procedure for all courts.
4-01-030. Conflict.
If there is any conflict between the provisions of this Judicial Code and the Utah Code Annotated,
as amended, the provisions of the Utah Code shall control.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 2
CHAPTER 4-03: JUSTICE COURT
4-03-010. Creation of Justice Court.
4-03-020. Compliance with Minimum Requirements.
4-03-030. Territorial Jurisdiction.
4-03-040. Jurisdiction.
4-03-050. Trial Facilities.
4-03-060. Reference Materials.
4-03-070. Court Days.
4-03-080. Hours of Business.
4-03-090. Powers of the Justice Court.
4-03-100. Public Proceedings.
4-03-110. English Language.
4-03-120. Abbreviations and Numerals.
4-03-130. Change of Place of Trial Because of Calamity.
4-03-140. Seal.
4-03-150. Process, Subpoenas and Warrants.
4-03-160. Juries.
4-03-170. Docket.
4-03-180. Docket Entries as Prima Facie Evidence.
4-03-190. Docket Index.
4-03-200. Dockets as Public Records.
4-03-210. Monthly Reports.
4-03-220. Delivery of Docket and Papers to Successor.
4-03-230. Validity of Papers Issued.
4-03-240. Decisions to be Rendered.
4-03-250. Filing and Docketing of Abstract.
4-03-260. Execution on Judgment.
4-03-270. Judgment Not a Lien Unless So Docketed.
4-03-280. Fees.
4-03-290. Collection and Deposit of Fines, Fees and Forfeitures.
4-03-300. Remittal of Fines, Fees and Forfeitures.
4-03-310. Disposition of Monies Received.
4-03-320. Proceedings Unaffected by Vacancy.
4-03-330. Repeated Application for Orders.
4-03-340. Appeals.
4-03-010. Creation of Justice Court.
There is hereby established a court within the City known as the Woods Cross City Justice Court
which court shall not be a court of record, hereinafter referred to as the "Justice Court."
4-03-020. Compliance with Minimum Requirements.
The City shall comply with and meet the minimum requirements set forth by the Judicial Council
for the creation and certification of the Justice Court in accordance with Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-139, as
amended.
4-03-030. Territorial Jurisdiction.
(a) The territorial jurisdiction of the Justice Court extends to the corporate limits of the City.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 3
(b) The territorial jurisdiction of the Justice Court functioning as a magistrate may extend
beyond the boundaries in Subsection (a) as provided in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-7-17.5, as amended, and to
the extent necessary to carry out magisterial functions under Utah Code Ann. ' 77-7-23, as amended,
regarding jailed persons.
4-03-040. Jurisdiction.
(a) The Justice Court has criminal jurisdiction over Class B and C misdemeanors, violation of
ordinances, and infractions committed within its territorial jurisdiction, except those offenses over which
the juvenile court has exclusive jurisdiction.
(b) The Justice Court has jurisdiction of small claims cases under Title 78, Chapter 6 of the
Utah Code Annotated, if the defendant resides in or the debt arose within the territorial jurisdiction of the
Justice Court.
(c) The Justice Court has jurisdiction over traffic misdemeanors and infractions committed by
persons 16 or 17 years of age that occur within the territorial jurisdiction of the Justice Court pursuant and
subject to the provisions set forth in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-105, as amended.
4-03-050. Trial Facilities.
(a) The City shall provide adequate courtroom and auxiliary space for the Justice Court. The
facility need not be specifically constructed for or allocated solely for the Justice Court if existing facilities
adequately serve the purposes of the Justice Court.
(b) The Justice Court Judge shall hold Court in the City at the location designated by the City
pursuant to Subsection (a) and shall conduct all official Court business in such location or an office located
in a public facility which is conducive and appropriate to the administration of justice.
4-03-060. Reference Materials.
The City shall provide and keep current for the Justice Court a copy of the motor vehicle laws of
Utah, appropriate copies of the Utah Code Annotated, the Justice Court Manual published by the State
Court Administrator, State laws affecting local government, City ordinances, and other legal reference
materials as determined necessary by the Justice Court Judge.
4-03-070. Court Days.
(a) Generally. The Justice Court is open and judicial business may be transacted on any
day, except as otherwise provided.
(b) Closed. The Justice Court is closed on Sunday, on any day on which a general election is
held, and on any legal holiday, provided however that judicial business may be transacted on such days
for the following purposes:
(1) To give, upon their request, instructions to a jury when deliberating on their
verdict;
(2) To receive a verdict or discharge a jury;
(3) For the exercise of the powers of a magistrate in a criminal action, or in a
proceeding of a criminal nature; or
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 4
(4) Judicial business not involving a trial or hearing unless the Judge finds it
necessary for the fair administration of justice.
4-03-080. Hours of Business.
The Justice Court shall be open and judicial business shall be transacted every day during regular
business hours as provided by law. The hours the Justice Court is open shall be posted conspicuously at
the Court and in local public buildings. The Justice Court Judge and clerk shall attend the Court at
regularly scheduled times.
4-03-090. Powers of the Justice Court.
The Justice Court has the authority necessary to exercise its jurisdiction including, but not limited
to, the authority to:
(a) Preserve and enforce order in its immediate presence;
(b) Enforce order in the proceedings before it, or before a person authorized to conduct a
judicial investigation under its authority;
(c) Provide for the orderly conduct of proceedings before it or its officers;
(d) Compel obedience to its judgments, orders, and process, and to the orders of a judge out
of court, in a pending action or proceeding;
(e) Control in furtherance of justice the conduct of its ministerial officers, and of all other
persons in any manner connected with a judicial proceeding before it in every matter;
(f) Compel the attendance of persons to testify in a pending action or proceeding, as
provided by law;
(g) Administer oaths in a pending action or proceeding, and in all other cases where
necessary in the exercise of its authority and duties;
(h) Amend and control its process and orders to conform to law and justice;
(i) Devise and make new process and forms of proceedings, consistent with law, necessary
to carry into effect its authority and jurisdiction;
(j) Establish and adopt procedural process, in conformance with the apparent intent of
statutes or rules of procedure, for actions in which such procedure is not yet established; and
(k) Enforce rules of the Utah Supreme Court and Judicial Council.
4-03-100. Public Proceedings.
The sittings of the Justice Court are public, provided however that in any case, the Court may, in
its discretion, during the examination of any witness, exclude any and all other witnesses in the case.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 5
4-03-110. English Language.
Judicial proceedings in the Justice Court shall be conducted in the English language.
4-03-120. Abbreviations and Numerals.
Abbreviations as are in common use may be used, and numbers may be expressed by figures or
numerals in the customary manner.
4-03-130. Change of Place of Trial Because of Calamity.
The Justice Court Judge may, by an order filed with the clerk and published as he or she
prescribes, direct that the Justice Court be held or continued at any other place in the City than that
appointed, when war, insurrection, pestilence or other public calamity, or danger thereof, or the destruction
of or danger to the building appointed for holding court, may render it necessary, and may in the same
manner revoke the order, and in his or her discretion appoint another place in the City for holding court.
4-03-140. Seal.
(a) Generally. The Justice Court shall have a seal which seal shall be approved by the
Judicial Council.
(b) When Affixed. The Seal of the Justice Court need not be affixed to any document of the
Court except to:
(1) A writ;
(2) The authentication of a copy of a record or document on file with the Justice
Court;
(3) The authentication of the signature of an officer of the Justice Court; and
(4) Any other document as permitted by law.
4-03-150. Process, Subpoenas and Warrants.
(a) Process from the Justice Court may be issued to any place in the State.
(b) Subpoenas in any action or proceeding of the Justice Court may be issued to any place in
the State.
(c) All warrants issued by the Justice Court for violation of any State law or local ordinance
within the Court's jurisdiction shall be directed to the sheriff, any constable of the county, or to the City
police.
4-03-160. Juries.
(a) Criminal actions before the Justice Court arising under City ordinances shall be tried and
determined without a jury except when imprisonment may be made a part of the penalty.
(b) When a jury demand is made, a jury shall be impaneled by the same procedure as in the
district courts.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 6
4-03-170. Docket.
The Justice Court Judge shall keep or cause to be kept a docket containing information as
required pursuant to Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-122, as amended.
4-03-180. Docket Entries as Prima Facie Evidence.
Entries in the Justice Court Judge's docket, certified by the Justice Court Judge or his or her
successor in office, are prima facie evidence of the facts stated.
4-03-190. Docket Index.
The Justice Court Judge shall keep or cause to be kept an alphabetical index to the names of the
parties to each judgment in his or her docket with a reference to the page of entry. The names of the
parties shall be entered in the index by the first letter of the family surname.
4-03-200. Dockets as Public Records.
The dockets kept or caused to be kept by the Justice Court Judge shall be kept as public records
in accordance with the provisions of the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act, as
adopted by the City.
4-03-210. Monthly Reports.
(a) The Justice Court Judge shall file monthly with the State Court Administrator a report of
the judicial business of the Judge on forms supplied by the State Court Administrator.
(b) The report shall state the number of criminal and small claims actions filed, the
dispositions entered, and other information as specified in the forms.
(c) A copy of the report shall be furnished by the Justice Court Judge to the City Council or to
such other person as the City Council may designate.
4-03-220. Delivery of Docket and Papers to Successor.
The Justice Court Judge, upon the expiration of term of office, shall deposit with his or her
successor all dockets and papers filed in his or her office including those of any predecessors and those
otherwise in his or her custody.
4-03-230. Validity of Papers Issued.
Every paper made or issued by the Justice Court Judge except a subpoena is valid only if issued
without any blank space to be filled or completed by another person.
4-03-240. Decisions to be Rendered.
(a) The Justice Court Judge shall decide all matters submitted for final determination within
two (2) months of submission, unless circumstances causing the delay are beyond the Judge's personal
control.
(b) The Justice Court Judge shall follow reporting procedures established by the Judicial
Council for all matters not decided within two (2) months of final submission.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 7
4-03-250. Filing and Docketing of Abstract.
(a) The Justice Court Judge, on the demand of a party in whose favor judgment is rendered,
shall provide the party with an abstract of the judgment in substantially the form approved by the Judicial
Council.
(b) The abstract may be filed in the office of the clerk of the district court of any county in the
State but shall be docketed in the judgment docket of that district court.
(c) The clerk shall note the time of receipt of the abstract on the abstract and on the docket.
4-03-260. Execution on Judgment.
From the time of the docketing in the office of the clerk of any district court, execution may then be
issued within the same time, in the same manner, and with the same effect as if issued on a judgment of
the district court.
4-03-270. Judgment Not a Lien Unless So Docketed.
(a) A judgment rendered in the Justice Court does not create a lien upon any real property of
the judgment debtor unless the judgment orabstract is recorded in the office of the county recorder of the
county in which the real property of the judgment debtor is located and contains the information set forth in
Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-119, as amended.
(b) When recorded, the judgment is a lien upon the real property of the judgment debtor for
eight (8) years from the date the judgment was entered unless the judgment is earlier satisfied.
4-03-280. Fees.
Except as otherwise provided, all fees in connection with the Justice Court shall be assessed in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council. Except as otherwise provided
by law, all fees shall be paid in advance.
4-03-290. Deposit of Fines, Fees and Forfeitures.
(a) The Justice Court shall deposit public funds in accordance with Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-
135 and Utah Code Ann. ' 51-4-2, as amended.
(b) The City Treasurer shall report to the City Recorder the sums collected and deposited.
The Recorder shall then apportion and remit the collected proceeds as provided by law.
(c) With the approval of the City Council, a trust or revolving account may be established in
the name of the Justice Court and the City Treasurer for the deposit of money collected including bail,
restitution, unidentified receipts, and other money that requires special accounting. Disbursements from
this account do not require the approval of the City Auditor, City Recorder, or City Council. The account
shall be reconciled at least quarterly by the City Auditor.
4-03-300. Remittal of Fines, Fees and Forfeitures.
All fines and forfeitures collected by the Justice Court shall be remitted in accordance with the
provisions of Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-116, as amended.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 8
4-03-310. Disposition of Monies Received.
Money received or collected on any process or order issued from the Justice Court shall be paid
within seven (7) days to the party or parties entitled or authorized to receive the money.
4-03-320. Proceedings Unaffected by Vacancy.
No proceeding in the Justice Court in an action or special proceeding pending therein is affected
by a vacancy in the office of the Judge or by the failure of a term thereof.
4-03-330. Repeated Application for Orders.
(a) If an application for an order to the Justice Court Judge is refused in whole or in part or is
granted conditionally, a subsequent application for the same order may not be made to any other judge,
except of a higher court.
(b) This Section does not apply to motions refused for any informality in the papers or
proceedings necessary to obtain the order, or to motions refused with liberty to renew them.
(c) A notice of appeal for a trial de novo in the district court is not a subsequent application for
the same order.
(d) A violation of this Section may be punished as a contempt, and an order made contrary
thereto may be revoked by the judge who made it, or vacated by a judge of the court in which the action or
proceeding is pending.
4-03-340. Appeals.
Either party may appeal a judgment rendered in the Justice Court to the District Court of Davis
County by filing a notice of appeal in accordance with applicable statutes. The appeal to the District Court
is a trial de novo as provided by law.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 9
CHAPTER 4-06: JUSTICE COURT JUDGE AND STAFF
4-06-010. Justice Court Judge.
4-06-020. Powers of Justice Court Judge.
4-06-030. Powers of Judge Contradistinguished from Court.
4-06-040. Eligibility.
4-06-050. Appointment.
4-06-060. Certification and Annual Training.
4-06-070. Residence Requirement.
4-06-080. Term and Vacancy.
4-06-090. Compensation.
4-06-100. Limitation on Additional Activities.
4-06-110. Reappointment.
4-06-120. Retirement.
4-06-130. Disqualification.
4-06-140. Grounds for Removal.
4-06-150. Temporary Justice Court Judge.
4-06-160. Clerical Personnel.
4-06-170. Justice Court Staff.
4-06-180. Bail Commissioners.
4-06-010. Justice Court Judge.
The Justice Court shall be presided over by a municipal justice court judge known as the Woods
Cross City Justice Court Judge, herein referred to as the "Justice Court Judge."
4-06-020. Powers of Justice Court Judge.
The Justice Court Judge has the same authority regarding matters within his or her jurisdiction as
judges of courts of record including, but not limited to, the power and authority to:
(a) Issue search warrants and warrants of arrest upon a finding of probable cause;
(b) Conduct proceedings to determine:
(1) Probable cause for any case within his or her jurisdiction; and
(2) An accused person's release on bail or his or her own recognizance;
(c) Preserve and enforce order in his or her immediate presence, and in proceedings before
him or her, when he or she is engaged in the performance of official duty;
(d) Compel obedience to his or her lawful orders as provided by law;
(e) Compel the attendance of persons to testify in a proceeding before him or her in the
cases and manner provided by law;
(f) Administer oaths to persons in a proceeding pending before him or her, and in all other
cases where it may be necessary in the exercise of his or her powers and duties;
(g) Exercise the powers of a magistrate to the extent permitted by law as enumerated in Utah
Code Ann. ' 78-7-17.5, as amended; and
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 10
(h) Punish for contempt in the cases provided by law for the effectual exercise of the powers
conferred herein.
4-06-030. Powers of Judge Contradistinguished from Court.
The Justice Court Judge may exercise out of court all the powers expressly conferred upon a
judge as contradistinguished from the Court.
4-06-040. Eligibility.
(a) The Justice Court Judge shall be:
(1) A citizen of the United States;
(2) Twenty-five (25) years of age or older;
(3) A resident of Utah for at least three (3) years immediately preceding appointment;
(4) A resident of Davis County or an adjacent county for at least six (6) months
immediately preceding appointment; and
(5) A qualified voter of the county of residence.
(b) The Justice Court Judge is not required to be admitted to practice law in the State as a
qualification to hold office but shall have at the minimum a diploma of graduation from high school or its
equivalent. This requirement does not apply to justice court judges holding office on July 1, 1989, who
successfully complete continuing education requirements under Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-127, as amended.
A Justice Court Judge shall be a person who has demonstrated maturity of judgment, integrity, and the
ability to understand and apply appropriate law with impartiality.
4-06-050. Appointment.
(a) Generally. The Justice Court Judge shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a
majority vote of the City Council in accordance with Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-134, as amended.
(b) Report to Judicial Council. After a newly appointed Justice Court Judge has been
confirmed, the City Council shall report the confirmed Judge's name to the Judicial Council.
4-06-060. Certification and Annual Training.
(a) Certification. Prior to assuming office, the Justice Court Judge shall attend an orientation
seminar conducted under the direction of the Judicial Council. The Judicial Council shall certify the
Justice Court Judge as qualified to hold office upon successful completion of the orientation program and
upon the written opinion of the City attorney that the Justice Court Judge meets the statutory qualifications
for office. No Justice Court Judge may perform judicial duties until so certified by the Judicial Council.
(b) Annual Training. The Justice Court Judge shall attend continuing education conducted
under the supervision of the Judicial Council each calendar year which education shall include instruction
regarding competency and understanding of constitutional provisions and laws relating to the jurisdiction
of the Court, rules of evidence, and rules of civil and criminal procedure. Completion of such continuing
education is evidenced by a certificate awarded by the Judicial Council. Any Justice Court Judge not
obtaining said certificate for two (2) consecutive years may be removed from office for cause under this
Section.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 11
(c) Costs. The City shall assume the expenses of travel, meals, and lodging for any Justice
Court Judge to attend the education and training seminars conducted by the Judicial Council and required
herein.
4-06-070. Residence Requirement.
The Justice Court Judge shall reside in Davis County, or in a county adjacent to Davis County.
4-06-080. Term and Vacancy.
(a) The term of office of the Justice Court Judge is four (4) years, beginning the first Monday
in February, 1992. A Justice Court Judge holding office when this Ordinance takes effect or appointed to
fill any vacancy shall hold office until reappointed or a successor is appointed and certified by the Judicial
Council.
(b) If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Justice Court Judge before the completion of his or
her term of office, the City Council may fill the vacancy in accordance with procedures set forth in Utah
Code Ann. '' 78-5-134 and 20A-1-506, as amended.
(c) The City Council shall notify the office of the State Court Administrator in writing of the
appointment, resignation, or the contractual agreement for services of a Justice Court Judge under this
Section within thirty (30) days after filling the vacancy.
4-06-090. Compensation.
(a) Amount. The Justice Court Judge shall be paid a fixed compensation determined by the
City Council taking into consideration recommendations of the office of the State Court Administrator as
provided in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-128, as amended. The compensation shall be comprised of a monthly
salary and shall be computed upon the number of hours, days or other periods of time that the Justice
Court Judge is to be available to perform all judicial functions, but in no case may the salary be an amount
greater than 85% of the salary of a district court judge.
(b) Review. The City Council shall annually review the compensation paid to the Justice
Court Judge and may adjust such compensation as deemed appropriate; provided however, that the
salary fixed for a Justice Court Judge may not be diminished during the term for which the Justice Court
Judge has been appointed or elected.
(c) Notice. A copy of the resolution, ordinance, or other document fixing the salary of the
Justice Court Judge and any adjustments to the document shall be furnished to the State Court
Administrator by the City Council.
4-06-100. Limitation on Additional Activities.
(a) The Justice Court Judge may not appear as an attorney in any criminal matter in a
federal, state, or justice court or appear as an attorney in any justice court or in any juvenile court case
involving conduct which would be criminal if committed by an adult.
(b) The Justice Court Judge may not hold any office or employment including contracting for
services in any justice agency of State government or any political subdivision of the State, including law
enforcement, prosecution, criminal defense, corrections, or court employment; provided however, that the
Justice Court Judge may, with the concurrence of the governing bodies of both Davis County and the City,
hold both the offices of county and municipal Justice Court Judge as defined in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-
102, as amended.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 12
(c) The Justice Court Judge may not hold any office in any political party or organization
engaged in any political activity or serve as an elected official in State government or any political
subdivision of the State.
(d) The Justice Court Judge may not own or be employed by any business entity which
regularly litigates in small claims court.
(e) Any Justice Court Judge who violates this Section may be subject to removal by the
Judicial Conduct Commission under Title 78, Chapter 8, of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
4-06-110. Reappointment.
Upon the expiration of a Justice Court Judge's term of office, the Justice Court Judge shall be
reappointed absent a showing of good cause by the City. If the City asserts good cause not to reappoint a
Justice Court Judge, a hearing may be held before the City Council in accordance with Utah Code Ann. '
78-5-134, as amended. Before reappointment, each Justice Court Judge shall be evaluated in
accordance with the performance evaluation program established in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-3-21, as
amended.
4-06-120. Retirement.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-137, as amended, the Justice
Court Judge shall retire upon attaining the age of seventy-five (75) years.
(b) The Justice Court Judge whose tenure in office has terminated due to retirement and who
is physically and mentally able to perform the duties of the office may hear cases as prescribed by rule of
the Supreme Court.
(c) The retired Justice Court Judge shall take and subscribe an oath of office only upon the
first appointment. The retired Justice Court Judge shall receive reasonable compensation for services as
set by the City Council by ordinance.
4-06-130. Disqualification.
(a) Except by consent of all parties, no Justice Court Judge may sit or act in any action or
proceeding:
(1) To which he or she is a party, or in which he or she is interested;
(2) When he or she is related to either party by consanguinity or affinity within the
third degree, computed according to the rules of common law; or
(3) When he or she has been attorney or counsel for either party in the action or
proceeding.
(b) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the arrangement of the calendar or the
regulation of the order of business, nor to the power or transferring the action or proceeding to some other
court.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 13
4-06-140. Grounds for Removal.
The Justice Court Judge may be removed from office, suspended, censured, involuntarily retired,
or publicly or privately reprimanded in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 8 of Title 78, as
amended.
4-06-150. Temporary Justice Court Judge.
If the Justice Court Judge is absent or disqualified, the City Council may appoint another Justice
Court Judge currently holding office within the judicial district to serve as a temporary Justice Court Judge.
A retired Justice Court Judge may also be appointed as a temporary Justice Court Judge under rule of
the Utah Supreme Court.
4-06-160. Clerical Personnel.
(a) The City shall provide and compensate clerical personnel to conduct the business of the
Justice Court.
(b) The selection, employment, supervision, and discipline of Court clerical personnel shall be
in accordance with City personnel policies, with the concurrence of the Justice Court Judge, and Title 52,
Chapter 3 of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, regarding employment of relatives.
(c) The City shall assume the cost of travel and training expenses of clerical personnel at
required training sessions conducted by the Judicial Council.
4-06-170. Justice Court Staff.
The City shall provide:
(a) Sufficient staff and public prosecutors to attend the Justice Court and perform the duties
of prosecution before the Justice Court;
(b) Adequate funding for the costs of defense for persons charged with a public offense who
are determined by the Justice Court to be indigent under Title 77, Chapter 32 of the Utah Code Annotated,
as amended; and
(c) Sufficient local law enforcement officers to attend and provide security for the Justice
Court when required.
4-06-180. Bail Commissioners.
(a) Appointment. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may appoint
from among the officers and members of the police department of the City one or more discreet persons to
serve as a bail commissioner. A bail commissioner appointed under this part shall serve at the pleasure of
the City and shall receive no compensation as a bail commissioner. Before beginning duties as a bail
commissioner, each officer shall take and subscribe an oath to faithfully and impartially discharge the
duties of his or her office; give a $2,500 bond to the City with two good and sufficient individual sureties or
with a single corporate surety, that is approved by the City for the faithful performance of his or her duties
as a bail commissioner.
(b) Powers and Duties. A bail commissioner shall have authority to fix and receive bail for a
person arrested within the corporate limits of the City in accordance with the uniform bail schedule
adopted by the Judicial Council or a reasonable bail for City Ordinances not contained in the schedule for
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 14
misdemeanors under the laws of the State or violation of City Ordinances. In addition to the duty of fixing
bail, a bail commissioner shall have power to collect and receipt moneys tendered in payment of the fine
of a person serving sentence in default of the payment of such fine, when the Court is closed. Any money
or bond collected by a bail commissioner shall be delivered to the appropriate court within three (3) days
of receipt of the money or bond.
(c) Return of Property. At the expiration of his or her term of office, the bail commissioner
shall surrender and turn over all funds, bonds, property, papers and records then in his or her hands
pertaining to the City.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 15
CHAPTER 4-09: SMALL CLAIMS
4-09-010. Small Claims.
4-09-020. Jurisdiction.
4-09-030. Counterclaims.
4-09-040. Procedure.
4-09-050. Deferral of Multiple Claims.
4-09-060. Judges Pro Tempore.
4-09-070. Assignee May Not File Claim.
4-09-080. Hearing Not of Record.
4-09-090. Judgment and Execution.
4-09-100. Appeals.
4-09-110. Fees.
4-09-120. Costs.
4-09-010. Small Claims.
Small claims actions may be brought before the Justice Court as provided herein.
4-09-020. Jurisdiction.
A small claims action is a civil action:
(a) For the recovery of money where the amount claimed does not exceed $5,000.00
including attorney fees but exclusive of court costs and interest and where the defendant resides or the
action of indebtedness was incurred within the jurisdiction of the Justice Court; or
(b) Involving interpleader under Rule 22 of the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure, in which the
amount claimed does not exceed $5,000.00 including attorney fees but exclusive of court costs and
interest.
4-09-030. Counterclaims.
Counterclaims may be maintained in small claims actions if the counterclaim arises out of the
transaction or occurrence that is the subject matter of the plaintiff's claim. A counterclaim may not be
raised for the first time in the trial de novo of the small claims action.
4-09-040. Procedure.
Small claims matters shall be managed in accordance with simplified rules of procedure and
evidence promulgated by the Utah Supreme Court.
4-09-050. Deferral of Multiple Claims.
If a person or corporation other than a municipality or political subdivision of the State files multiple
small claims in the Justice Court, the Justice Court Judge or clerk may remove all but the initial claim from
the Court's calendar in order to dispose of all other small claims matters. Claims so removed shall be
rescheduled as permitted by the Court's calendar.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 16
4-09-060. Judges Pro Tempore.
The Justice Court may request that the Utah Supreme Court appoint a member of the Utah State
Bar in good standing, with the member's consent, as judge pro tempore to hear and determine small
claims actions at times, including evening hours, to be set by the Justice Court. Such judges pro tempore,
after being duly sworn, shall serve voluntarily and without compensation at the request of the Justice
Court, shall be extended the same immunities, and shall have the same powers with respect to matters
within the jurisdiction of the Justice Court as may be exercised by a Judge thereof.
4-09-070. Assignee May Not File Claim.
No claim shall be filed or prosecuted in a small claims action by any assignee of such claim.
4-09-080. Hearing Not of Record.
The hearing in a small claims action has the sole object of dispensing speedy justice between the
parties. The record of small claims proceedings shall be as provided by rules of the Judicial Council.
4-09-090. Judgment and Execution.
(a) The judgment in a small claims action may not exceed $5,000.00 including attorney fees
but exclusive of court costs and interest.
(b) Attachment, garnishment, and execution may issue after judgment as prescribed by law,
upon the payment of the fees required for those services.
4-09-100. Appeals.
(a) Either party may appeal the judgment in a small claims action to the District Court of
Davis County by filing a notice of appeal with the Justice Court within ten (10) days of the notice of entry of
the judgment.
(b) The appeal to the District Court is a trial de novo and shall be tried in accordance with the
procedures of the small claims action, except a record of the trial shall be maintained. The trial de novo
may not be heard by a judge pro tempore appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
The decision of the trial de novo may not be appealed unless the Court rules on the constitutionality of a
statute or ordinance.
4-09-110. Fees.
The filing fees for small claims actions shall be assessed in accordance with the filing fees
required by law as set forth in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-7-35, as amended, and shall be collected and remitted
as provided in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-6-14, as amended.
4-09-120. Costs.
The prevailing party in any small claims action is entitled to costs of the action and also the costs
of execution upon a judgment rendered therein.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 17
CHAPTER 4-12: CITATIONS AND COMPLAINTS
4-12-010. Cross Reference.
4-12-020. Party Plaintiff.
4-12-030. Corporate Violations.
4-12-040. Citation.
4-12-050. Contents of Citation.
4-12-060. Proceeding on Citation.
4-12-070. Appearance.
4-12-080. Wilfully Failing to Appear.
4-12-090. Delivery of Prisoner Arrested Without Warrant.
4-12-100. Transfer of Case.
4-12-110. Bail Forfeiture.
4-12-120. Successive Actions Permitted.
4-12-010. Cross Reference.
Except as otherwise provided, the jurisdiction and procedure for the accusation, prosecution,
conviction and punishment of offenders and offenses within the Justice Court shall be governed by the
provisions set forth in the Woods Cross Criminal Code.
4-12-020. Party Plaintiff.
All actions brought to recover any fine or to enforce any penalty under an ordinance of the City
shall be brought in the corporate name of the City as plaintiff.
4-12-030. Corporate Violations.
A corporation violating any City ordinance may be complained against the same as a natural
person pursuant to the pleading and procedures set forth at Utah Code Ann. '' 10-7-69, et seq., as
amended.
4-12-040. Citation.
Any peace officer, in lieu of taking a person into custody, or any City official charged with the
enforcement of the laws of this City, may issue and deliver a citation requiring any person subject to arrest
or prosecution on a misdemeanor or infraction charge to appear at the court of the magistrate before
whom the person could be taken pursuant to law if the person had been arrested.
4-12-050. Contents of Citation.
(a) If a citation is issued pursuant to this Chapter, the peace officer or City official shall issue
one (1) copy to the person cited and shall within five (5) days, file a duplicate copy with the court specified
in the citation.
(b) Each copy of the citation issued under authority of this Chapter shall contain:
(1) The name of the court before which the person is to appear.
(2) The name of the person cited.
(3) A brief description of the offense charged.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 18
(4) The date, time and place at which the offense is alleged to have occurred.
(5) The date on which the citation was issued.
(6) The name of the peace officer or public official who issued the citation, and the
name of the arresting person if an arrest was made by a private party and the citation was issued
in lieu of taking the arrested person before a magistrate.
(7) The time and date on or before and after which the person is to appear.
(8) The address of the court in which the person is to appear.
(9) A certification above the signature of the officer issuing the citation in substantially
the following language: "I certify that a copy of this citation or information (Summons and
Complaint) was duly served upon the defendant according to law on the above date and I know or
believe and so allege that the above-named defendant did commit the offense herein set forth
contrary to law. I further certify that the Court to which the defendant has been directed to appear
is the proper Court pursuant to Section 77-7-21, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended."
(10) A notice containing substantially the following language:
READ CAREFULLY
This citation is not an information and will not be used as an information
without your consent. If an information is filed, you will be provided a
copy by the Court. You must appear in Court on or before the time set in
this citation. IF YOU FAIL TO APPEAR AN INFORMATION WILL BE
FILED AND THE COURT MAY ISSUE A WARRANT FOR YOUR
ARREST.
4-12-060. Proceeding on Citation.
(a) Whenever a citation is issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the copy of the
citation filed with the magistrate may be used in lieu of an information to which the person cited may plead
guilty or no contest and be sentenced or on which bail may be posted and forfeited. With the magistrate's
approval, a person may voluntarily forfeit bail without appearance being required in any case of a Class B
misdemeanor or less. Such voluntary forfeiture of bail shall be entered as a conviction and treated the
same as if the accused pleaded guilty.
(b) If the person cited wilfully fails to appear before a magistrate pursuant to a citation issued
under this Chapter, or pleads not guilty to the offense charged, or does not deposit bail on or before the
date set for his or her appearance, an information shall be filed and proceedings held in accordance with
the Rules of Criminal Procedure and all other applicable provisions of the Utah Code Annotated or these
Ordinances, which information shall be deemed an original pleading; provided, however, that the person
cited may by written agreement waive the filing of the information and thereafter the prosecution may
proceed on the citation notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary.
4-12-070. Appearance.
(a) Any person receiving a misdemeanor citation shall appear before the Justice Court Judge
designated in the citation on or before the time and date specified in the citation unless the uniform bail
schedule adopted by the Judicial Council or Utah Code Ann. ' 77-7-21, as amended, permits forfeiture of
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 19
bail for the offense charged. The citation may not require a person to appear sooner than five (5) days or
later than fourteen (14) days following its issuance.
(b) Any person who receives a citation and who fails to comply therewith on or before the
time and date and at the court specified is subject to arrest. The Justice Court Judge may issue a warrant
of arrest.
(c) Except where otherwise provided by law, a citation issued for violations of Title 41 of the
Utah Code Annotated shall state that the person receiving the citation shall appear before the Justice
Court Judge who has jurisdiction over the offense charged. The Justice Court clerk and other
administrative personnel shall ensure that the Justice Court has jurisdiction and venue over such citation
and shall refuse to receive citations that should be filed in another court. Fines, fees, costs, and forfeitures
imposed or collected for violations of Title 41 which are filed contrary to this Section shall be paid to the
entitled municipality or county by the state, county, or municipal treasurer who has received the fines,
fees, costs, or forfeitures from the court which collected them. The accounting and remitting of sums due
shall be at the close of the fiscal year of the municipality or county which has received fines, fees, costs, or
forfeitures as a result of any improperly filed citations.
4-12-080. Wilfully Failing to Appear.
Any person who wilfully fails to appear before the Justice Court pursuant to a citation issued under
the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the
charge upon which he or she was originally cited.
4-12-090. Delivery of Prisoner Arrested Without Warrant.
(a) When an arrest is made without a warrant by a peace officer or private person, the person
arrested shall be taken without unnecessary delay to the Justice Court Judge, except as provided in
Subsection (c). An information stating the charge against the person shall be made before the Justice
Court Judge.
(b) If the Justice Court Judge is not available, the arrested person shall be taken before the
magistrate within Davis County who is nearest to the scene of the alleged offense or nearest to the jail
under Subsection (c), who may act as committing magistrate for arraigning the accused, setting bail, or
issuing warrants.
(c) If the arrested person under Subsection (a) must be transported from jail to a Justice
Court Judge, the person may be taken before the magistrate nearest to the jail rather than the Justice
Court Judge specified in Subsection (a) for arraignment, setting bail, or issuing warrants.
(d) The case shall then be transferred to the court having jurisdiction. This Section does not
confer jurisdiction upon a court unless otherwise provided by law.
(e) Any officer or person violating this Section is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
4-12-100. Transfer of Case.
The Justice Court Judge may, upon the motion of either the defense attorney or prosecuting
attorney, based on a lack of territorial jurisdiction or the disqualification of the Judge, transfer cases to the
nearest justice court or the nearest district court within Davis County.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 20
4-12-110. Bail Forfeiture.
With the approval of the Justice Court and in accordance with the procedures set forth in Title 77
of the Utah Code Annotated, a person may voluntarily forfeit bail without appearance being required, in
any case of a Class B misdemeanor or less. Such voluntary forfeiture of bail shall be entered as a
conviction and treated the same as if the accused pleaded guilty.
4-12-120. Successive Actions Permitted.
Pursuant to Utah Code Ann. ' 10-7-65, as amended, no prosecution, recovery, or acquittal for the
violation of any City ordinance shall constitute a defense to any other prosecution of the same person for
any other violation of any such ordinance although the different causes of action existed at the same time
and if united would not have exceeded the jurisdiction of the Justice Court.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 1
CHAPTER 4-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
4-01-010. Title.
4-01-020. Intent.
4-01-030. Conflict.
4-01-010. Title.
This Title shall be known as the Woods Cross City Judicial Code, hereinafter referred to as the
"Judicial Code."
4-01-020. Intent.
It is the intent of the City Council that this Judicial Code comply with and be interpreted in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Utah Code Annotated, particularly Chapters 5 through 7
of Title 78, as amended, regarding the jurisdiction, venue, procedure and conduct of Justice Courts and
Justice Court Judges, as well as the relevant portions of Title 77, as amended, regarding general criminal
procedure for all courts.
4-01-030. Conflict.
If there is any conflict between the provisions of this Judicial Code and the Utah Code Annotated,
as amended, the provisions of the Utah Code shall control.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 4, Page 2
CHAPTER 4-03: JUSTICE COURT
4-03-010. Creation of Justice Court.
4-03-020. Compliance with Minimum Requirements.
4-03-030. Territorial Jurisdiction.
4-03-040. Jurisdiction.
4-03-050. Trial Facilities.
4-03-060. Reference Materials.
4-03-070. Court Days.
4-03-080. Hours of Business.
4-03-090. Powers of the Justice Court.
4-03-100. Public Proceedings.
4-03-110. English Language.
4-03-120. Abbreviations and Numerals.
4-03-130. Change of Place of Trial Because of Calamity.
4-03-140. Seal.
4-03-150. Process, Subpoenas and Warrants.
4-03-160. Juries.
4-03-170. Docket.
4-03-180. Docket Entries as Prima Facie Evidence.
4-03-190. Docket Index.
4-03-200. Dockets as Public Records.
4-03-210. Monthly Reports.
4-03-220. Delivery of Docket and Papers to Successor.
4-03-230. Validity of Papers Issued.
4-03-240. Decisions to be Rendered.
4-03-250. Filing and Docketing of Abstract.
4-03-260. Execution on Judgment.
4-03-270. Judgment Not a Lien Unless So Docketed.
4-03-280. Fees.
4-03-290. Collection and Deposit of Fines, Fees and Forfeitures.
4-03-300. Remittal of Fines, Fees and Forfeitures.
4-03-310. Disposition of Monies Received.
4-03-320. Proceedings Unaffected by Vacancy.
4-03-330. Repeated Application for Orders.
4-03-340. Appeals.
4-03-010. Creation of Justice Court.
There is hereby established a court within the City known as the Woods Cross City Justice Court
which court shall not be a court of record, hereinafter referred to as the "Justice Court."
4-03-020. Compliance with Minimum Requirements.
The City shall comply with and meet the minimum requirements set forth by the Judicial Council
for the creation and certification of the Justice Court in accordance with Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-139, as
amended.
4-03-030. Territorial Jurisdiction.
(a) The territorial jurisdiction of the Justice Court extends to the corporate limits of the City.
(b) The territorial jurisdiction of the Justice Court functioning as a magistrate may extend
beyond the boundaries in Subsection (a) as provided in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-7-17.5, as amended, and to
the extent necessary to carry out magisterial functions under Utah Code Ann. ' 77-7-23, as amended,
regarding jailed persons.
4-03-040. Jurisdiction.
(a) The Justice Court has criminal jurisdiction over Class B and C misdemeanors, violation of
ordinances, and infractions committed within its territorial jurisdiction, except those offenses over which
the juvenile court has exclusive jurisdiction.
(b) The Justice Court has jurisdiction of small claims cases under Title 78, Chapter 6 of the
Utah Code Annotated, if the defendant resides in or the debt arose within the territorial jurisdiction of the
Justice Court.
(c) The Justice Court has jurisdiction over traffic misdemeanors and infractions committed by
persons 16 or 17 years of age that occur within the territorial jurisdiction of the Justice Court pursuant and
subject to the provisions set forth in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-105, as amended.
4-03-050. Trial Facilities.
(a) The City shall provide adequate courtroom and auxiliary space for the Justice Court. The
facility need not be specifically constructed for or allocated solely for the Justice Court if existing facilities
adequately serve the purposes of the Justice Court.
(b) The Justice Court Judge shall hold Court in the City at the location designated by the City
pursuant to Subsection (a) and shall conduct all official Court business in such location or an office
located in a public facility which is conducive and appropriate to the administration of justice.
4-03-060. Reference Materials.
The City shall provide and keep current for the Justice Court a copy of the motor vehicle laws of
Utah, appropriate copies of the Utah Code Annotated, the Justice Court Manual published by the State
Court Administrator, State laws affecting local government, City ordinances, and other legal reference
materials as determined necessary by the Justice Court Judge.
4-03-070. Court Days.
(a) Generally. The Justice Court is open and judicial business may be transacted on any
day, except as otherwise provided.
(b) Closed. The Justice Court is closed on Sunday, on any day on which a general election
is held, and on any legal holiday, provided however that judicial business may be transacted on such
days for the following purposes:
(1) To give, upon their request, instructions to a jury when deliberating on their
verdict;
(2) To receive a verdict or discharge a jury;
(3) For the exercise of the powers of a magistrate in a criminal action, or in a
proceeding of a criminal nature; or
(4) Judicial business not involving a trial or hearing unless the Judge finds it
necessary for the fair administration of justice.
4-03-080. Hours of Business.
The Justice Court shall be open and judicial business shall be transacted every day during
regular business hours as provided by law. The hours the Justice Court is open shall be posted
conspicuously at the Court and in local public buildings. The Justice Court Judge and clerk shall attend
the Court at regularly scheduled times.
4-03-090. Powers of the Justice Court.
The Justice Court has the authority necessary to exercise its jurisdiction including, but not limited
to, the authority to:
(a) Preserve and enforce order in its immediate presence;
(b) Enforce order in the proceedings before it, or before a person authorized to conduct a
judicial investigation under its authority;
(c) Provide for the orderly conduct of proceedings before it or its officers;
(d) Compel obedience to its judgments, orders, and process, and to the orders of a judge out
of court, in a pending action or proceeding;
(e) Control in furtherance of justice the conduct of its ministerial officers, and of all other
persons in any manner connected with a judicial proceeding before it in every matter;
(f) Compel the attendance of persons to testify in a pending action or proceeding, as
provided by law;
(g) Administer oaths in a pending action or proceeding, and in all other cases where
necessary in the exercise of its authority and duties;
(h) Amend and control its process and orders to conform to law and justice;
(i) Devise and make new process and forms of proceedings, consistent with law, necessary
to carry into effect its authority and jurisdiction;
(j) Establish and adopt procedural process, in conformance with the apparent intent of
statutes or rules of procedure, for actions in which such procedure is not yet established; and
(k) Enforce rules of the Utah Supreme Court and Judicial Council.
4-03-100. Public Proceedings.
The sittings of the Justice Court are public, provided however that in any case, the Court may, in
its discretion, during the examination of any witness, exclude any and all other witnesses in the case.
4-03-110. English Language.
Judicial proceedings in the Justice Court shall be conducted in the English language.
4-03-120. Abbreviations and Numerals.
Abbreviations as are in common use may be used, and numbers may be expressed by figures or
numerals in the customary manner.
4-03-130. Change of Place of Trial Because of Calamity.
The Justice Court Judge may, by an order filed with the clerk and published as he or she
prescribes, direct that the Justice Court be held or continued at any other place in the City than that
appointed, when war, insurrection, pestilence or other public calamity, or danger thereof, or the
destruction of or danger to the building appointed for holding court, may render it necessary, and may in
the same manner revoke the order, and in his or her discretion appoint another place in the City for
holding court.
4-03-140. Seal.
(a) Generally. The Justice Court shall have a seal which seal shall be approved by the
Judicial Council.
(b) When Affixed. The Seal of the Justice Court need not be affixed to any document of the
Court except to:
(1) A writ;
(2) The authentication of a copy of a record or document on file with the Justice
Court;
(3) The authentication of the signature of an officer of the Justice Court; and
(4) Any other document as permitted by law.
4-03-150. Process, Subpoenas and Warrants.
(a) Process from the Justice Court may be issued to any place in the State.
(b) Subpoenas in any action or proceeding of the Justice Court may be issued to any place
in the State.
(c) All warrants issued by the Justice Court for violation of any State law or local ordinance
within the Court's jurisdiction shall be directed to the sheriff, any constable of the county, or to the City
police.
4-03-160. Juries.
(a) Criminal actions before the Justice Court arising under City ordinances shall be tried and
determined without a jury except when imprisonment may be made a part of the penalty.
(b) When a jury demand is made, a jury shall be impaneled by the same procedure as in the
district courts.
4-03-170. Docket.
The Justice Court Judge shall keep or cause to be kept a docket containing information as
required pursuant to Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-122, as amended.
4-03-180. Docket Entries as Prima Facie Evidence.
Entries in the Justice Court Judge's docket, certified by the Justice Court Judge or his or her
successor in office, are prima facie evidence of the facts stated.
4-03-190. Docket Index.
The Justice Court Judge shall keep or cause to be kept an alphabetical index to the names of the
parties to each judgment in his or her docket with a reference to the page of entry. The names of the
parties shall be entered in the index by the first letter of the family surname.
4-03-200. Dockets as Public Records.
The dockets kept or caused to be kept by the Justice Court Judge shall be kept as public records
in accordance with the provisions of the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act, as
adopted by the City.
4-03-210. Monthly Reports.
(a) The Justice Court Judge shall file monthly with the State Court Administrator a report of
the judicial business of the Judge on forms supplied by the State Court Administrator.
(b) The report shall state the number of criminal and small claims actions filed, the
dispositions entered, and other information as specified in the forms.
(c) A copy of the report shall be furnished by the Justice Court Judge to the City Council or
to such other person as the City Council may designate.
4-03-220. Delivery of Docket and Papers to Successor.
The Justice Court Judge, upon the expiration of term of office, shall deposit with his or her
successor all dockets and papers filed in his or her office including those of any predecessors and those
otherwise in his or her custody.
4-03-230. Validity of Papers Issued.
Every paper made or issued by the Justice Court Judge except a subpoena is valid only if issued
without any blank space to be filled or completed by another person.
4-03-240. Decisions to be Rendered.
(a) The Justice Court Judge shall decide all matters submitted for final determination within
two (2) months of submission, unless circumstances causing the delay are beyond the Judge's personal
control.
(b) The Justice Court Judge shall follow reporting procedures established by the Judicial
Council for all matters not decided within two (2) months of final submission.
4-03-250. Filing and Docketing of Abstract.
(a) The Justice Court Judge, on the demand of a party in whose favor judgment is rendered,
shall provide the party with an abstract of the judgment in substantially the form approved by the Judicial
Council.
(b) The abstract may be filed in the office of the clerk of the district court of any county in the
State but shall be docketed in the judgment docket of that district court.
(c) The clerk shall note the time of receipt of the abstract on the abstract and on the docket.
4-03-260. Execution on Judgment.
From the time of the docketing in the office of the clerk of any district court, execution may then
be issued within the same time, in the same manner, and with the same effect as if issued on a judgment
of the district court.
4-03-270. Judgment Not a Lien Unless So Docketed.
(a) A judgment rendered in the Justice Court does not create a lien upon any real property of
the judgment debtor unless the judgment orabstract is recorded in the office of the county recorder of the
county in which the real property of the judgment debtor is located and contains the information set forth
in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-119, as amended.
(b) When recorded, the judgment is a lien upon the real property of the judgment debtor for
eight (8) years from the date the judgment was entered unless the judgment is earlier satisfied.
4-03-280. Fees.
Except as otherwise provided, all fees in connection with the Justice Court shall be assessed in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council. Except as otherwise
provided by law, all fees shall be paid in advance.
4-03-290. Deposit of Fines, Fees and Forfeitures.
(a) The Justice Court shall deposit public funds in accordance with Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-
135 and Utah Code Ann. ' 51-4-2, as amended.
(b) The City Treasurer shall report to the City Recorder the sums collected and deposited.
The Recorder shall then apportion and remit the collected proceeds as provided by law.
(c) With the approval of the City Council, a trust or revolving account may be established in
the name of the Justice Court and the City Treasurer for the deposit of money collected including bail,
restitution, unidentified receipts, and other money that requires special accounting. Disbursements from
this account do not require the approval of the City Auditor, City Recorder, or City Council. The account
shall be reconciled at least quarterly by the City Auditor.
4-03-300. Remittal of Fines, Fees and Forfeitures.
All fines and forfeitures collected by the Justice Court shall be remitted in accordance with the
provisions of Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-116, as amended.
4-03-310. Disposition of Monies Received.
Money received or collected on any process or order issued from the Justice Court shall be paid
within seven (7) days to the party or parties entitled or authorized to receive the money.
4-03-320. Proceedings Unaffected by Vacancy.
No proceeding in the Justice Court in an action or special proceeding pending therein is affected
by a vacancy in the office of the Judge or by the failure of a term thereof.
4-03-330. Repeated Application for Orders.
(a) If an application for an order to the Justice Court Judge is refused in whole or in part or is
granted conditionally, a subsequent application for the same order may not be made to any other judge,
except of a higher court.
(b) This Section does not apply to motions refused for any informality in the papers or
proceedings necessary to obtain the order, or to motions refused with liberty to renew them.
(c) A notice of appeal for a trial de novo in the district court is not a subsequent application
for the same order.
(d) A violation of this Section may be punished as a contempt, and an order made contrary
thereto may be revoked by the judge who made it, or vacated by a judge of the court in which the action
or proceeding is pending.
4-03-340. Appeals.
Either party may appeal a judgment rendered in the Justice Court to the District Court of Davis
County by filing a notice of appeal in accordance with applicable statutes. The appeal to the District
Court is a trial de novo as provided by law.

CHAPTER 4-06: JUSTICE COURT JUDGE AND STAFF
4-06-010. Justice Court Judge.
4-06-020. Powers of Justice Court Judge.
4-06-030. Powers of Judge Contradistinguished from Court.
4-06-040. Eligibility.
4-06-050. Appointment.
4-06-060. Certification and Annual Training.
4-06-070. Residence Requirement.
4-06-080. Term and Vacancy.
4-06-090. Compensation.
4-06-100. Limitation on Additional Activities.
4-06-110. Reappointment.
4-06-120. Retirement.
4-06-130. Disqualification.
4-06-140. Grounds for Removal.
4-06-150. Temporary Justice Court Judge.
4-06-160. Clerical Personnel.
4-06-170. Justice Court Staff.
4-06-180. Bail Commissioners.
4-06-010. Justice Court Judge.
The Justice Court shall be presided over by a municipal justice court judge known as the Woods
Cross City Justice Court Judge, herein referred to as the "Justice Court Judge."
4-06-020. Powers of Justice Court Judge.
The Justice Court Judge has the same authority regarding matters within his or her jurisdiction as
judges of courts of record including, but not limited to, the power and authority to:
(a) Issue search warrants and warrants of arrest upon a finding of probable cause;
(b) Conduct proceedings to determine:
(1) Probable cause for any case within his or her jurisdiction; and
(2) An accused person's release on bail or his or her own recognizance;
(c) Preserve and enforce order in his or her immediate presence, and in proceedings before
him or her, when he or she is engaged in the performance of official duty;
(d) Compel obedience to his or her lawful orders as provided by law;
(e) Compel the attendance of persons to testify in a proceeding before him or her in the
cases and manner provided by law;
(f) Administer oaths to persons in a proceeding pending before him or her, and in all other
cases where it may be necessary in the exercise of his or her powers and duties;
(g) Exercise the powers of a magistrate to the extent permitted by law as enumerated in
Utah Code Ann. ' 78-7-17.5, as amended; and
(h) Punish for contempt in the cases provided by law for the effectual exercise of the powers
conferred herein.
4-06-030. Powers of Judge Contradistinguished from Court.
The Justice Court Judge may exercise out of court all the powers expressly conferred upon a
judge as contradistinguished from the Court.
4-06-040. Eligibility.
(a) The Justice Court Judge shall be:
(1) A citizen of the United States;
(2) Twenty-five (25) years of age or older;
(3) A resident of Utah for at least three (3) years immediately preceding
appointment;
(4) A resident of Davis County or an adjacent county for at least six (6) months
immediately preceding appointment; and
(5) A qualified voter of the county of residence.
(b) The Justice Court Judge is not required to be admitted to practice law in the State as a
qualification to hold office but shall have at the minimum a diploma of graduation from high school or its
equivalent. This requirement does not apply to justice court judges holding office on July 1, 1989, who
successfully complete continuing education requirements under Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-127, as amended.
A Justice Court Judge shall be a person who has demonstrated maturity of judgment, integrity, and the
ability to understand and apply appropriate law with impartiality.
4-06-050. Appointment.
(a) Generally. The Justice Court Judge shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a
majority vote of the City Council in accordance with Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-134, as amended.
(b) Report to Judicial Council. After a newly appointed Justice Court Judge has been
confirmed, the City Council shall report the confirmed Judge's name to the Judicial Council.
4-06-060. Certification and Annual Training.
(a) Certification. Prior to assuming office, the Justice Court Judge shall attend an orientation
seminar conducted under the direction of the Judicial Council. The Judicial Council shall certify the
Justice Court Judge as qualified to hold office upon successful completion of the orientation program and
upon the written opinion of the City attorney that the Justice Court Judge meets the statutory
qualifications for office. No Justice Court Judge may perform judicial duties until so certified by the
Judicial Council.
(b) Annual Training. The Justice Court Judge shall attend continuing education conducted
under the supervision of the Judicial Council each calendar year which education shall include instruction
regarding competency and understanding of constitutional provisions and laws relating to the jurisdiction
of the Court, rules of evidence, and rules of civil and criminal procedure. Completion of such continuing
education is evidenced by a certificate awarded by the Judicial Council. Any Justice Court Judge not
obtaining said certificate for two (2) consecutive years may be removed from office for cause under this
Section.
(c) Costs. The City shall assume the expenses of travel, meals, and lodging for any Justice
Court Judge to attend the education and training seminars conducted by the Judicial Council and required
herein.
4-06-070. Residence Requirement.
The Justice Court Judge shall reside in Davis County, or in a county adjacent to Davis County.
4-06-080. Term and Vacancy.
(a) The term of office of the Justice Court Judge is four (4) years, beginning the first Monday
in February, 1992. A Justice Court Judge holding office when this Ordinance takes effect or appointed to
fill any vacancy shall hold office until reappointed or a successor is appointed and certified by the Judicial
Council.
(b) If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Justice Court Judge before the completion of his or
her term of office, the City Council may fill the vacancy in accordance with procedures set forth in Utah
Code Ann. '' 78-5-134 and 20A-1-506, as amended.
(c) The City Council shall notify the office of the State Court Administrator in writing of the
appointment, resignation, or the contractual agreement for services of a Justice Court Judge under this
Section within thirty (30) days after filling the vacancy.
4-06-090. Compensation.
(a) Amount. The Justice Court Judge shall be paid a fixed compensation determined by the
City Council taking into consideration recommendations of the office of the State Court Administrator as
provided in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-128, as amended. The compensation shall be comprised of a monthly
salary and shall be computed upon the number of hours, days or other periods of time that the Justice
Court Judge is to be available to perform all judicial functions, but in no case may the salary be an
amount greater than 85% of the salary of a district court judge.
(b) Review. The City Council shall annually review the compensation paid to the Justice
Court Judge and may adjust such compensation as deemed appropriate; provided however, that the
salary fixed for a Justice Court Judge may not be diminished during the term for which the Justice Court
Judge has been appointed or elected.
(c) Notice. A copy of the resolution, ordinance, or other document fixing the salary of the
Justice Court Judge and any adjustments to the document shall be furnished to the State Court
Administrator by the City Council.
4-06-100. Limitation on Additional Activities.
(a) The Justice Court Judge may not appear as an attorney in any criminal matter in a
federal, state, or justice court or appear as an attorney in any justice court or in any juvenile court case
involving conduct which would be criminal if committed by an adult.
(b) The Justice Court Judge may not hold any office or employment including contracting for
services in any justice agency of State government or any political subdivision of the State, including law
enforcement, prosecution, criminal defense, corrections, or court employment; provided however, that the
Justice Court Judge may, with the concurrence of the governing bodies of both Davis County and the
City, hold both the offices of county and municipal Justice Court Judge as defined in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-
5-102, as amended.
(c) The Justice Court Judge may not hold any office in any political party or organization
engaged in any political activity or serve as an elected official in State government or any political
subdivision of the State.
(d) The Justice Court Judge may not own or be employed by any business entity which
regularly litigates in small claims court.
(e) Any Justice Court Judge who violates this Section may be subject to removal by the
Judicial Conduct Commission under Title 78, Chapter 8, of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
4-06-110. Reappointment.
Upon the expiration of a Justice Court Judge's term of office, the Justice Court Judge shall be
reappointed absent a showing of good cause by the City. If the City asserts good cause not to reappoint
a Justice Court Judge, a hearing may be held before the City Council in accordance with Utah Code Ann.
' 78-5-134, as amended. Before reappointment, each Justice Court Judge shall be evaluated in
accordance with the performance evaluation program established in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-3-21, as
amended.
4-06-120. Retirement.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-5-137, as amended, the Justice
Court Judge shall retire upon attaining the age of seventy-five (75) years.
(b) The Justice Court Judge whose tenure in office has terminated due to retirement and
who is physically and mentally able to perform the duties of the office may hear cases as prescribed by
rule of the Supreme Court.
(c) The retired Justice Court Judge shall take and subscribe an oath of office only upon the
first appointment. The retired Justice Court Judge shall receive reasonable compensation for services as
set by the City Council by ordinance.
4-06-130. Disqualification.
(a) Except by consent of all parties, no Justice Court Judge may sit or act in any action or
proceeding:
(1) To which he or she is a party, or in which he or she is interested;
(2) When he or she is related to either party by consanguinity or affinity within the
third degree, computed according to the rules of common law; or
(3) When he or she has been attorney or counsel for either party in the action or
proceeding.
(b) The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the arrangement of the calendar or the
regulation of the order of business, nor to the power or transferring the action or proceeding to some
other court.
4-06-140. Grounds for Removal.
The Justice Court Judge may be removed from office, suspended, censured, involuntarily retired,
or publicly or privately reprimanded in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 8 of Title 78,
as amended.
4-06-150. Temporary Justice Court Judge.
If the Justice Court Judge is absent or disqualified, the City Council may appoint another Justice
Court Judge currently holding office within the judicial district to serve as a temporary Justice Court
Judge. A retired Justice Court Judge may also be appointed as a temporary Justice Court Judge under
rule of the Utah Supreme Court.
4-06-160. Clerical Personnel.
(a) The City shall provide and compensate clerical personnel to conduct the business of the
Justice Court.
(b) The selection, employment, supervision, and discipline of Court clerical personnel shall
be in accordance with City personnel policies, with the concurrence of the Justice Court Judge, and Title
52, Chapter 3 of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, regarding employment of relatives.
(c) The City shall assume the cost of travel and training expenses of clerical personnel at
required training sessions conducted by the Judicial Council.
4-06-170. Justice Court Staff.
The City shall provide:
(a) Sufficient staff and public prosecutors to attend the Justice Court and perform the duties
of prosecution before the Justice Court;
(b) Adequate funding for the costs of defense for persons charged with a public offense who
are determined by the Justice Court to be indigent under Title 77, Chapter 32 of the Utah Code
Annotated, as amended; and
(c) Sufficient local law enforcement officers to attend and provide security for the Justice
Court when required.
4-06-180. Bail Commissioners.
(a) Appointment. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may appoint
from among the officers and members of the police department of the City one or more discreet persons
to serve as a bail commissioner. A bail commissioner appointed under this part shall serve at the
pleasure of the City and shall receive no compensation as a bail commissioner. Before beginning duties
as a bail commissioner, each officer shall take and subscribe an oath to faithfully and impartially
discharge the duties of his or her office; give a $2,500 bond to the City with two good and sufficient
individual sureties or with a single corporate surety, that is approved by the City for the faithful
performance of his or her duties as a bail commissioner.
(b) Powers and Duties. A bail commissioner shall have authority to fix and receive
bail for a person arrested within the corporate limits of the City in accordance with the uniform bail
schedule adopted by the Judicial Council or a reasonable bail for City Ordinances not contained
in the schedule for misdemeanors under the laws of the State or violation of City Ordinances. In
addition to the duty of fixing bail, a bail commissioner shall have power to collect and receipt
moneys tendered in payment of the fine of a person serving sentence in default of the payment of
such fine, when the Court is closed. Any money or bond collected by a bail commissioner shall
be delivered to the appropriate court within three (3) days of receipt of the money or bond.
(c) Return of Property. At the expiration of his or her term of office, the bail
commissioner shall surrender and turn over all funds, bonds, property, papers and records then in
his or her hands pertaining to the City.
CHAPTER 4-09: SMALL CLAIMS
4-09-010. Small Claims.
4-09-020. Jurisdiction.
4-09-030. Counterclaims.
4-09-040. Procedure.
4-09-050. Deferral of Multiple Claims.
4-09-060. Judges Pro Tempore.
4-09-070. Assignee May Not File Claim.
4-09-080. Hearing Not of Record.
4-09-090. Judgment and Execution.
4-09-100. Appeals.
4-09-110. Fees.
4-09-120. Costs.
4-09-010. Small Claims.
Small claims actions may be brought before the Justice Court as provided herein.
4-09-020. Jurisdiction.
A small claims action is a civil action:
(a) For the recovery of money where the amount claimed does not exceed $5,000.00
including attorney fees but exclusive of court costs and interest and where the defendant resides or the
action of indebtedness was incurred within the jurisdiction of the Justice Court; or
(b) Involving interpleader under Rule 22 of the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure, in which the
amount claimed does not exceed $5,000.00 including attorney fees but exclusive of court costs and
interest.
4-09-030. Counterclaims.
Counterclaims may be maintained in small claims actions if the counterclaim arises out of the
transaction or occurrence that is the subject matter of the plaintiff's claim. A counterclaim may not be
raised for the first time in the trial de novo of the small claims action.
4-09-040. Procedure.
Small claims matters shall be managed in accordance with simplified rules of procedure and
evidence promulgated by the Utah Supreme Court.
4-09-050. Deferral of Multiple Claims.
If a person or corporation other than a municipality or political subdivision of the State files
multiple small claims in the Justice Court, the Justice Court Judge or clerk may remove all but the initial
claim from the Court's calendar in order to dispose of all other small claims matters. Claims so removed
shall be rescheduled as permitted by the Court's calendar.
4-09-060. Judges Pro Tempore.
The Justice Court may request that the Utah Supreme Court appoint a member of the Utah State
Bar in good standing, with the member's consent, as judge pro tempore to hear and determine small
claims actions at times, including evening hours, to be set by the Justice Court. Such judges pro
tempore, after being duly sworn, shall serve voluntarily and without compensation at the request of the
Justice Court, shall be extended the same immunities, and shall have the same powers with respect to
matters within the jurisdiction of the Justice Court as may be exercised by a Judge thereof.
4-09-070. Assignee May Not File Claim.
No claim shall be filed or prosecuted in a small claims action by any assignee of such claim.
4-09-080. Hearing Not of Record.
The hearing in a small claims action has the sole object of dispensing speedy justice between the
parties. The record of small claims proceedings shall be as provided by rules of the Judicial Council.
4-09-090. Judgment and Execution.
(a) The judgment in a small claims action may not exceed $5,000.00 including attorney fees
but exclusive of court costs and interest.
(b) Attachment, garnishment, and execution may issue after judgment as prescribed by law,
upon the payment of the fees required for those services.
4-09-100. Appeals.
(a) Either party may appeal the judgment in a small claims action to the District Court of
Davis County by filing a notice of appeal with the Justice Court within ten (10) days of the notice of entry
of the judgment.
(b) The appeal to the District Court is a trial de novo and shall be tried in accordance with the
procedures of the small claims action, except a record of the trial shall be maintained. The trial de novo
may not be heard by a judge pro tempore appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
The decision of the trial de novo may not be appealed unless the Court rules on the constitutionality of a
statute or ordinance.
4-09-110. Fees.
The filing fees for small claims actions shall be assessed in accordance with the filing fees
required by law as set forth in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-7-35, as amended, and shall be collected and remitted
as provided in Utah Code Ann. ' 78-6-14, as amended.
4-09-120. Costs.
The prevailing party in any small claims action is entitled to costs of the action and also the costs
of execution upon a judgment rendered therein.

CHAPTER 4-12: CITATIONS AND COMPLAINTS
4-12-010. Cross Reference.
4-12-020. Party Plaintiff.
4-12-030. Corporate Violations.
4-12-040. Citation.
4-12-050. Contents of Citation.
4-12-060. Proceeding on Citation.
4-12-070. Appearance.
4-12-080. Wilfully Failing to Appear.
4-12-090. Delivery of Prisoner Arrested Without Warrant.
4-12-100. Transfer of Case.
4-12-110. Bail Forfeiture.
4-12-120. Successive Actions Permitted.
4-12-010. Cross Reference.
Except as otherwise provided, the jurisdiction and procedure for the accusation, prosecution,
conviction and punishment of offenders and offenses within the Justice Court shall be governed by the
provisions set forth in the Woods Cross Criminal Code.
4-12-020. Party Plaintiff.
All actions brought to recover any fine or to enforce any penalty under an ordinance of the City
shall be brought in the corporate name of the City as plaintiff.
4-12-030. Corporate Violations.
A corporation violating any City ordinance may be complained against the same as a natural
person pursuant to the pleading and procedures set forth at Utah Code Ann. '' 10-7-69, et seq., as
amended.
4-12-040. Citation.
Any peace officer, in lieu of taking a person into custody, or any City official charged with the
enforcement of the laws of this City, may issue and deliver a citation requiring any person subject to
arrest or prosecution on a misdemeanor or infraction charge to appear at the court of the magistrate
before whom the person could be taken pursuant to law if the person had been arrested.
4-12-050. Contents of Citation.
(a) If a citation is issued pursuant to this Chapter, the peace officer or City official shall issue
one (1) copy to the person cited and shall within five (5) days, file a duplicate copy with the court specified
in the citation.
(b) Each copy of the citation issued under authority of this Chapter shall contain:
(1) The name of the court before which the person is to appear.
(2) The name of the person cited.
(3) A brief description of the offense charged.
(4) The date, time and place at which the offense is alleged to have occurred.
(5) The date on which the citation was issued.
(6) The name of the peace officer or public official who issued the citation, and the
name of the arresting person if an arrest was made by a private party and the citation was issued
in lieu of taking the arrested person before a magistrate.
(7) The time and date on or before and after which the person is to appear.
(8) The address of the court in which the person is to appear.
(9) A certification above the signature of the officer issuing the citation in
substantially the following language: "I certify that a copy of this citation or information
(Summons and Complaint) was duly served upon the defendant according to law on the above
date and I know or believe and so allege that the above-named defendant did commit the offense
herein set forth contrary to law. I further certify that the Court to which the defendant has been
directed to appear is the proper Court pursuant to Section 77-7-21, Utah Code Annotated, 1953,
as amended."
(10) A notice containing substantially the following language:
READ CAREFULLY
This citation is not an information and will not be used as an information
without your consent. If an information is filed, you will be provided a
copy by the Court. You must appear in Court on or before the time set in
this citation. IF YOU FAIL TO APPEAR AN INFORMATION WILL BE
FILED AND THE COURT MAY ISSUE A WARRANT FOR YOUR
ARREST.
4-12-060. Proceeding on Citation.
(a) Whenever a citation is issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the copy of the
citation filed with the magistrate may be used in lieu of an information to which the person cited may
plead guilty or no contest and be sentenced or on which bail may be posted and forfeited. With the
magistrate's approval, a person may voluntarily forfeit bail without appearance being required in any case
of a Class B misdemeanor or less. Such voluntary forfeiture of bail shall be entered as a conviction and
treated the same as if the accused pleaded guilty.
(b) If the person cited wilfully fails to appear before a magistrate pursuant to a citation issued
under this Chapter, or pleads not guilty to the offense charged, or does not deposit bail on or before the
date set for his or her appearance, an information shall be filed and proceedings held in accordance with
the Rules of Criminal Procedure and all other applicable provisions of the Utah Code Annotated or these
Ordinances, which information shall be deemed an original pleading; provided, however, that the person
cited may by written agreement waive the filing of the information and thereafter the prosecution may
proceed on the citation notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary.
4-12-070. Appearance.
(a) Any person receiving a misdemeanor citation shall appear before the Justice Court Judge
designated in the citation on or before the time and date specified in the citation unless the uniform bail
schedule adopted by the Judicial Council or Utah Code Ann. ' 77-7-21, as amended, permits forfeiture of
bail for the offense charged. The citation may not require a person to appear sooner than five (5) days or
later than fourteen (14) days following its issuance.
(b) Any person who receives a citation and who fails to comply therewith on or before the
time and date and at the court specified is subject to arrest. The Justice Court Judge may issue a
warrant of arrest.
(c) Except where otherwise provided by law, a citation issued for violations of Title 41 of the
Utah Code Annotated shall state that the person receiving the citation shall appear before the Justice
Court Judge who has jurisdiction over the offense charged. The Justice Court clerk and other
administrative personnel shall ensure that the Justice Court has jurisdiction and venue over such citation
and shall refuse to receive citations that should be filed in another court. Fines, fees, costs, and
forfeitures imposed or collected for violations of Title 41 which are filed contrary to this Section shall be
paid to the entitled municipality or county by the state, county, or municipal treasurer who has received
the fines, fees, costs, or forfeitures from the court which collected them. The accounting and remitting of
sums due shall be at the close of the fiscal year of the municipality or county which has received fines,
fees, costs, or forfeitures as a result of any improperly filed citations.
4-12-080. Wilfully Failing to Appear.
Any person who wilfully fails to appear before the Justice Court pursuant to a citation issued
under the provisions of this Chapter is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of
the charge upon which he or she was originally cited.
4-12-090. Delivery of Prisoner Arrested Without Warrant.
(a) When an arrest is made without a warrant by a peace officer or private person, the
person arrested shall be taken without unnecessary delay to the Justice Court Judge, except as provided
in Subsection (c). An information stating the charge against the person shall be made before the Justice
Court Judge.
(b) If the Justice Court Judge is not available, the arrested person shall be taken before the
magistrate within Davis County who is nearest to the scene of the alleged offense or nearest to the jail
under Subsection (c), who may act as committing magistrate for arraigning the accused, setting bail, or
issuing warrants.
(c) If the arrested person under Subsection (a) must be transported from jail to a Justice
Court Judge, the person may be taken before the magistrate nearest to the jail rather than the Justice
Court Judge specified in Subsection (a) for arraignment, setting bail, or issuing warrants.
(d) The case shall then be transferred to the court having jurisdiction. This Section does not
confer jurisdiction upon a court unless otherwise provided by law.
(e) Any officer or person violating this Section is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
4-12-100. Transfer of Case.
The Justice Court Judge may, upon the motion of either the defense attorney or prosecuting
attorney, based on a lack of territorial jurisdiction or the disqualification of the Judge, transfer cases to the
nearest justice court or the nearest district court within Davis County.
4-12-110. Bail Forfeiture.
With the approval of the Justice Court and in accordance with the procedures set forth in Title 77
of the Utah Code Annotated, a person may voluntarily forfeit bail without appearance being required, in
any case of a Class B misdemeanor or less. Such voluntary forfeiture of bail shall be entered as a
conviction and treated the same as if the accused pleaded guilty.
4-12-120. Successive Actions Permitted.
Pursuant to Utah Code Ann. ' 10-7-65, as amended, no prosecution, recovery, or acquittal for the
violation of any City ordinance shall constitute a defense to any other prosecution of the same person for
any other violation of any such ordinance although the different causes of action existed at the same time
and if united would not have exceeded the jurisdiction of the Justice Court.
TITLE 5
REVENUE AND FINANCE
CHAPTER 5-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 5-03: ACCOUNTS AND ACCOUNTING
CHAPTER 5-06: BUDGETS
CHAPTER 5-09: EXPENDITURES AND APPROPRIATIONS
CHAPTER 5-12: PROPERTY TAX
CHAPTER 5-15: SALES AND USE TAX
CHAPTER 5-18: TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
CHAPTER 5-20: TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
CHAPTER 5-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
5-01-010. Budget Officer.
5-01-020. City Recorder.
5-01-030. City Treasurer.
5-01-040. Unlawful Conduct.
5-01-010. Budget Officer.
The City Administrator is hereby appointed as the Budget Officer of the City and shall
perform all duties required of such position as set forth in the Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for
Utah Cities.
5-01-020. City Recorder.
The City Recorder, as ex officio City Auditor, shall perform such duties regarding revenue
and finance matters for the City as set forth in Title 3 and as otherwise set forth herein and in the
Utah Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Cities.
5-01-030. City Treasurer.
The City Treasurer shall perform such duties regarding revenue and finance matters for
the City as set forth in Title 3 and as otherwise set forth herein and in the Uniform Fiscal
Procedures Act for Utah Cities.
5-01-040. Unlawful Conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commingle City funds with his or her own money
and whenever it shall appear that the Treasurer or any other officer is making profit out of public
money or is using the same for any purpose not authorized by law, such officer shall be
suspended from office and subject to disciplinary proceedings up to and including termination in
accordance with the City's disciplinary procedures.
Chapter 5-20: Telecommunications Tax
5-20-010 Definitions.
5-20-020 Levy of tax.
5-20-030 Rate.
5-20-040 Rate limitation and exemption therefrom.
5-20-050 Effective date of tax levy.
5-20-060 Changes in Rate or Repeal of the Tax.
5-20-070 Interlocal Agreement for collection of the tax.
5-20-080 Repeal of inconsistent taxes and fees.
5-20-10 Definitions.
As used in this ordinance:
(1) “Commission” means the State Tax Commission.
(2) (a) Subject to Subsections (2) (b) and (c), “customer” means the person who is
obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service
received under the contract.
(b) For purposes of this ordinance, “customer” means:
(i) the person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications
provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract; or
(ii) if the end user is not the person described in Subsection (2) (b) (i), the end
user of telecommunications service.
(c) “Customer” does not include a reseller:
(i) of telecommunications service; or
(ii) for mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an
agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider’s licensed service
area.
(3) (a) “End user” means the person who uses a telecommunications service.
(b) For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is not
an individual, “end user” means the individual who uses the telecommunications service on behalf
of the person who is provided the telecommunications service.
(4) “Gross Receipts attributed to the municipality” means those gross receipts
from a transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the municipality for the
purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah Code Title 59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act
and determined in accordance with Utah Code section 59-12-207.
(5) “Gross receipts from telecommunications service” means the revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered except for
amounts collected or paid as:
(a) a tax, fee, or charge:
(i) imposed by a governmental entity;
(ii) separately identified as a tax, fee, or charge in the transaction with the
customer for the telecommunications service; and
(iii) imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
(b) sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a customer
under Title 59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act; or
(c) interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications provider
on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when payment is due.
(6) “Mobile telecommunications service” is as defined in the Mobile
Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 124.
(7) “Municipality” means Woods Cross City.
(8) “Place of primary use”:
(a) for telecommunications service other than mobile telecommunications
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2004
Title 5, Page 17
service, means the street address representative of where the customer’s use of the
telecommunications service primarily occurs, which shall be:
(i) the residential street address of the customer; or
(ii) the primary business street address of the customer; or
(b) for mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the Mobile
Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 124.
(9) Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, “service address” means:
(a) if the location described in this Subsection (9) (a) is known, the location of the
telecommunications equipment:
(i) to which a call is charged; and
(ii) from which the call originates or terminates;
(b) if the location described in Subsection (9) (a) is not known but the location
described in this Subsection (8) (b) is known, the location of the origination point of the signal of
the telecommunications service first identified by:
(i) the telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
(ii) if the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the
telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications provider from its
service provider; or
(c) if the locations described in Subsection (9) (a) or (b) are not known, the location of a
customer’s place of primary use.
(8) (a) Subject to Subsections (9) (b) and (9) (c), “telecommunications provider”
means a person that:
(i) owns, controls, operates, or manages a telecommunications service; or
(ii) engages in an activity described in Subsection (9) (a) (i) for the shared use
with or resale to any person of the telecommunications service.
(b) A person described in Subsection (9) (a) is a telecommunications provider whether or
not the Public Service Commission of Utah regulates:
(i) that person; or
(ii) the telecommunications service that the person owns, controls, operates, or
manages.
(c) “Telecommunications provider” does not include an aggregator as defined in
Utah Code Section 54-8b-2.
(10) “Telecommunications service” means:
(a) telephone service, as defined in Utah Code Section 59-12-102, other than
mobile telecommunications service, that originates and terminates within the boundaries of this
state; and
(b) mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah Code Section 59-12-102
(i) that originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state; and
(ii) only to the extent permitted by the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing
Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 116 et seq.
5-20-020 Levy of tax.
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to this municipality.
5-20-030 Rate
The rate of the tax levy shall be 2 % of the telecommunication provider’s gross
receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed to the municipality subject to the
following:
If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than this municipality then the rate
imposed on the gross receipts for telecommunications services shall be the lower of (1) the rate
imposed by the taxing jurisdiction in which the transaction is located or (2) the rate for non-mobile
telecommunication services shall be the rate imposed by the municipality in which the customers
service address is located; or for mobile telecommunications service, the rate imposed by the
municipality of the customer’s primary place of use.
.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2004
Title 5, Page 18
5-20-040 Rate limitation and exemption therefrom
This rate of this levy shall not exceed 4% of the telecommunication provider’s gross
receipts from telecommunication service attributed to the municipality unless a higher rate is
approved by a majority vote of the voters in this municipality that vote in:
(a) a municipal general election:
(b) a regular general election; or
(c) a local special election.
5-20-050 Effective date of tax levy.
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of July 1, 2004 or the first day of any calendar
quarter after a 75 day period beginning on the date the Commission received notice pursuant to
Utah Code Section 10-1-403 that this municipality has enacted this ordinance.
5-20-060 Changes in Rate or Repeal of the Tax
This ordinance is subject to the requirements of Utah Code Section 10-1-403. If the tax rate
is changed or the tax is repealed, then the appropriate notice shall be given as provided in Utah
Code Section 10-1-403.
5-20-070 Interlocal Agreement for collection of the tax
On or before the effective date of the ordinance, the municipality shall enter into the uniform
interlocal agreement with the Commission as described in Utah Code Seciton 10-1-405 for the
collection, enforcement, and administration of this municipal telecommunications license tax;
5-20-080 Repeal of inconsistent taxes and fees.
Any tax or fee previously enacted by this municipality under authority of Utah Code Section
10-1-203 or Utah Code Title 11, Chapter 26, Local Taxation of Utilities Limitation is hereby
repealed.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal ordinance or fee which
provides that the municipality may recover from a telecommunications provider the management
costs of the municipality caused by the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rightsof-
way of the municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah Code Section 72-7-102
and is not related to the municipality’s loss of use of a highway as a result of the activities of the
telecommunications provider in a right of way, or increased deterioration of a highway as a result
of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right-of-way nor does this ordinance limit
the municipalities right to charge fees or taxes on persons that are not subject to the municipal
telecommunications license tax under this ordinance and locate telecommunications facilities, as
defined in Utah Code Section 72-7-108, in this municipality.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2004
Title 5, Page 19
CHAPTER 5-03: ACCOUNTS AND ACCOUNTING
5-03-010. Fiscal Year.
5-03-020. Accounts.
5-03-030. Accounting Records.
5-03-040. Financial Reporting.
5-03-050. Monthly and Quarterly Financial Reports.
5-03-060. Annual Financial Reports.
5-03-070. Independent Audit.
5-03-010. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year for the City shall begin July 1 of each year and shall end June 30 of the following
year.
5-03-020. Accounts.
The City shall maintain, according to its own accounting needs, funds and account groups in its
system of accounts as prescribed in the Uniform Accounting Manual for Utah Cities.
5-03-030. Accounting Records.
Accounting records shall be established and maintained, and financial statements prepared from
those records, in accordance with the Uniform Accounting Manual for Utah Cities as adopted and
maintained by the State Auditor, hereinafter the "Uniform Accounting Manual for Utah Cities."
5-03-040. Financial Reporting.
The City shall comply with annual financial reporting or independent auditing requirements as set
forth in the Uniform Accounting Manual for Utah Cities.
5-03-050. Monthly and Quarterly Financial Reports.
The City Recorder shall prepare and present to the City Council monthly summary financial
reports and quarterly detail financial reports prepared in the manner prescribed in the Uniform Accounting
Manual for Utah Cities.
5-03-060. Annual Financial Reports.
Within 180 days after the close of each fiscal year, the City Recorder shall present to the City
Council an annual financial report prepared in the manner prescribed in the Uniform Accounting Manual
for Utah Cities. This requirement may be satisfied by presentation of the audit report furnished by an
independent auditor if the financial statements included are appropriately prepared and reviewed with the
City Council. Copies of the annual financial report or audit report furnished by the independent auditor
shall be filed with the State Auditor and shall be filed as a public document in the office of the City
Recorder.
5-03-070. Independent Audit.
Independent audits of the City are required to be performed in conformity with Title 51,
Chapter 2, of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended. Within ten (10) days following the receipt
of the audit report furnished by the independent auditor, the City Recorder shall prepare and
publish at least twice in a newspaper of general circulation published within Davis County, a
notice to the public that the audit of the City has been completed and a copy thereof may be
inspected at the office of the City Recorder.
CHAPTER 5-06: BUDGETS
5-06-010. Budgets.
5-06-020. Tentative Budget.
5-06-030. Tentative Budget Requirements.
5-06-040. Budget Officer Estimates.
5-06-050. Supporting Data.
5-06-060. Budget Message.
5-06-070. Review of Tentative Budget.
5-06-080. Public Inspection.
5-06-090. Public Hearing.
5-06-100. Continuing Review.
5-06-110. Final Budget.
5-06-120. Filing and Public Inspection.
5-06-130. Amendments to Individual Budgets.
5-06-140. Operating and Capital Budgets.
5-06-150. Defined.
5-06-160. Tentative Operating and Capital Budget.
5-06-170. Estimates.
5-06-180. Supporting Data.
5-06-190. Public Hearing.
5-06-200. Review of Tentative Operating and Capital Budget.
5-06-210. Final Operating and Capital Budget.
5-06-220. Filing and Public Inspection.
5-06-230. Amendments to Operating and Capital Budgets.
5-06-240. Expenditures.
5-06-250. Appropriations.
5-06-260. Fund Balances.
5-06-010. Budgets.
The Budget Officer shall prepare for each budget year a budget for the general fund, including the
Class C and collector road funds, special revenue funds, debt service funds, and capital improvement
funds. The budget for each fund shall provide a complete financial plan for the budget year and shall
specify in tabular form the following: estimates of all anticipated revenues, classified by the account titles
prescribed in the Uniform Accounting Manual for Utah Cities; and all appropriations for expenditures,
classified by the account titles prescribed in the Uniform Accounting Manual for Utah Cities. The total of
the anticipated revenues shall equal the total of appropriated expenditures.
5-06-020. Tentative Budget.
The Budget Officer shall prepare for the ensuing year, on forms provided or approved by the state
auditor, and file with the City Council on or before the first regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council
in May of each year, a tentative budget for each fund for which a budget is required.
5-06-030. Tentative Budget Requirements.
The tentative budget of each fund shall set forth in tabular form the following:
(a) actual revenues and expenditures in the last completed fiscal year;
(b) budget estimates for the current fiscal year;
(c) actual revenues and expenditures for a period of six (6) to nine (9) months, as
appropriate, of the current fiscal year;
(d) estimated total revenues and expenditures for the current fiscal year; and
(e) the Budget Officer's estimates of revenue and expenditures for the budget year
computed in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Chapter.
5-06-040. Budget Officer Estimates.
(a) Expenditures. The Budget Officer shall estimate, on the basis of demonstrated need, the
expenditures for the budget year after a review of the budget requests and estimates of the department
heads. Each department head shall be heard by the Budget Officer prior to making the final estimates,
but the officer may revise any department's estimates as the officer deems advisable for the purpose of
presenting the budget to the City Council.
(b) Revenue. The Budget Officer shall estimate the amount of revenue available to serve
the needs of each fund, estimate the portion to be derived from all sources other than general property
taxes, and estimate the portion that must be derived from general property taxes. From the latter
estimate, the Budget Officer shall compute and disclose in the budget the lowest rate of property tax levy
that will raise the required amount of revenue, calculating the levy upon the latest taxable value.
5-06-050. Supporting Data.
Each tentative budget filed by the Budget Officer with the City Council shall contain the estimates
of expenditures submitted by the department heads, together with specific work programs and such other
supporting data as required herein or requested by the City Council. The City Council may require each
department head to submit a supplementary estimate of all capital projects which the department head
believes should be undertaken within the next three (3) succeeding years.
5-06-060. Budget Message.
Each tentative budget filed by the Budget Officer with the City Council shall be accompanied by a
budget message, which shall explain the budget, contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of
the City for the budget year, and describe the important features of the budgetary plan. The budget
message shall also set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous year in appropriation and
revenue items and shall explain any major changes in financial policy.
5-06-070. Review of Tentative Budget.
The City Council shall review, consider and adopt the tentative budget at any regular or special
meeting called for the purpose. The tentative budget may be amended or revised in such manner as is
deemed advisable prior to public hearing, provided that no appropriation required for debt retirement and
interest, reduction of any existing deficits, or otherwise required by law or ordinance, may be reduced
below the minimum required.
5-06-080. Public Inspection.
The tentative budget adopted by the City Council and all supporting schedules and data shall be
of public record filed in the office of the City Recorder, available for public inspection during regular
business hours for a period of at least ten (10) days prior to the adoption of a final budget.
5-06-090. Public Hearing.
At the meeting at which the tentative budget is adopted, the City Council shall establish the time
and place of a public hearing to consider adoption of the budget and shall order that notice thereof be
published at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing in at least one issue of a newspaper of general
circulation published in Davis County. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the tentative
budget at the time and place advertised at which all interested persons in attendance shall be given an
opportunity to be heard, for or against, the estimates of revenue and expenditures or any item in the
tentative budget of any fund.
5-06-100. Continuing Review.
After the public hearing on the tentative budget, the City Council may continue to review the
tentative budget and may insert new items or increase or decrease items of expenditures that were the
proper subject of consideration at the public hearing, provided that no appropriation required for debt
retirement and interest, reduction of any existing deficits, or otherwise required by law or ordinance, may
be reduced below the minimum required. The City Council shall increase or decrease the total
anticipated revenue to equal the net change in proposed expenditures in the budget.
5-06-110. Final Budget.
The City Council shall, by resolution or ordinance, adopt a final budget for the ensuing fiscal year
for each fund for which a budget is required herein before June 30 of each fiscal year, or August 31 in the
case of a property tax increase under Title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended. Upon final
adoption, the budgets shall be in effect for the budget year, subject to amendment.
5-06-120. Filing and Public Inspection.
A copy of the final budget for each fund shall be certified by the Budget Officer and filed with the
State Auditor within thirty (30) days after adoption of the same by the City Council. A certified copy of the
final budget shall also be filed with the City Recorder and shall be available to the public for inspection
during regular business hours.
5-06-130. Amendments to Individual Budgets.
The City Council may, upon the written request of one of its members or upon its own motion
setting forth the reasons therefor, review the individual budgets of the funds of the City for the purpose of
determining if the total of any of them should be increased. If the City Council decides that the budget
total of one or more of such funds should be increased, it shall follow the public hearing procedures set
forth herein. After the public hearing, the City Council, by resolution or ordinance, may amend the
budgets of the funds proposed to be increased to make the proposed increases which were the proper
subject of consideration at the hearing. Final amendments in the current year to the budgets of any funds
shall be adopted by the City Council on or before the last day of the fiscal year.
5-06-140. Operating and Capital Budgets.
The City Council shall adopt for the ensuing year an "operating and capital budget" for each
enterprise fund and shall adopt such type of budget for other special funds as required by the Uniform
Accounting Manual for Utah Cities in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
5-06-150. Defined.
For purposes of this Chapter, "operating and capital budget" means a plan of financial operation
for an enterprise or other required special fund, embodying estimates of operating resources and
expenses and other outlays for a fiscal year.
5-06-160. Tentative Operating and Capital Budget.
The Budget Officer shall prepare for the ensuing fiscal year and file with the City Council on or
before the first regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council in May of each year, a tentative operating
and capital budget for each enterprise fund and for other required special funds.
5-06-170. Estimates.
The Budget Officer shall prepare estimates in cooperation with the appropriate department
heads. Each department head shall be heard by the Budget Officer prior to making final estimates, but
the Budget Officer may revise any department's estimates as the officer deems advisable for the purpose
of presenting the budget to the City Council.
5-06-180. Supporting Data.
Each tentative operating and capital budget filed by the Budget Officer with the City Council shall
contain the specific work programs as submitted by the department heads and any other supporting data
required by the City Council. The City Council may require each department head to submit a
supplementary estimate of all capital projects which the department head believes should be undertaken
within the next three (3) succeeding years.
5-06-190. Public Hearing.
If within any enterprise fund, allocations or transfers which cannot be defined as a reasonable
allocation of costs between funds are included in a tentative operating and capital budget, a written notice
as to date, time, place, and purpose of such hearing is to be mailed to utility fund customers at least
seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
5-06-200. Review of Tentative Operating and Capital Budget.
The City Council shall review and consider the tentative operating and capital budgets at any
regular or special meeting called for the purpose. The City Council may make changes to the tentative
budgets as deemed advisable. Operating and capital budgets for enterprise or other required special
funds shall comply with the public hearing requirements set forth herein.
5-06-210. Final Operating and Capital Budget.
The City Council shall, by resolution or ordinance, adopt a final operating and capital budget for
the ensuing fiscal year for each fund for which such a budget is required herein before June 30 of each
fiscal year, or August 31 in the case of a property tax increase under Title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated,
as amended. Upon final adoption, the operating and capital budgets shall be in effect for the budget year,
subject to amendment.
5-06-220. Filing and Public Inspection.
A copy of the final operating and capital budget as finally adopted for each fund shall be certified
by the Budget Officer and filed with the State Auditor within thirty (30) days after adoption of the same by
the City Council. A certified copy of the final budget shall also be filed with the City Recorder and shall be
available to the public for inspection during regular business hours.
5-06-230. Amendments to Operating and Capital Budgets.
The City Council may, upon the written request of one of its members or upon its own motion
setting forth the reasons therefor, review any one or more of the operating and capital budgets for the
purpose of determining if the total of any of them should be increased. The City Council may increase the
total budget appropriation for any such funds by resolution at any regular or special meeting called for
that purpose, provided that written notice of the time, place and purpose of the meeting must be mailed or
delivered to all members of the City Council at least five (5) days prior to the meeting unless such notice
is waived in writing or orally during attendance at the meeting by any member of the City Council.
5-06-240. Expenditures.
Expenditures from operating and capital budgets shall conform to the requirements relating to
budgets specified in Chapter 5-09 of this Title.
5-06-250. Appropriations.
(a) Limitation. The City shall not make any appropriation in the final budget of any fund in
excess of the estimated expendable revenue for the budget year of such fund.
(b) Fund Excess. In determining the estimated expendable revenue of the general fund for
the budget year, there shall be included therein as an appropriation from the fund balance that portion of
the fund balance at the close of the last completed fiscal year, not previously included in the budget of the
current year, that exceeds the amount permitted herein regarding fund balances.
(c) Fund Deficit. There shall be included as an item of appropriation in each fund for any
budget year any existing deficit as of the close of the last completed fiscal year, not previously included in
the budget of the current year, to the extent of at least five percent (5%) of the total revenue of such fund
in its last completed fiscal year. If the total amount of the deficit is less than five percent (5%) of the total
revenue in the last completed fiscal year, the entire amount of such deficit shall be included.
5-06-260. Fund Balances.
(a) All Funds. The City may accumulate retained earnings or fund balances as appropriate,
in any fund as limited herein. Any fund balance in excess of five percent (5%) of the total revenues of the
General Fund may be utilized for budget purposes.
(b) General Fund. Any accumulated fund balance in the General Fund shall not exceed
eighteen percent (18%) of the total estimated revenue of the General Fund and shall be restricted to the
following purposes:
(1) to provide working capital to finance expenditures from the beginning of
the budget year until the general property taxes, sales taxes, or other applicable
revenues are collected, thereby reducing the amount which the City must borrow during
such period;
(2) to provide a resource to meet emergency expenditures; and
(3) to cover a pending year-end excess of expenditures over revenues from
an unavoidable shortfall in revenues.
(c) Capital Improvement Fund. Within a capital improvement fund, the City Council
may, in any budget year, appropriate from estimated revenue or fund balance to a reserve for
capital improvements for the purpose of financing future specific capital improvements, under a
formal long-range capital plan adopted by the City Council. The reserves may accumulate from
year to year until the accumulated total is sufficient to permit economical expenditure for the
specified purposes. Disbursements from the reserves shall be made only by transfer to a
revenue or transfer account within the capital improvements fund, under a budget appropriation in
a budget for the fund adopted in the manner provided herein. Expenditures from the above
appropriation budget accounts shall conform to all requirements of this Title relating to execution
and control of budgets.
CHAPTER 5-09: EXPENDITURES AND APPROPRIATIONS
5-09-010. Expenditures.
5-09-020. Purchasing Procedures.
5-09-030. Emergency Expenditures.
5-09-040. Transfer of Appropriations between Accounts.
5-09-050. Transfer of Appropriations between Departments.
5-09-060. Transfer of Special Fund Balances.
5-09-070. Interfund Loans.
5-09-080. Reduction of Budget Appropriations.
5-09-090. Lapse of Appropriations.
5-09-010. Expenditures.
All expenditures by any department must conform with the department budget. No appropriation
may be encumbered and no expenditure may be made against any department appropriation unless
there is sufficient unencumbered balance in the department's appropriation, except in the cases of
emergency as provided herein. City officers or employees shall not make or incur expenditures or
encumbrances in excess of total appropriations for any department in the budget as adopted or
subsequently amended. Any obligation contracted by any such officer or employee shall not be or
become valid or enforceable against the City. No check or warrant to cover any claim against any
appropriation shall be drawn until the claim has been processed as provided herein.
5-09-020. Purchasing Procedures.
All purchases or encumbrances shall be made in accordance with the purchasing procedures set
forth in the Title 3 of this Code. All encumbrances reported as outstanding as of the fiscal year-end shall
be supported by a purchase order issued on or before the last day of the fiscal year and approved by the
City.
5-09-030. Emergency Expenditures.
In the event the City Council determines that an emergency exists, such as widespread damage
from fire, flood or earthquake, and that the emergency necessitates the expenditure of money in excess
of the budget of the general fund, the City Council may by resolution or ordinance amend the budget and
authorize such expenditures and incur such deficits in the fund balance of the general fund as may be
reasonably necessary to meet the emergency.
5-09-040. Transfer of Appropriations between Accounts.
Upon written consent of the Budget Officer, the head of any department may transfer any
unencumbered or unexpended appropriation balance or any portion thereof from one expenditure
account to another within the department during the budget year. Upon written consent of the Budget
Officer, the head of any department may permit an excess expenditure of one or more line items provided
the total of all excess expenditures or encumbrances do not exceed total unused appropriations within the
department at the close of the budget year.
5-09-050. Transfer of Appropriations between Departments.
At the request of the Budget Officer, or upon its own initiative, the City Council by resolution may
transfer any unencumbered or unexpended appropriation balance or portion thereof from one department
fund to the same fund of another department, provided that no appropriation for debt retirement and
interest, reduction of deficit, or other appropriation required by law or ordinance shall be reduced below
the minimum required.
5-09-060. Transfer of Special Fund Balances.
Whenever the necessity for maintaining any special fund of the City ceases to exist and a
balance remains in the fund, the City Council shall authorize the transfer of the balance to the fund
balance account in the general fund of the City except as follows.
(a) Special Assessment Fund. Any balance remaining in a special assessment fund and any
unrequired balance in its special improvements guarantee fund shall be treated in the manner provided in
Title 17A of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, regarding municipal improvement districts.
(b) Capital Fund. Any balance remaining in a capital improvements or capital projects fund
shall be transferred to the appropriate debt service fund or other fund as the bond ordinance may require
and otherwise to the fund balance account in the general fund.
(c) Trust Fund. Whenever any balance held in a trust fund for a specific purpose, other than
cemetery perpetual care, is to be transferred because its original purpose or restriction has ceased to
exist, a public hearing shall be held in a manner set forth in this Title. Published notice of the public
hearing shall invite those persons who contributed to the fund to appear at the hearing. If the City Council
determines the fund balance amounts are refundable to the original contributors, a thirty (30) day period
following the hearing shall be allowed for persons having an interest in the fund to file with the City
Council a verified claim for the amount of each claimant's contribution. Any claim not so filed shall be
forever barred. Any balance remaining after refunds to eligible contributors shall be transferred to the
fund balance account in the general fund.
5-09-070. Interfund Loans.
The City Council may authorize interfund loans from one fund to another at such interest rates
and upon such repayment terms and conditions as it may prescribe, and with available cash in any fund,
may purchase or otherwise acquire for investment unmatured bonds of the City or of any fund of the City,
subject to restrictions imposed by applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations.
5-09-080. Reduction of Budget Appropriations.
The total budget appropriation of any department may be reduced for purposes other than
transfers to another department by resolution of the City Council. Notice of the proposed action must be
given to all members of the City Council at least five (5) days before such action, unless such notice is
waived in writing or orally during attendance at the meeting by any member of the City Council.
5-09-090. Lapse of Appropriations.
All unexpended or unencumbered appropriations except capital projects fund appropriations shall
lapse at the end of the budget year.

CHAPTER 5-12: PROPERTY TAX
5-12-010. Property Tax Levy.
5-12-020. Computation of Levy.
5-12-030. Apportionment of Levy.
5-12-010. Property Tax Levy.
The City Council shall by resolution or ordinance set the real and personal property tax levy for
various City purposes before June 22 of each year, or August 17 in the case of a property tax rate
increase under Title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, unless an appropriate later date has
been approved by the State Tax Commission.
5-12-020. Computation of Levy.
In computing the total levy, the City Council shall determine the requirements of each fund for
which property taxes are to be levied and shall specify in its ordinance or resolution adopting the levy the
amount apportioned to each fund. The combined levies for all purposes in any year, excluding the
retirement of general obligation bonds and the payment of any interest and taxes expressly authorized by
law to be levied in addition, may not exceed .007 per dollar of taxable value of taxable property.
5-12-030. Apportionment of Levy.
The proceeds of the levy apportioned for general fund purposes shall be credited as revenue in
the general fund. The proceeds of the levy apportioned for special fund purposes shall be credited to the
appropriate accounts in the applicable special funds.

CHAPTER 5-15: SALES AND USE TAX
5-15-010. Purpose.
5-15-020. Sales Tax.
5-15-030. Use Tax.
5-15-040. Exemption from Tax.
5-15-050. Tax Paid.
5-15-060. Point of Sale.
5-15-070. State Tax Collection Provisions.
5-15-080. State Tax Commission Contract.
5-15-090. Distribution of Tax Revenue.
5-15-010. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide the City with an added source of revenue to thereby
assist the City in meeting its growing financial needs. It is intended that this added revenue be used to
the greatest possible extent by the City to finance its capital outlay requirements and to service its bonded
indebtedness. The provisions of this Chapter are intended and shall be interpreted to be in compliance
with the Local Sales and Use Tax Act, set forth at Utah Code Ann. '' 59-12-201, et seq., as amended, and
other applicable provisions of State law.
5-15-020. Sales Tax.
There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of items
listed in Utah Code Ann. ' 59-12-103, as amended, made within the City at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the purchase price paid or charged.
5-15-030. Use Tax.
There is hereby levied and there shall be collected and paid an excise tax on the storage, use, or
other consumption within the City of tangible personal property or any items listed in Utah Code Ann. ' 59-
12-103, as amended, made within the City at the rate of one percent (1%) of the purchase price paid or
charged.
5-15-040. Exemption from Tax.
The sale, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the purchase price or
the cost of which has been subject to sales or use tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in
accordance with the Local Sales and Use Tax Act, by any county other than Davis County, or city or town
in this State, shall be exempt from the tax due under this Ordinance.
5-15-050. Tax Paid.
The amount of any tax paid under the State Sales and Use Tax Act, set forth at Utah Code Ann. ''
59-12-101, et seq., as amended, shall not be included as a part of the purchase price paid or charged for
a taxable item.
5-15-060. Point of Sale.
For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales shall be presumed to have been consummated at
the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer
or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state
destination. If a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of
business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under the
rules and regulations of the Utah State Tax Commission.
5-15-070. State Tax Collection Provisions.
The Tax Collection provisions set forth in Part I, Chapter 12, Title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated,
as amended, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this
Ordinance as though fully set forth herein, except those provisions which are inconsistent with the
provisions of the Local Sales and Use Tax Act or this Title. Whenever the State of Utah is named or
referred to as the "taxing agency," the name of Woods Cross City shall be substituted therefor, provided
that such substitution shall not be required when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State
Tax Commission or of the Constitution of Utah, or when the result of the substitution would require action
to be taken by or against the City or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax
Commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Chapter. Any
amendments made to Part I, Chapter 12, Title 59 of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, which would
be applicable to the City as set forth herein are incorporated herein by this reference and shall be
effective upon the date they are effective as a Utah statute.
5-15-080. State Tax Commission Contract.
The City has entered into an agreement with the State Tax Commission for the Commission to
perform all functions incident to the administration, operation and enforcement of the Sales and Use Tax
Ordinance of the City without interference from the City, provided that the City may be allowed to
intervene in accordance with the provisions and restrictions of Utah Code Ann. ' 59-12-209, as amended.
That agreement is hereby confirmed and the Mayor is hereby authorized to enter into such
supplementary agreement(s) with the State Tax Commission which may be necessary for the continued
administration, operation and enforcement of the Sales and Use Tax Ordinance of the City.
5-15-090. Distribution of Tax Revenue.
The City shall distribute its sales or use tax revenues by means other than point of sale or use in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Utah Code Ann. ' 59-12-205, as amended.

CHAPTER 5-18: TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
5-18-010. Definitions.
5-18-020. Transient Room Tax Imposed.
5-18-030. Quarterly Tax and ReportBPenalties for Late Payment.
5-18-040. State Tax Commission.
5-18-010. Definitions.
For purposes of this part:
(a) APublic Accommodation@ means a place providing temporary sleeping accommodations
to the public and includes:
(1) Motel;
(2) Hotel;
(3) Motor Court;
(4) Inn;
(5) Bed and Breakfast establishment;
(6) Condominium.
(b) ARents@ include:
(1) Rents;
(2) Time share fees or dues.
(c) ATransient@ means a person who occupies a public accommodation for thirty (30)
consecutive days or less.
5-18-020. Transient Room Tax Imposed.
There is hereby imposed a transient room tax on the rent charged to transients occupying public
accommodations within Woods Cross City, in the amount of one percent (1%) of the rents charged.
5-18-030. Quarterly Tax and ReportBPenalties for Late Payment.
(a) The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be due and payable to the City Treasurer on a
quarterly basis on the first day of the second succeeding calendar quarterly period for which the tax is
imposed. Every person or business assessed a tax hereunder shall file with the City Treasurer, together
with the tax required herein, a report of such person=s or business=s gross revenue for the applicable
quarterly period at the time payment of the tax is due.
(b) Any tax or return due under this Chapter which is not paid or submitted when due shall
be subject to penalties and interest as set forth in Utah Code Ann. '' 59-1-401 and 59-1-402, as amended.
5-18-040. State Tax Commission.
The City may contract with the State Tax Commission to perform all functions incident to the
administration and operation of this Chapter.
TITLE 6
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 6-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 6-03: ASSESSMENTS AND LICENSE FEES
CHAPTER 6-06: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR DENIAL OF LICENSES
CHAPTER 6-09: BEER LICENSES
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 6, Page 1
CHAPTER 6-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-01-010. Definitions.
6-01-020. Business License Required.
6-01-030. Business License Official - Duties and Responsibilities.
6-01-040. License - Application Requirements.
6-01-050. Issuance of a Business License.
6-01-060. Renewals of Business Licenses.
6-01-070. Inspections.
6-01-080. Payment Dates of Business License Fees.
6-01-090. Term of Business Licenses.
6-01-100. License - Transfer of Name or Location - Fee.
6-01-110. License - Transfer to Other Persons Prohibited.
6-01-120. License - Posting and Display Required.
6-01-130. Reciprocal Recognition of Business Licenses.
6-01-140. Constructive Notice of Time Periods.
6-01-150. Penalty.
6-01-010. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable throughout this Title unless a different meaning is
clearly intended:
(a) Alcoholic Beverage Licenses means Class 'A,' Class 'B,' or Class 'C beer licenses,
nonprofit club licenses or liquor consumption licenses as defined in Chapter 6-12 of this Title.
(b) Applicant means any person applying for any license provided for in this Title. If the
person is a partnership or corporation, then each partner, officer or director is considered an applicant
and must qualify accordingly.
(c) Application means a formal written request for the issuance of any license permitted
under this Title.
(d) Authorized Officers means those persons authorized by the City or other entities to
inspect businesses and enforce the provisions of this Title or other applicable regulations, including peace
officers, ordinance enforcement officers, and employees of the Health Department, Fire District,
Community Development Department, Building Inspection Division, City Attorney's Office or the City
Administrator.
(e) Business means and includes all trades, occupations, professions or activities
engaged in within Woods Cross City, carried on for the purpose of gain or economic profit, except that the
acts of employees rendering service to employers shall not be included in the term "business" unless
otherwise specifically provided.
(f) Business License Official or License Official shall mean the Community
Development Director of Woods Cross City.
(g) Consolidated Fee Schedule means the schedule of fees adopted each year by
resolution of the Woods Cross City Council setting forth the various fees charged by the City.
(h) Employee means all individuals who work for an employer for salary or commission or
wages and who are subject to the direction and control of such employer.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 6, Page 2
(i) Engaging in Business includes, but is not limited to, the sale of real or personal
property at retail or wholesale, the bartering or trading of property or services, the manufacturing of goods
or property and the rendering of personal services for others for a consideration by persons engaged in
any profession, trade, craft, business, occupation or other calling, except the rendering of personal
services by an employee to his employer under any contract of personal employment.
(j) Fire Department means the South Davis County Fire Department.
(k) Health Department means the Davis County Health Department.
(l) Licensee means the person who has obtained any type of license provided for in this
Title. The term shall also include any employee or agent of the licensee.
(m) Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
(n) Place of Business means each separate location maintained or operated by the
licensee, whether or not under the same name, within the City from which business is engaged in.
(o) Violated or Violating means that there exists reasonable cause to believe that any
ordinance, code, statute or law has been or is being violated and is not limited to pleas of guilty or
convictions for violating said ordinances, codes, statutes or laws.
6-01-020. Business License Required.
Unless otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business within
the City without first having obtained a business license pursuant to this Title or to continue doing
business after a previously issued business license has expired without renewing said license and paying
any applicable fees and penalties. A separate license shall be required for each type of business defined
herein and for each place of business. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation.
6-01-030. Business License Official - Duties and Responsibilities.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Business License Official to:
(a) Enforce the provisions of this Title;
(b) Collect all business license fees and all alcoholic beverage license fees;
(c) Process all applications and renewals of all licenses provided for in this Title;
(d) Obtain any necessary approvals from the various City departments and divisions before
issuing any business licenses or alcoholic beverage licenses; and
(e) Deny, suspend or revoke licenses as provided in Chapter 6-06 of this Title.
6-01-040. License - Application Requirements.
(a) Applications for licenses and permits required by this Title shall be made in writing to the
License Official in the absence of provision to the contrary, which applications shall be made upon forms
provided by the City. The application shall show:
(1) The name of the person desiring a license;
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 6, Page 3
(2) The kind of license desired, stating the business, calling, trade or profession to
be performed, practiced or carried on;
(3) The class of license desired, if such licenses are divided into classes;
(4) The place where such business, calling, trade or profession is to be carried on,
giving the street number, if such business, calling, trade or profession is to be carried on in any
building or enclosure;
(5) The period of time for which such license is desired to be issued;
(6) That the proposed use of any premises by the applicant will not be in violation of
City zoning regulations, that the principals of the applicant's business are properly bonded if
bonding is required, and that the applicant will otherwise be in full compliance with all applicable
City, State and federal laws and ordinances;
(7) Such additional information as may reasonably be required by the City as
needed for the proper guidance of City officials in issuing the permit or license applied for.
(b) The truthfulness, completeness and accuracy of all of said information provided by
applicant shall be attested to by an authorized representative of the business.
(c) Failure to provide all required information or providing false or misleading information in
the application shall constitute grounds for denial of the application or revocation of a permit or license
which was granted in reliance on the information provided, and shall constitute a misdemeanor, if such is
done wilfully with the intent to mislead the City.
6-01-050. Issuance of a Business License.
(a) An applicant for a business license shall fill out the application in full and sign it as
verification, under penalty of law, that all information contained therein is true.
(b) The application shall be returned to the Business License Official along with full payment
of all business license fees.
(c) If required by separate ordinance, the Business License Official shall submit copies to
other departments, divisions or agencies of the City for their review.
(d) Only after signed, written approvals from any required department, division or agency are
obtained, the Business License Official shall be authorized to prepare a certificate of license for issuance.
(e) The certificate of license shall be signed by the Mayor and shall contain the following
information:
(1) The person's name to whom the certificate is issued;
(2) The business name;
(3) The type of business licensed;
(4) The date the license was issued;
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 6, Page 4
(5) The expiration date of the license;
(6) The address of the place of business licensed; and
(7) The business license number.
6-01-060. Renewals of Business Licenses.
(a) Each year, licensees shall renew their business licenses by completing an application for
a license renewal signed under penalty of law that all information contained therein is true and returning
it, along with the proper fees, to the Business License Official within the time period set forth in Section 6-
01-080(b) below. Renewal applications for businesses which required police checks of the licensees
under the original license application shall be submitted to the Police Department to determine whether
the licensee still meets the necessary qualifications.
(b) Upon receipt of the application fees, and Police Department approval, if applicable, the
Business License Official shall be authorized to prepare a certificate of license as provided in this
Chapter.
6-01-070. Inspections.
(a) Authorized officers shall be permitted to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this Title or any other applicable statute or ordinance, and may enter any building or may
enter upon any premises during regular business hours; or, if there are no regular business hours, the
officers or their authorized representatives shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.
(b) No owner, occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or
premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to properly permit entry
therein by the authorized officer or his representative(s) for the purpose of inspection and examination to
ensure compliance with this Title.
6-01-080. Payment Dates of Business License Fees.
(a) Business license fees for new businesses shall be due and payable upon making
application to the Business License Official. The application shall not be processed until the fee is paid.
(b) Business license fees for renewal businesses shall be due and payable on or before the
first day of January each year. If the license is not paid by January 31, a fifty percent (50%) penalty of the
amount of the fee shall be added to the original amount due. If the fee is still not paid by February 28, a
seventy-five percent (75%) penalty of the amount of the fee shall be added to the original amount due. If
the fee is still not paid by March 31, a one hundred percent (100%) penalty of the amount of the fee shall
be added to the original amount.
(c) Penalty fees may be appealed to the Community Development Director who may, for
good cause shown, refund all or part of the applicable penalty fee that has been paid. The decision of the
Business License Official and the Community Development Director may be appealed to the City Council
as set forth in Chapter 6-06 of this Title. The City Council may, upon good cause, recommend that all or
part of the penalty fee be refunded.
6-01-090. Term of Business Licenses.
All business licenses shall expire each year on December 31.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 6, Page 5
6-01-100. License - Transfer of Name or Location - Fee.
(a) Any person to whom a business license has been issued to transact or carry on some
business, calling, trade or profession at a definite location in the City may make application for the
transfer of his/her business license for the sole purpose of transacting or carrying on the same business,
calling, trade or profession as is therein mentioned at some other definite location in the City by himself or
herself by filing said application with the License Official, together with the sum of fifteen dollars ($15).
(b) Any person who wishes to change his/her business name shall also make application for
the change of name of such person's business license, for the sole purpose of transacting or carrying on
the same business, calling, trade or profession as is therein mentioned under a new name, by filing an
application with the License Official, along with the sum of fifteen dollars ($15).
(c) If the business in question has any other licenses which are required under this Title, or
its successor, the fee shall be thirty-five dollars ($35) for the change of address and thirty-five dollars
($35) for the change of name.
(d) The transfer fee shall be nonrefundable regardless of whether the application is granted
or denied. The Mayor, after receiving reports which shall be furnished by the License Official, the Police
Department or the Board of Health, when necessary, may in his/her discretion, deny or grant the transfer
of any or all of said licenses strictly within the above limitations.
6-01-110. License - Transfer to Other Persons Prohibited.
No license granted or issued under any of the provisions of any ordinance of the City shall be in
any manner assignable, transferable or authorize any person other than the person named therein as the
licensee to carry on or conduct the licensed business, except as may be otherwise specifically provided
by ordinance.
6-01-120. License - Posting and Display Required.
Every certificate of license issued shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place upon
the wall of the building, room or office of the store or place in which such licensed business, calling, trade
or profession is carried on, so that the same may be easily seen. When such certificate of license shall
have expired it shall be removed by the licensee from such place in which it has been posted; and no
certificate of license which is not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted upon the wall or
any part of any room, store, office or place of business after the period of such certificate or license has
expired.
6-01-130. Reciprocal Recognition of Business Licenses.
(a) A business license shall not be required for operation of any vehicle or equipment in the
City when:
(1) Such vehicle is merely passing through the City; or
(2) Such vehicle is used exclusively in interstate commerce.
(b) A business license shall not be required of any person whose only business activity in the
City is the mere delivery in the City of property sold by him at a regular place of business maintained by
him outside the City where:
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 6, Page 6
(1) Such person's business is at the time of such delivery licensed by the Utah city or
county in which such place of business is situated; and
(2) The authority licensing such business grants to licensees of the City making
deliveries within its jurisdiction the same privileges, upon substantially the same terms as are
granted by this Section; and
(3) Neither the property delivered nor any of the facilities by which it was
manufactured, produced or processed are subject to inspection by authority of the City for
compliance with health or sanitary standards prescribed by the City; and
(4) The truck or other conveyance by which such delivery is made prominently
displays at all times a license plate or symbol issued by the licensing authority to evidence such
business license. Such plate or symbol shall identify the licensing authority by which it is issued,
shall indicate that it evidences a license issued thereby, and shall specify the year or term for
which it is effective.
(c) Except as otherwise provided herein, a business license shall not be required of any
person who is duly licensed in another county or another city in Utah, has no business location in the City,
and the county or other licensing city would also reciprocate if the same business were located in the
City.
(1) Before reciprocity is granted, the person must fill out a business license
application and show proof of a valid business license in a qualifying city or county.
(2) Reciprocity shall not be granted to solicitors, mobile food units or any business
requiring police checks or police I.D. cards.
(d) The City Recorder shall, at the request of any person, upon payment of copying and
postage costs, certify a copy of this Section to any city or county of the State of Utah.
6-01-140. Constructive Notice of Time Periods.
(a) All businesses, owners, licensees, or applicants are obligated to be aware of and are
deemed to have constructive notice of all time periods and/or deadlines and the effect of noncompliance
with said time periods and/or deadlines as set forth in this Title relating to the application, issuance,
renewal, expiration, appeal or other action relating to business licenses, alcohol licenses, or any other
licensing matters set forth in this Title.
(b) Nothing in this Title shall be construed as requiring the City to take any affirmative action
to notify businesses, owners, licensees, or applicants of any time periods and/or deadlines or the effect of
noncompliance with said time periods and/or deadlines set forth in this Title relating to the application,
issuance, renewal, expiration, appeal or other action relating to business licenses, alcohol licenses, or
any other licensing matters as set forth in this Title.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 6, Page 7
6-01-150. Penalty.
(a) Any violations of this Title shall be a Class B misdemeanor.
(b) Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate violation.
CHAPTER 6-03: ASSESSMENTS AND LICENSE FEES
6-03-010. Definitions.
6-03-020. Provisions as Regulatory Measure.
6-03-030. License Fee - Required to do Business.
6-03-040. License Fee - Not Required When.
6-03-050. License Fee Additional to all Regulatory Licenses.
6-03-060. Fee - No Undue Burden on Interstate Commerce.
6-03-070. License Fees Levied.
6-03-080. Joint Licenses.
6-03-090. Branch Establishments.
6-03-100. License Fees - Debt to City - Collection.
6-03-110. Fees - Delinquent Payments - Penalty.
6-03-120. Information Not to be Made Public.
6-03-130. Recordkeeping Required.
6-03-140. Filing False Return Prohibited.
6-03-010. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings herein prescribed:
(a) Business means and includes all activities engaged in within the corporate limits of
Woods Cross City carried on for the business of gain or economic profit, except that the acts of
employees rendering service to employers shall not be included in the term "business" unless otherwise
specifically prescribed.
(b) Employee means the operator, owner or manager of said place of business and any
persons employed by such person in the operation of the place of business in any capacity, and also any
salesman, agent or independent contractor engaged in the operation of said place of business in any
capacity.
(c) Engaging in Business means and includes, but is not limited to, the sale of tangible
personal property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods or property, and the rendering of
personal services for others for a consideration by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft,
business, occupation or other calling, except the rendering of personal services by an employee to his
employer under any contract of personal employment.
(d) Person means any individual, receiver, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate,
firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, corporation,
association, society or other group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal,
non-profit or otherwise.
(e) Place of Business means each separate location maintained or operated by the
licensee within the City from which business activity is conducted or transacted.
6-03-020. Provisions as Regulatory Measure.
The ordinance codified in this Chapter is intended to serve as a means for the City to recoup the
administrative costs associated with issuance and renewal of business licenses issued within the City.
6-03-030. License Fee - Required to do Business.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in business within the City without first paying all license
fees required by this Chapter and any other City or State taxes, fees or assessments.
6-03-040. License Fee - Not Required When.
No license fee shall be imposed under this Chapter upon any person:
(a) Engaged in business for solely religious, charitable, eleemosynary or other types of
strictly nonprofit purpose who is tax exempt in such activities under the laws of the United States and the
state of Utah;
(b) Engaged in a business specifically exempted from municipal taxation and fees by the
laws of the United States or the state; or
(1) Not maintaining a place of business within the City who has paid a like or similar
license tax or fee to some other taxing unit within the state, and which taxing unit exempts from
its license tax or fee, by reciprocal agreement, businesses domiciled in the City and doing
business in such taxing unit.
6-03-050. License Fee Additional to all Regulatory Licenses.
The license fee imposed by this Chapter shall be in addition to any and all other taxes or license
fees imposed by any other provisions of the ordinances of Woods Cross City.
6-03-060. Fee - No Undue Burden on Interstate Commerce.
None of the license fees provided for by this Chapter shall be applied so as to occasion an undue
burden on interstate commerce. In any case where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for
license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, such person may apply to the City Council for an
adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce.
Such application may be made before, at or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed license
fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show the method of applicant's business,
the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business, and such other information as the Council may
deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The
Council may designate a person to conduct an investigation, comparing the applicants business with
other businesses of like nature. The Council or the Council's designee shall make findings of facts; shall
determine whether the fee fixed by this Chapter is discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to applicant's
business; and shall determine, or if investigated by the Councils designee, shall recommend to the
Council, a license fee for the applicant in an amount that is nondiscriminatory, reasonable and fair. If the
Council is satisfied that such license fee is the amount that the applicant should pay, the license fee shall
be fixed in such amount. If the regular license fee has already been paid, the Council shall order a refund
of the amount over and above the fee fixed by the Council. In fixing the fee to be charged, the Council
shall have the power to use methods which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with those
assessed on businesses of like nature.
6-03-070. License Fees Levied.
(a) Fees for Businesses Located in the City. There is hereby levied upon the business of
every person engaged in business in the City at a place of business within the City, an annual license fee
as set forth in the Citys Consolidated Fee Schedule.
(b) Fee for Applications filed after October 31st. The Business License Fee for any license
application filed after October 31st of any year shall be one-half () the amount of the fee that would be
payable for a full year license.
(c) Fee for Businesses Located Outside the City. There is levied upon every person
engaged in business in the City, not having a place of business in the City, and not exempt as provided
by Section 6-03-040 of this Chapter, or its successor, a license fee based upon the percentage of gross
sales and/or services made or performed from a place of business outside the corporate limits of the City
from which business within the City is transacted, and by applying such percentage to the fee which
would otherwise be assessed for such place of business were it located within the corporate limits of
Woods Cross City.
(d) Nonrefundable Application Fee. In the event any initial or renewal business license
application is denied by the City or is withdrawn by the applicant, the City shall be entitled to retain the
sum of thirty-five dollars ($35) as a nonrefundable business license application fee from any license fees
paid or payable to the City, unless another nonrefundable business license application fee is otherwise
provided for under the ordinances of the City.
6-03-080. Joint Licenses.
Whenever any person is engaged in two or more businesses at the same location within the City,
such person shall not be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses, but
shall be issued one license which shall specify on its face all such businesses. The license fee shall be
computed as if all said businesses were one business being conducted at such location. Where two or
more persons conduct separate businesses at the same location, each such person shall obtain a license
for such business and pay the required license tax for such business.
6-03-090. Branch Establishments.
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of business
engaged in, within the City, as if such branch establishment or location were a separate business, and
each license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the business licensed thereby at the location
or in the manner designated in such license, provided, that warehouses and distributing places used in
connection with or incident to a business licensed under this Chapter shall not be deemed to be separate
places of business or branch establishments.
6-03-100. License Fees - Debt to City - Collection.
Any license fee due and unpaid under this Chapter and all penalties thereon shall constitute a
debt to Woods Cross City, and shall be collected by court proceedings in the same manner as any other
debt in like amount, which remedy shall be in addition to all other existing remedies.
6-03-110. Fees - Delinquent Payments - Penalty.
License fees for renewal of an existing business license shall be due on or before January 1 of
each year. In the event any fee is not paid on or before such date, a penalty shall be assessed pursuant
to the provisions of Section 6-01-080 of this Title, or its successor section, which penalty shall become
part of the license fee imposed by this Chapter.
6-03-120. Information Not to be Made Public.
(a) Information furnished to the License Official, as required by this Chapter, shall not be
made public nor shall it be subject to the inspection of any person except the City Administrator or his or
her authorized agent, or to those persons first authorized to do so by order of the Mayor.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to make public or to inform any other person as to
the content of any information provided in conjunction with a license application, or to permit the
inspection of any such information, except as is authorized in this Section.
6-03-130. Recordkeeping Required.
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the payment of any license fee imposed by
this Chapter to keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years such books and records as will
accurately reflect the amount of any license fee for which he or she may be liable under the
provisions of this Chapter.
6-03-140. Filing False Return Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to make a return that is false, knowing the same to be so.
CHAPTER 6-06: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR DENIAL OF LICENSES
6-06-010. Denial of a Business License.
6-06-020. Reasons for Suspension or Revocation.
6-06-030. Enforcement.
6-06-040. Procedure for Suspension or Revocation.
6-06-050. Appeal Procedure.
6-06-060. Hearing.
6-06-070. Decision of the City Council.
6-06-080. Appeal of City Council Decision.
6-06-090. Licensing After Revocation.
6-06-100. Validity of Business License During Appeal.
6-06-010. Denial of a Business License.
After a person has made application to the City for a business license, the application may be
denied for any of the following reasons:
(a) The applicant does not meet the qualifications for a license as provided under this Title.
(b) For a new application, nonpayment of a returned check for the required license fees at
the time the application is made. For a business license renewal application, nonpayment of the required
license fees plus penalty three (3) months after it is due.
(c) Any reviewing department, division or agency of the City provided for in this Title has
disapproved the application pursuant to any applicable provision of the City Code.
(d) False or incomplete information given on the application.
(e) Noncompliance with any requirement or condition set by the Planning Commission or
Planning and Zoning Division, if applicable, under a conditional use permit or by the Board of Adjustment
or Planning and Zoning Division, if applicable, granting a variance or special exception.
(f) Noncompliance with any City, State or federal statutes or any Health Department
regulations governing the applicant's proposed business.
(g) Any other reason expressly provided for in this Title.
6-06-020. Reasons for Suspension or Revocation.
An existing business license may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons:
(a) The license does not now meet the qualifications for a license as provided under this
Title.
(b) False or incomplete information given on an application.
(c) The licensee has violated or is violating any provision of this Title or provision of the City
Code, State or federal statutes or regulations governing the licensee's business.
(d) The licensee has obtained or aided another person to obtain a license by fraud or deceit.
(e) The licensee has failed to pay any taxes or fees to the City when due.
(f) The licensee has refused authorized representatives of the City access to the licensed
premises for the purpose of an inspection or has interfered with such representatives while in the
performance of their duty in making such inspection.
(g) The licensee is not complying with a requirement or condition set by the Planning
Commission or Planning and Zoning Division, if applicable, under a conditional use permit; by the Board
of Adjustment or Planning and Zoning Division, if applicable, granting a variance or special exception; by
the City Council, or by agreement.
(h) Violation of this Title by the agents or employees of a licensee and violations of any other
laws by the agents or employees committed while acting as an agent or employee of the licensee; or
(i) Any other reason expressly provided for by ordinance.
6-06-030. Enforcement.
(a) The Business License Official shall have the authority without a hearing, to deny a
license for the reasons provided for in this Chapter.
(b) The Business License Official shall have the authority to suspend or revoke a license
without a hearing, for reasons provided for in this Chapter. However, the suspension or revocation shall
not take effect until the time period for appealing the decision as set forth in this Chapter below has
passed.
(c) The Business License Official may, on his/her own initiative or in response to complaints
from the general public or any City department or division, investigate and gather evidence of violations of
this Title or other circumstances which may give rise to a denial, suspension or revocation.
6-06-040. Procedure for Suspension or Revocation.
The Business License Official shall cause written notice to be given by personal service or
registered mail to the licensee at the licensees business address of his or her decision to suspend or
revoke a license, the reason for such decision, that operation of a business after the effective date of the
suspension or revocation is a Class B misdemeanor, the licensee's right to appeal the Business License
Official's decision and have a hearing, and the appeal procedure.
6-06-050. Appeal Procedure.
(a) Appeals of the Business License Official's decision to deny, suspend or revoke a license
may be made by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Council within fifteen (15) days of receipt of
the notice of denial, suspension or revocation.
(b) The notice of appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth with specificity the reasons for
which the appeal is taken.
6-06-060. Hearing.
(a) The hearing shall be at a time, place, and day set by the City Council, but not later than
twenty-one (21) days after receipt of the notice of appeal.
(b) At the hearing, the Business License Official or his or her designee shall present the
reasons for the decision to deny, suspend or revoke the license.
(c) The applicant or licensee, in person or through his or her attorney, may then
present any evidence showing reason why the decision was in error.
(d) All witnesses shall be sworn to testify truthfully. Either party is entitled to confront
and cross-examine any witnesses.
(e) Any oral or documental evidence may be received, but the Council shall exclude
all privileged, irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence.
(f) If the denial, suspension, or revocation appealed from is based on a finding by
the Building Department or Fire District that the business was or would be in violation of any
Uniform Construction Codes or on a finding by the County Health Department that the business
was or would be in violation of any County Health Department regulations, then that finding shall
be conclusive on the City Council, and the Council's decision may be based only on whether the
license was properly denied, suspended, or revoked because of the Building Department, Fire
District or County Health Department finding.
(g) If the denial, suspension, or revocation appealed from is based on a
determination by the Business License Official that grounds existed pursuant to this Code, the
City Council may examine the factual nature of the grounds and determine whether such grounds
are sufficient to sustain the decision of the Business License Official.
(h) The City Council does not have the authority to waive compliance with applicable
provisions of the Business License ordinances, nor can the Council extend deadlines set forth in
the ordinances or change the substance or form of the ordinances.
6-06-070. Decision of the City Council.
The City Council, after hearing all the evidence, shall announce its decision within fifteen
(15) days from the date of hearing. The Council may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the
Business License Official. The decision shall be in writing and shall be based upon findings of
fact.
6-06-080. Appeal of City Council Decision.
Any decision of the City Council made pursuant to the provisions of this Title may be
appealed by any aggrieved party to the District Court within thirty (30) days from when the written
decision is made.
6-06-090. Licensing After Revocation.
A person, whose license has been revoked, may not be issued a license for a period of
twelve (12) months after the revocation.
6-06-100. Validity of Business License During Appeal.
Throughout the administrative appeal process as outlined above, a licensee holding a
suspended or revoked business license may continue to operate his or her business in
accordance with federal, State and local laws pending final decision on the appeal, or until the
time for appeal has passed, whichever occurs first.
CHAPTER 6-09: BEER LICENSES
6-09-010. Definitions.
6-09-020. License To Sell Beer At Retail.
6-09-030. Retail Licenses - Classification.
6-09-040. Class A Licenses.
6-09-050. Class B Licenses (Restaurant).
6-09-060. Class C Beer Licenses.
6-09-070. Renewal of Existing Licenses.
6-09-080. Fees.
6-09-090. Expiration and Renewal.
6-09-010. Definitions.
All words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
(a) "Beer" means all products that contain sixty-three hundredths of one percent (.63%) of
alcohol by volume or one-half of one percent (.5%) of alcohol by weight, but not more than four percent
(4%) of alcohol by volume or three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) by weight and are obtained by
fermentation, infusion, or decoction of any malted grain. Beer may or may not contain hops or other
vegetable products. Beer includes products referred to as malt liquor, malted beverages or malt coolers.
(b) "Church" means a building set apart primarily for the purpose of worship in which
religious services are held and with which clergy is associated, and the main body of which is kept for that
use and not put to any other use inconsistent with its primary purpose and which is tax exempt under the
laws of this State.
(c) "Club" and "Private Club" means any non-profit corporation operating as a social club,
recreational, fraternal or athletic association, or kindred association organized primarily for the benefit of
its stock holders or members.
(d) "Commission" means the State of Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission.
(e) "Licensee" means any person(s) holding any beer, liquor or private club license in
connection with the operation of a place of business or private club in the City. This term shall also
include any employee of the Licensee.
(f) "Licensed Premises" means any room, house, building, structure or place occupied by
any person licensed to sell beer on any premises under this Title; provided, that in any multi-roomed
establishment, an applicant for a Class B, or Class C License shall designate a room or portion of the
building of such business for the sale of beer, which portion so specifically designated in the application
and in the license issued pursuant thereto shall be the licensed premises. Multiple dining facilities located
in one building and owned or leased by one licensed applicant shall be deemed to be only one licensed
premises.
(g) (1) ALiquor@ means: alcohol or any alcoholic spiritous, vinous, fermented, malt, or
other liquid, or combination of liquids, a part of which is spiritous, vinous, or fermented, and all other
drinks, or drinkable liquids that contain more than one-half of one percent (.5%) of alcohol by volume and
is suitable for use for beverage purposes.
(2) ALiquor@ does not include any beverage defined as a beer, malt liquor, or
malted beverage that has an alcohol content of less than four percent (4%) alcohol by volume.
(h) "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, business,
trust, or other form of business enterprise including the receiver or trustee, and the plural as well as the
singular number, unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed by the context.
(i) "Restaurant" means any business establishment where a variety of foods are prepared
and complete meals are served to the general public, located on a premises having adequate culinary
fixtures for food preparation and dining accommodations, and that is engaged primarily in serving meals
to the general public.
(j) "Retailer" means any person engaged in the sale or distribution of beer to the consumer.
(k) "Tavern" means any business establishment engaged primarily in the retail selling or
distribution of beer to public patrons for consumption on the establishment=s premises. "Tavern" includes
beer bars, parlors, lounges, cabarets, and night clubs where the revenue from the sale of beer exceeds
the revenue of the sale of food, although food need not be sold in such establishments.
(l) "Sell" or "To Sell" when used in this Title in any provision means any transaction,
exchange, or barter whereby, for any consideration, an alcoholic beverage is either directly or indirectly
transferred, solicited, ordered, delivered for value, or by any means or under any pretext is promised or
obtained, whether done by a person as a principal, proprietor, or as an agent, servant, or employee,
unless otherwise defined in this Title or the rules made by the commission.
6-09-020. License To Sell Beer At Retail.
(a) It shall be a Class B misdemeanor for any person to sell beer in bottles or draft without
first having procured a license therefor from the City and paying the license fee required by this part.
(b) It shall be a Class B misdemeanor for any person to sell beer after the revocation of the
license issued pursuant to this part.
(c) A separate license shall be required for each place of sale and the license shall at all
times be conspicuously displayed in the place to which it shall refer or for which it shall be issued. It shall
be unlawful for any licensee to violate any of the terms of his or her license.
(d) All licenses shall comply with the Utah State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and the
regulations of the Utah State Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission.
6-09-030. Retail Licenses - Classification.
(a) Retail licenses issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be classified under the
following types which shall carry the privileges and responsibilities hereinafter set forth in this Chapter:
Class A, Class B and Class C.
(b) All licenses of each class shall be numbered numerically commencing with one (1).
6-09-040. Class A Licenses.
(a) A Class A retail license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer on the premises described
therein, in original containers of a size not to exceed one (1) liter capacity, for consumption off premises.
(b) On Premises Consumption Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a Class A licensee to
permit the consumption of beer on any Class A licensed premises.
(c) Class A License Application. A person seeking a Class A License to sell alcoholic
beverages within the City of Woods Cross shall provide a written application on forms provided by the
City. The application shall be accompanied by:
(1) The complete Class A license fee;
(2) A copy of the applicant=s business license;
(3) Evidence of proximity to any school, church, public library, playground or park;
(4) A floor plan of the business, including where the applicant proposes to keep,
store and sell beer;
(5) Any other information the City may require to accurately evaluate the merits of
the application.
(d) Location Restrictions. No Class A license shall be issued to any person where the
premises would be located within three hundred (300) feet of a school, church, public library, public
playground or park as measured from the nearest entrance of the outlet by following the shortest route of
either ordinary pedestrian traffic, or where applicable vehicular traffic along public thoroughfares,
whichever is the closer, to the property boundary of a public or private school, church, public library,
public playground or park.
(e) Hours of Sale. A Class A licensee may sell beer beginning at the hour of 7:00 a.m. and
ending at the hour of 1:00 a.m.
(f) Sales Restrictions. Beer may not be sold, delivered, or furnished to any:
(1) Minor;
(2) Person actually, apparently, or obviously under the influence of any intoxicating
beverage or controlled substance;
(3) Known habitual drunkard;
(4) Known interdicted person.
(g) Employment of Minors. Provisions of this Chapter prohibiting possession of alcoholic
beverages by minors shall not apply to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age who are bona fide
employees in Class A licensed premises while under the supervision of a person twenty-one (21) years of
age or older who is on the premises.
(h) Unlawful to Permit Intoxicated Person on Licensed Premises. It shall be unlawful for any
person licensed to sell beer or for any of his agents or employees to allow intoxicated persons to remain
in or about any licensed premises.
(i) Records Requirements. Holders of Class A licenses shall maintain records which shall
disclose the gross sale of beer during each and every year. Such records shall be available for
inspection and audit by an authorized City employee at any time following the end of each year and for
eighteen (18) months thereafter. Failure of a licensee to properly maintain the required records or failure
to submit such records for inspection and audit shall be cause for suspension or revocation of a Class A
license.
(j) Beer as a Percent of Sales. Each Class A licensee shall maintain at least eighty percent
(80%) of its total business from the sale of products other than beer.
(k) Shoplifting Controls. A Class A licensee shall make every reasonable effort to limit the
potential for theft of beer from licensed premises. A clear, unobstructed view of all portions of the interior
shall be available at all times from a point within the licensed premises at or near the main public
entrance. A beer inventory shrinkage record shall be kept by the licensee and made available at any time
upon request to the Chief of Police or City Planner for inspection or audit. Failure of a licensee to
properly maintain the alcoholic beverage inventory shrinkage or failure to submit such records for
inspection and audit shall be a Class B misdemeanor and shall be cause for suspension or revocation of
a Class A license.
(l) Advertising Sale. It shall be unlawful for any Class A licensee to advertise the sale of
beer in violation of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
(m) There shall be no transfer of a Class A license from one location to another.
(n) Monetary Value of License. A person having been granted a Class A license shall not
sell, exchange, barter, give or attempt in any way to dispose of the license whether for monetary gain or
not. A Class A beer license has no monetary value for the purpose of any type of disposition.
(o) Restriction on Number of Licenses. The total number of Class A beer licenses in the City
of Woods Cross shall not exceed one (1) per each one thousand (1,000) residents of Woods Cross City.
(e.g. if the population of Woods Cross is 8,000, the total number of Class A licenses allowed would be 8.)
6-09-050. Class B Licenses (Restaurant).
(a) Before any establishment may sell beer at retail for on-premises consumption, it must
first obtain:
(1) A Class B license from the City of Woods Cross;
(2) An on-premises beer retailer license from the Alcoholic Beverage Control
Commission.
(b) Class B Licenses. A person seeking a Class B license to sell beer within the City of
Woods Cross for consumption on the premises shall provide a written application on forms provided by
the City. The application shall be accompanied by:
(1) The complete Class B license fee;
(2) A copy of the applicant=s business license;
(3) Evidence of proximity to any school, church, public library, playground or park;
(4) A floor plan of the restaurant, including consumption areas and an area where
the applicant proposes to keep, store and sell beer;
(5) A signed consent form stating that the restaurant will permit any authorized
representative of the Commission, City, City Police Department or Health Department
unrestricted right to enter the restaurant;
(6) Evidence that the business is carrying DRAM shop insurance coverage of at
least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate;
(7) Any other information the City may require to accurately evaluate the merits of
the application.
(c) A Class B license shall not be granted to an established business located within six
hundred (600) feet of any public or private school, church, public library, playground or park as measured
from the nearest entrance of the outlet by following the shortest route of either ordinary pedestrian traffic,
or where applicable, vehicular traffic along public thoroughfares, whichever is the closer, to the property
boundary of the public or private school, church, public library, public playground or park.
(d) The restrictions contained in Subsection (c) govern the issuance of a Class B restaurant
license unless the City Council determines that compliance with the distance requirements would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties or exceptional and undue hardships in the granting of a
restaurant beer license. In that event, the City Council may, after giving full consideration of all attending
circumstances and after compliance with public notice and public hearing requirements as specified in
Subsection (e), authorize a variance from the distance requirements to relieve the difficulties or
hardships, if the variance may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this Chapter.
(e) Class B restaurant license applicants wishing to request a variance by the City Council
from the proximity distance requirement stated in Subsection (c) must comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Payment of Fee. Any licensed applicant desiring variances provided in
Subsection (d) for which a special public hearing is required shall pay a fee therefor set by
resolution of the City Council before said hearing shall be set or advertised.
(2) Advertising. Notice of a public hearing shall be published once a week for three
(3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation. At a minimum, the advertisement
shall state the date, time, location and reason for the public hearing.
(3) Notice to Property Owners. Letters of notice of public hearing shall be mailed at
least ten (10) days in advance of the public hearing to all persons owning property within six
hundred (600) feet of the licensed applicant=s premises.
(4) Petition. The Class B restaurant license applicant shall circulate a petition to
each person owning property within six hundred (600) feet of the applicant=s business premises.
Such petition shall allow the affected property owners to indicate a lack of opposition to such a
license being granted to the applicant.
(5) Public Hearing. After satisfying the fee and notice requirements, the City Council
shall hold a public hearing to consider the granting of a variance from the distance requirements
stated in Subsection (c).
(f) Hours of Sale. A Class B licensee may sell beer beginning at the hour of 10:00 a.m. and
ending at the hour of 1:00 a.m.
(g) Operational Restrictions. Each person granted a Class B license and the employees,
management and personnel of the restaurant shall abide by the following conditions and requirements.
Failure to comply may result in suspension or revocation of the license or other disciplinary action taken
against individual employees or management personnel.
(1) A Class B retail license shall entitle the licensee to sell beer, on the premises
described therein, in any size containers not exceeding two (2) liters and on draft for consumption
on the licensed premises. Only bona fide restaurants shall be entitled to Class B licenses.
(2) All holders of a Class B license shall maintain records which shall disclose the
gross sales of beer and the gross sales of food served and any other items sold for consumption
on or off the premises during the semi-annual periods ending June 30 and December 31 of each
year. Such sales shall be shown separately.
(3) Each licensee shall retain all invoices, vouchers, sales slips, receipts and other
records and other commodity purchases from all suppliers. Such records shall be available for
inspection and audit by the City license official at any time following the close of the semi-annual
period, and for eighteen (18) months thereafter. Failure to properly maintain such records for
such inspection and audit shall be cause for revocation of the Class B license. If any audit or
inspection discloses that the sales of beer on the licensed premises are in excess of twenty-five
percent (25%) of the gross dollar volume of business for any semi-annual period, the Class B
license shall then be immediately suspended and shall not be reinstated until the licensee is able
to prove to the satisfaction of the City Council that in the future the sales of beer on the licensed
premises will not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross dollar volume of business.
(4) No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall sell or serve beer under
a Class B license.
(5) Beer purchased from the restaurant may not be removed from the restaurant
premises.
(6) An employee of a Class B licensee, while on duty, may not consume any
alcoholic beverage or be under the influence of alcoholic beverages.
(7) Each Class B licensee shall display in a prominent place in the restaurant:
(i) The Class B License issued by the City of Woods Cross and the
restaurant liquor license issued by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission;
(ii) A sign in large letters stating: "WARNING, THE CONSUMPTION OF
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PURCHASED IN THIS ESTABLISHMENT MAY BE
HAZARDOUS TO YOUR HEALTH AND THE SAFETY OF OTHERS.@
(8) There shall be no transfer of a Class B license from one location to another
without prior written approval from the Woods Cross City Council.
(9) Monetary Value of License.
(i) A person having been granted a Class B License shall not sell,
exchange, barter, give or attempt in any way to dispose of the license whether for
monetary gain or not.
(ii) A Class B beer license has no monetary value for the purpose of any
type of disposition.
(10) A person=s willingness to serve alcoholic beverages and/or beer shall not be
made a condition of employment as a server with a restaurant that has a Class B beer license.
(11) Each Class B beer licensee shall post a cash or corporate or surety bond in the
penal amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) payable to the City which the licensee has
procured and thus maintained for so long as the licensee continues to hold its Class B license.
(12) The bond shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney conditioned upon the
licensee=s faithful compliance with this Title and the rules of the Commission.
(13) If the ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) corporate surety bond is canceled due to
the licensee's negligence, a three hundred dollar ($300.00) reinstatement fee may be assessed
by the City. No part of any cash or corporate bond so posted may be withdrawn during the period
the license is in effect or while revocation proceedings are pending against the Licensee. A bond
filed by the licensee may be forfeited if the license is finally revoked.
(h) Sales Restrictions. Beer may not be sold, delivered, or furnished to any:
(1) Minor;
(2) Person actually, apparently, or obviously under the influence of any intoxicating
beverage or controlled substance;
(3) Known habitual drunkard;
(4) Known interdicted person.
(i) Restriction on Licenses. The total number of Class B beer licenses in the City of Woods
Cross shall be one (1) per one thousand (1,000) population (e.g., if the population of Woods Cross is
8,000 persons the maximum number of Class B Beer Licenses would be eight).
6-09-060. Class C Beer Licenses.
(a) A Class C beer license shall be required for all premises where the primary or main
business is that of selling beer for consumption on the licensed premises. A Class C license shall entitle
the licensee to sell beer for consumption on the licensed premises in any sized container. No person
under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall sell or serve beer under this license.
(b) The licensing and operation of a tavern as defined in Section 6-09-010 of the Woods
Cross City Code is strictly prohibited within Woods Cross City. Therefore, no Class C beer licenses shall
be issued within Woods Cross City.
6-09-070. Renewal of Existing Licenses.
All applications for renewal licenses filed by the holders of existing licenses shall be filed with the
license official at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the then issued license. Any person who
fails to file such application within the time limit shall close his licensed premises on or before the
expiration date of the then license and shall keep the premises closed for any and all business for the
sale of beer until the date his new license is issued by order of the Woods Cross City Council.
6-09-080. Fees.
Applications for retail beer licenses under this Chapter shall be accompanied by the fees
established by the Woods Cross City Consolidated Fee Schedule as amended.
6-09-090. Expiration and Renewal.
(a) All Class A or B retail licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this Title shall
expire on December 31 of each year and shall be issued for one (1) year. In the event renewal
fees are not received at the office of the license official by February 15 of each year when due,
the licensee must reapply for a beer license and pay a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the
fees due as part of the reissuance fee, in addition to any applicable beer license fees. In the
event the renewal fees are not received at the office of the license official by March 15 of each
year when due, the licensee must reapply for a beer license and pay a penalty of one hundred
percent (100%) of the fee due as part of the reissuance fee, in addition to any applicable beer
license fees.
(b) Procedure when Business Purchased. If any licensee sells his or her place of
business, the purchaser thereof may be granted a license to serve beer upon meeting all the
requirements of this Chapter.
Woods Cross Municipal Code November 2009
Title 6, Page 22a
CHAPTER 6-10 RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATIONS
6-10-010 Definitions.
6-10-020 Exemptions from Chapter.
6-10-030 Home Solicitation Sale Requirements.
6-10-040 “No Solicitation” Notice.
6-10-050 Duties of Solicitors.
6-10-060 Time of Day Restrictions.
6-10-070 Penalties.
6-10-010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply:
(a) “City” means Woods Cross City
(b) “Door to Door Solicitation” means the practice of engaging in or attempting to engage in
conversation with any person at a Residence within the City while making or seeking to make or facilitate
a Home Solicitation Sale or attempting to further the sale of Goods or Services.
(c) “Goods” means one or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise, perishables
of any kind, subscriptions, or manufactured products offered, provided, or sold.
(d) “Home Solicitation Sale” to make or attempt to make a sale of Goods or Services by a
Solicitor at a Residence within the City by means of Door to Door Solicitation, regardless of
(i) the means of payment or consideration used for the purchase;
(ii) the time of delivery of the goods of services; or
(iii) the previous or present classification of the Solicitor as a Solicitor, peddler,
hawker, iterant merchant or other similar designation
(e) “No Solicitation Sign” means a reasonably visible and legible sign that states “No
Soliciting”, “No Solicitors”, “No Salespersons”, “No Trespassing”, or words of similar import.
(f) “Residence” means any living unit contained with any building or structure that is
occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the City, together with the lot or
other real property on which the living unit is located. This does not include the sidewalk, public street or
public rights of way.
(g) “Services” means those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided or sold to
a person at a Residence.
(h) “Soliciting”, “Solicit”, or “Solicitation” means any of the following activities:
(i) seeking to obtain sales or orders for the exchange of Goods or Services
regardless of whether advance payment is sought;
Woods Cross Municipal Code November 2009
Title 6, Page 22b
(ii) seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase insurance,
subscriptions to publications or publications;
(iii) seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value for the
benefit of any person or entity;
(iv) seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for Goods or Services; or
(v) other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of Soliciting such
as hocking or peddling.
(i) “Solicitor” or “Solicitors” means a person(s) engaged in Door to Door Solicitation.
6-10-020 Exemptions from Chapter.
Except as otherwise governed by applicable state law, the following are exempt from the
requirements of this Chapter:
(a) Persons specifically invited to a Residence by an occupant thereof prior to the time of the
person’s arrival at the Residence.
(b) Persons delivering Goods to a Residence pursuant to a previously made order, or
persons providing Services at a Residence pursuant to a previously made request by an occupant of the
Residence.
(c) Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in conjunction with any
religious belief or political position regardless of whether Goods, Services or other consideration is offered
or given, with or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge or purchase.
(d) Persons representing charitable organizations. This charitable exemption shall also
apply to students Soliciting contributions to finance extra-circular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or
cultural programs provided that the Solicitation has been approved in writing by the school administration,
and that such student Solicitors carry current picture student identification from the school for which they
are Soliciting.
6-10-030 Home Solicitation Sale Requirements.
The provisions of Title 70C-5-101 through 70C-5-105 of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended,
are hereby adopted and by this reference made a part of the Woods Cross Municipal Code requirements
for Home Solicitation Sales.
6-10-040 “No Solicitation” Notice.
(a) Any occupant of a Residence may give notice of a desire to refuse Solicitors by
displaying a “No Solicitation” sign which shall be posted on or near the main entrance door or on or near
the property line adjacent to the sidewalk leading to the Residence.
(b) The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute notice to any Solicitor
that the inhabitant of the Residence does not desire to receive and/or does not invite Solicitors.
Woods Cross Municipal Code November 2009
Title 6, Page 22c
(c) It shall be the responsibility of the Solicitor to check each Residence for the presence of
any such notice.
6-10-050 Duties of Solicitors.
(a) Every person Soliciting shall check each Residence for any “No Soliciting” sign or placard
or any other notice or sign notifying a Solicitor not to Solicit on the premises, such as, but not limited to,
No Solicitation signs. If such a sign or placard is posted, such Solicitor shall desist from any efforts to
Solicit at the Residence or dwelling and shall immediately depart from such property. Possession of a
business license does not in any way relieve any Solicitor of this duty.
(b) It is a violation of this Chapter for any person Soliciting to knock on the door, ring the
doorbell, or in any other manner attempt to attract the attention the occupant of a Residence that bears a
“No Solicitation” sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in a
Home Solicitation Sale or Door to Door Solicitation.
(c) It is a violation of this Chapter for any Solicitor through ruse, deception or fraudulent
concealment of a purpose to Solicit to take action calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a
Residence.
(d) Any Solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a Residence or a dwelling to
leave shall immediately and peacefully depart the premises.
(e) The Solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical contact with or touch
another person without the person’s consent.
(f) The Solicitor shall not follow a person into a Residence without that person’s explicit
consent.
(g) The Solicitor shall not continue repeat Soliciting after a person has communicated clearly
and unequivocally their lack of interest the subject, Goods or Services of the Solicitor.
(h) The Solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures.
6-10-060 Time of Day Restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to Solicit at a Residence before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
Mountain Time, unless the solicitor has obtained express prior permission from the occupant of the
Residence to do so.
6-10-070 Penalties.
Any person who violates any term or provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and shall be punishable of a fine of not to exceed $1,000 and/or a jail sentence of not to
exceed six (6) months.
TITLE 7
PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE
CHAPTER 7-01: CITY-COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT
CHAPTER 7-03: NUISANCES
CHAPTER 7-06: CLEANING OF REAL PROPERTY
CHAPTER 7-09: DUMPING AND FILL REQUIREMENTS
CHAPTER 7-12: GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 7-15: GENERAL FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 7-18: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
CHAPTER 7-21: ANIMAL CONTROL
CHAPTER 7-24: NOISE CONTROL
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 7, Page 1
CHAPTER 7-01: CITY-COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT
7-01-010. Powers of City-County Health Department.
7-01-020. Adoption of Regulations.
7-01-030. Penalty.
7-01-010. Powers of City-County Health Department.
The City-County Health Department which has been created by Davis County and other
participating cities and towns located in Davis County and known as the Davis County Health Department
is hereby authorized and empowered to act within the incorporated limits of Woods Cross City in
accordance with the authority granted to a City-County Health Department in Title 26A, Chapter 1,
Sections 101 through 124, inclusive, Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
7-01-020. Adoption of Regulations.
The applicable and duly adopted regulations of the Davis County Health Department are hereby
adopted by this reference as ordinances of Woods Cross City, insofar as they are not in conflict with other
effective ordinances of the City not adopted by reference. This adoption by reference includes any such
regulations or amendments thereof adopted by the Davis County Health Department after the effective
date of this Chapter, unless repealed by further ordinance.
7-01-030. Penalty.
Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of the ordinances adopted in
Section 7-01-020 either by failing to do those acts required therein or by doing a prohibited act, shall be
subject to the penalty specified therein, or in the event no penalty is specified shall be guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 7, Page 2
CHAPTER 7-03: NUISANCES
7-03-010. Nuisance Conditions Designated and Unlawful.
7-03-020. Liability for Existence of Nuisances.
7-03-030. Creating or Maintaining Nuisances Prohibited.
7-03-040. Abatement of Nuisances - Community Development Director Powers and Duties.
7-03-050. Abatement of Nuisances - Notice Required.
7-03-060. Work Performed by City When - Costs.
7-03-010. Nuisance Conditions Designated and Unlawful.
Whatever is dangerous to human life or health and whatever renders soil, air, water or food
impure or unwholesome, are declared to be nuisances and to be illegal. This Section shall not be
construed to be exclusive as to what condition or circumstance constitutes a nuisance.
7-03-020. Liability for Existence of Nuisances.
Where a nuisance exists upon property and is the outgrowth of the usual, natural or necessary
use of property, the landlord thereof and such landlord’s agent, the tenant and his or her agent, and all
other persons having control of the property on which such nuisance exists, shall be deemed to be the
authors thereof, and shall be equally liable therefor, but where any such nuisance shall arise from the
unusual or unnecessary use to which such property may be put, or from business use to which such
property may be put, or from business thereon conducted, then the occupants, and all other persons
contributing to the continuance of such nuisance shall be deemed the authors thereof.
7-03-030. Creating or Maintaining Nuisances Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent or occupant, to create, aid in creating, or
contribute to a nuisance, or to support, continue or retain a nuisance.
7-03-040. Abatement of Nuisances - Community Development Director Powers and Duties.
In accordance with Utah Code Ann. § 10-8-060, as amended, any nuisance existing within
Woods Cross City may be abated in accordance with the procedures set forth in Utah Code Ann. § 76-10-
806, as amended, or as otherwise provided by law.
7-03-050. Abatement of Nuisances - Notice Required.
The Community Development Director may serve a notice in writing upon the owner, occupant or
agent of any lot, building or premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found, or upon the person
who may be the cause of such nuisance, requiring such person to abate the same in such manner as the
Community Development Director may direct, and within a reasonable time to be fixed in the notice.
Failure to give a notice as provided herein shall not relieve the author of any nuisance from the obligation
to abate such nuisance, or from the penalty provided for the maintenance thereof. However, nothing
herein shall be construed to require such notice prior to instituting an action for abatement of a nuisance
as set forth in Section 7-03-040, above.
7-03-060. Work Performed by City When - Costs.
In case of neglect or refusal of any person to abate any nuisance defined by ordinance, after
notice in writing has been served upon such person, as provided in Section 7-03-050, or its successor,
and within the time specified in such notice, it is hereby made the duty of the Community Development
Director to inform the City Council of the nuisance and to recommend appropriate action to secure the
discontinuance or abatement of the nuisance.

CHAPTER 7-06: CLEANING OF REAL PROPERTY
7-06-010. Purpose.
7-06-020. Definitions.
7-06-030. Weed Control.
7-06-040. Refuse Control.
7-06-050. Graffiti Control.
7-06-060. Inspections.
7-06-070. Notice of Violation.
7-06-080. Misdemeanor.
7-06-090. Citations, Injunctions and Other Relief.
7-06-100. Removal by City.
7-06-010. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the cleaning of real property, including the control of
weeds and removal of graffiti from property located within the City, in order to:
(a) Prevent fire hazards;
(b) Prevent the spread of vegetation not conducive to the public health, safety or welfare;
(c) Eliminate the presence of public nuisances, eyesores, and other objects, structures or
refuse not conducive to the public health, safety and welfare;
(d) Prevent the continued existence of unsightly or deleterious objects and structures upon
property resulting from lack of maintenance, repair or cleaning; and
(e) Prevent the unsightly effect of graffiti within the City and to discourage its continued
application.
7-06-020. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
(a) “Graffiti” means any form of unauthorized painting, writing, spraying, scratching, affixing,
marking or inscribing on the property of another, whether public or private, regardless of the content or
nature of the material used in the commission of the act.
(b) “Inspector” means the Woods Cross City Administrator, Planning Director, or the Davis
County Health Department Director of Health, or the South Davis County Fire District Fire Chief, or their
authorized representatives.
(c) “Owner” means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
(1) Has the legal title to any real property, premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without actual possession thereof; or
(2) Has charge, care or control of any real property, premises, dwelling or dwelling
unit, as tenant, lessee, legal or equitable owner, or as personal representative, trustee, guardian,
agent, or conservator of the person holding legal title.
(d) “Person” means any individual, public or private corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, joint venture, association, firm, trustee, executor of an estate, or other legal entity recognized
by law.
(e) “Refuse” means garbage, trash, rubbish, weed or grass clippings, dead animals, sludge,
liquid or semi-liquid waste, and other discarded materials, or materials stored or accumulated in an
unsightly manner for the purpose of eventually discarding or salvaging them, including unregistered
and/or junk vehicles, or materials that have served their intended purpose.
(f) “Weeds” means vegetation which is uncultivated, useless, unsightly, or which has
become a fire hazard or otherwise determined by the City to be noxious, dangerous or a nuisance,
including, but not limited to poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron) and those plants named in the Utah Noxious
Weed Act in Title 4 of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended.
7-06-030. Weed Control.
(a) No owner shall permit weeds on his property to exceed a height of six inches at any time.
(b) No owner shall permit poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison oak (rhus diversiloba), or
poison sumac (rhus vernix) to grow at any height on his or her property at any time.
(c) Weeds and noxious plants must be eradicated by chemicals, cutting or other acceptable
method, and all cuttings or dead remnants shall be promptly cleared and removed from the property.
(d) When an Inspector determines that the size, location, accessibility, or other
circumstances regarding certain property makes compliance with this Section impractical, the Inspector
may, in his or her sole discretion, issue an order permitting the owner to create fire breaks as required
and approved by South Davis County District, or otherwise exempt the property from the requirements set
forth herein as deemed permissible and nonhazardous to the public health and safety. Any such
exception or exemption permitted hereunder shall be in writing and issued to the owner of the property.
(e) When an Inspector determines that the weeds in a particular area pose a serious fire
hazard in view of their density, dryness, proximity to possible sources of ignition, and the effects of
prevailing winds and weather, then the owner of the property on which said weeds are present shall be
deemed in violation of this Section, regardless of the height of such weeds.
7-06-040. Refuse Control.
(a) No owner shall permit refuse to remain upon his property for longer than twenty (20)
days.
(b) When an Inspector determines that a particular deposit of refuse poses a significant
health hazard by reason of its potential for the spread of disease, the breeding of worms, insects or
rodents, or the contamination of a stream or other body of water, then said Inspector may order the owner
of the property on which said refuse is deposited, or the person who deposited it there, or both, to remove
said refuse within twenty-four (24) hours. If twenty-four (24) hours pass after the order is issued and such
refuse is not removed, the Inspector shall issue a Notice of Violation. In addition, the City Attorney may
seek a preliminary injunction enjoining continuation of such violation.
7-06-050. Graffiti Control.
(a) Reporting. City employees shall report graffiti as part of their job responsibilities.
Residents may also report graffiti within the City. Any person spotting graffiti within the City may report
the sighting to the Community Development Department, the City Police Department, or any City
employee. Any sighting not reported directly to the Community Development Department shall thereafter
be reported to the Community Development Department for enforcement and tracking purposes. Any
graffiti reports or photos prepared by the Community Development Department shall be forwarded to the
City Police Department for possible criminal prosecution and/or intelligence functions.
(b) Removal Required. In order to prevent the unsightly and dangerous effects of vandalism
and graffiti, it shall be the duty of every owner of property within Woods Cross City to keep his or her
property free from graffiti and evidence of vandalism. No owner of property in the City shall permit such
graffiti or evidence of vandalism to remain on his or her property after receiving written notice from the
City requesting removal.
7-06-060. Inspections.
An Inspector may from time-to-time enter and inspect real property for violations of this Chapter in
accordance with any warrant procedures required by law.
7-06-070. Notice of Violation.
(a) Owners of property on which a violation of this Chapter exists shall be served a Notice of
Violation in substantially the following form:
Please take notice that upon real property owned by you a condition exists which
is in violation of Title 7 Chapter 6 of the Woods Cross Municipal Code. This condition is
______________ (Here describe the violation and its location).
This condition must be eradicated, destroyed, or removed within __________
days after the date this notice is served; otherwise, you will be guilty of a misdemeanor
and the City may remedy this condition at your expense. Questions may be directed to
________, at _______, telephone __________. Served this _____ day of ________,
20_______.
Inspector ______________________.
(b) A reasonable time shall be given for the owner to bring his property into compliance with
this Chapter which shall not be less than ten days after Notice of Violation is served, but may be longer,
at the Inspector’s discretion.
(c) A Notice of Violation shall be served by the Inspector or his representative either
personally, by leaving the notice with the owner or a person at his residence of suitable age and
discretion, or by mailing, postage prepaid, to the owner, addressed to his last known post office address
as disclosed by the records of the Davis County Assessor, and proof of service shall be made under oath
by the Inspector serving a Notice of Violation and filed in the office of the Davis County Treasurer.
Service made by mailing shall be registered mail, and shall be deemed complete on the date on which a
notice thus served is deposited in the United States Postal Service system.
(d) The Notice of Violation shall list the person or office from which the owner may obtain
further information, and the address and telephone number of such person or office.
(e) The Notice of Violation shall be signed by the Inspector issuing it.
7-06-080. Misdemeanor.
The failure to control weeds, refuse or graffiti in the manner prescribed in this Chapter and within
the time set for compliance in a Notice of Violation shall be a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by fine,
imprisonment or both, as permitted by the applicable laws of the State of Utah and Woods Cross City.
7-06-090. Citations, Injunctions and Other Relief.
(a) The City may enforce the provisions of this Chapter by issuing a citation as provided by
Utah Code Ann. § 77-7-18, as amended.
(b) In addition to the misdemeanor penalty described above, the City may seek and be
awarded injunctive or any other remedy available at law or in equity.
7-06-100. Removal by City.
If any owner to whom Notice of Violation has been served does not eradicate, destroy or remove
the weeds, refuse or graffiti causing the violation within the time specified in the Notice of Violation, the
City Administrator may, at his discretion, cause such weeds, refuse or graffiti to be removed and
destroyed. If the City Administrator elects to cause such weeds, refuse or graffiti to be removed and
destroyed, he shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in their removal and
destruction and send a copy thereof by registered mail to the owner’s last known address. If the owner
fails to make full payment of the amount set forth in said statement within twenty (20) days of the date of
mailing the statement, the City Administrator or his designee may refer the matter to the Davis County
Treasurer for collection as taxes, as provided in Utah Code Annotated, Title 10, Chapter 11, as amended.
If the City Administrator does not refer the matter to the Davis County Treasurer, the City Attorney may
bring suit in an appropriate court of law to recover judgment for all costs incurred by the City under this
Section, together with attorney’s fees and court costs.

CHAPTER 7-09: DUMPING AND FILL REQUIREMENTS
7-09-010. Purpose.
7-09-020. Definitions.
7-09-030. Dumping.
7-09-040. Fill Permit Required.
7-09-050. Acceptable Fill Material.
7-09-060. Violations.
7-09-070. Construction Related Fill.
7-09-080. Contents and Conditions of Fill Permit.
7-09-090. Enforcement.
7-09-100. Penalty.
7-09-110. Fees.
7-09-010. Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the persons and
property in the City of Woods Cross, to protect and preserve property and property values within the City
and to insure that properties within the City are maintained in an attractive and aesthetically pleasing
manner by regulating dumping of fill material on real property within the City.
7-09-020. Definitions.
(a) “Construction and Demolition Waste” means waste building material, rubbish, or other
debris resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations on residential, commercial,
industrial, institutional, and governmental buildings, structures, improvements and pavements, including
but not limited to debris from streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, etc.
(b) “Disposal” means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing
of any Solid Waste or Hazardous Waste into or on any land or water.
(c) “Earth material” means any natural rock, natural soil, or any combination thereof.
(d) “Fill” means to deposit, or a deposit of, earth material placed by artificial or mechanical
means.
(e) “Generate” means the act or process of producing or creating construction and demolition
waste, earth material used as fill, hazardous waste and/or solid waste.
(f) “Hazardous Waste” means a Solid Waste or combination of Solid Wastes which, because
of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible
illness or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. This includes, but is not
limited to “Hazardous Waste” as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or agencies of the
State of Utah charged with regulation of solid and hazardous wastes.
(g) “Manifest” means the form used for identifying the quantity, composition, origin, routing,
and destination of material regulated by this Chapter during its transportation from the point of generation
to the point of placement, disposal, treatment, or storage.
(h) “Person” means any individual, public or private corporation and its officers, partnership,
association, limited liability company, firm, trustee, executor of an estate, the state or its departments and
political subdivisions, institution, bureau or other legal entity recognized by law.
(i) “Solid Waste” means any Construction and Demolition Waste, garbage, refuse, sludge
(including sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control
facility), or other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material
resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, or agricultural operations and from community activities but
does not include solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or in irrigation return flows or discharges
for which a permit is required under Chapter 5, Title 19, Water Quality Act, or under the federal Water
Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C., Section 1251 et seq. “Solid waste” also includes material defined herein
as “construction and demolition waste.”
(j) “To place” means to distribute, dump, dispose of, or deposit material on or at property in
the City.
(k) “To store” or “Storage” means the actual or intended placement or containment of solid
waste or hazardous waste on a temporary basis in a manner as not to constitute disposal of the waste.
7-09-030. Dumping.
(a) Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to place or store Solid
Waste in any location in the City with or without the permission of owner or occupant of the location,
except at a solid waste management facility licensed by the City, Davis County, or by the State of Utah.
(b) The following activities shall be lawful:
(1) It shall be lawful to place Solid Waste in approved containers serviced by a
licensed commercial hauler of Solid Waste or a licensed private hauler of Solid Waste.
(2) It shall be lawful to use fill for purposes of landscaping or construction on
property in the City if the following requirements are met:
(i) That prior to placing any fill on the property, a permit is obtained from the
City pursuant to the requirements of Section 7-09-040. A permit shall not be required for
small loads of topsoil, sand, or similar fill material used for landscaping or construction
purposes where the total quantity of material placed upon the property within any
calendar year does not exceed twenty-five (25) cubic yards. The fill material shall be
utilized on the site within thirty (30) days of its delivery to the site, and shall comply with
the “clean fill” requirements set forth in Section 7-09-050.
(ii) The use of and composition of the fill material does not violate any
provision of any local, state or federal law or this Chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful to do any of the following:
(i) To place or store Solid Waste in a container owned, leased, rented or
controlled by another person without the consent of that person.
(ii) To place or store any Solid Waste in any container owned or serviced by
the City where the regulations of the City or the Wasatch Energy Systems (the “landfill
facility”) do not allow the material to be received by or deposited therein.
7-09-040. Fill Permit Required.
Except as provided in Section 7-09-030 it shall be unlawful for any person to place or store fill at,
on, or within any site or property within the City without first obtaining a fill permit from the City. A
separate permit shall be required for each site and for any fill not specified within a permit previously
issued by the City. A fill permit may be issued by the City if the applicant complies with all of the
following:
(a) The applicant shall submit a fill plan. The fill plan shall include the following:
(1) A boundary description of the specific location(s) of the proposed fill site. The
City may require applicant to submit a meets and bounds legal descriptions.
(2) A description of each location or site from which the fill material will be
generated.
(3) The location of any existing or future buildings or structures on the property
where the work is to be performed and the locations of any buildings or structures on any lands
which are adjacent to the property or which may be affected by the proposed fill and/or grading
operations and drainage resulting therefrom.
(4) A detailed accurate description of the type and content of the fill material to be
placed at the proposed fill site.
(b) Upon review of the submitted fill plan the City Engineer may require additional
information depending upon the magnitude of the proposed fill and the possible impact upon adjacent
properties and/or public right-of-way. Such additional information may include:
(1) Site information for the site at which the fill will be deposited, including accurate
contours of existing ground, and details of terrain and how area drainage will be handled.
(2) Limiting dimensions, elevations or finished contours to be achieved in the
process of fill and grading the site, and proposed channels for drainage and related construction.
(3) Detailed plans of all surface and sub-surface drainage devices, walls, cribbing,
dams and other proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and the
estimated run-off of the area served by any drains.
(4) A soils engineering report and an engineering geology report consistent with the
currently adopted edition of the Uniform Building Code.
(5) All of the above information shall be provided and stamped by a licensed
engineer.
7-09-050. Acceptable Fill Material.
(a) It shall be unlawful to place fill at any site in the City which is not “clean” fill material within
reasonable standards of the construction industry in the State of Utah. Generally, “clean” fill material may
consist of soil and rocks and related inert earth material which is substantially free from concrete, wood,
roots, bark, tree limbs, grass clippings, yard refuse, and other similar materials.
(b) In any event, the following materials are not acceptable as “clean” fill material at fill sites
within the City:
(1) Material which is toxic or which may be characterized as Hazardous Waste.
(2) Material which may be characterized as “Solid Waste.”
(3) Material containing detrimental amounts of organic material.
(4) Material characterized as asphalt and related materials and products, the
composition of which includes oils or other petroleum based products.
(5) Rock, concrete, and other irreducible materials with a maximum dimension of
greater than twenty-four inches (24"). Rock, concrete or other irreducible material with a
maximum dimension of greater than twenty-four inches (24") shall not be brought on any fill site
and then reduced in size, by crushing, milling or otherwise, for use in fill on the site or elsewhere.
7-09-060. Violations.
In addition to the requirements set forth herein, it shall be unlawful, to do any of the following:
(a) To make a false statement to obtain a permit pursuant to this Chapter.
(b) To obtain a permit pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter and thereafter fill, or cause
the filling of, any property within the City in a location or manner which violates the conditions and
requirements of the fill permit.
(c) To place, use, or cause the placement or use of, materials as fill within the City which are
not permitted under this Chapter, any local, county, State or federal Solid and Hazardous Waste
Regulations, or which are in any manner inconsistent with the requirements of the fill permit.
(d) To refuse entry or access to the City Engineer, Building Official or their designee to the
site at which any fill activity is taking place.
(e) To violate any term, condition or requirement of a fill permit issued by the City.
7-09-070. Construction Related Fill.
Where a permit is applied for in connection with a site at which construction is anticipated by the
applicant, or at any site in the City at which construction might be anticipated in the future, consistent with
the City’s Master Plan, in addition to the requirements set forth above, the City may require compliance
with any and all excavation and grading requirements and regulations set forth in the Uniform
Construction Codes as adopted by the City.
7-09-080. Contents and Conditions of Fill Permit.
The City shall require the following as part of any fill permit issued by the City:
(a) Compliance with all regulations and requirements of this Chapter.
(b) A statement of conditions providing and specifying the following:
(1) The time for commencement and completion of the fill activities;
(2) A requirement that the fill work authorized by the permit be performed in a
workmanlike manner and in conformance with the terms and conditions of the permit;
(3) That if any historic or archaeologic remains are discovered while accomplishing
the activity authorized by the permit that the applicant immediately notify the City and appropriate
state and federal authorities regarding the same;
(4) That representatives from the City are authorized to inspect the fill material and
work at any time deemed necessary by the City, in its discretion, to insure that it is being or has
been accomplished in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit;
(5) That the permit does not excuse or obviate the need of the applicant to obtain
other federal, state or local authorizations required by law;
(6) That the permit does not grant any property rights or exclusive privileges;
(7) That the permit does not authorize any injury to the property or rights of others.
(c) A statement indicating that in issuing the permit the City does not assume any liability for
the following:
(1) Damages to the permitted project or uses thereof resulting from other permitted
or unpermitted activities or from natural causes;
(2) Damages to the permitted project or uses thereof as a result of current or future
activities undertaken by or on behalf of the City in the public interest;
(3) Damages to persons, property, or to other permitted or unpermitted activities or
structures caused by the activity authorized by this permit;
(4) Design or construction deficiencies associated with the permitted work;
(5) Damage claims associated with any future modification, suspension or
revocation of the permit.
(d) The permit shall also include a statement relating to the data supplied by the applicant,
and reserving the City’s right to re-evaluate the City’s decision to issue a permit based upon any of the
following:
(1) The City may re-evaluate its decision to issue the permit at any time the
circumstances warrant. Circumstances that could require a re-evaluation include, but are not
limited to the following:
(i) Failure by the applicant or its agent or employees to comply with the
terms and conditions of the permit;
(ii) Circumstances which indicate that the information provided by the
applicant in obtaining the permit may have been false, incomplete or inaccurate;
(iii) Significant new information arises which the City did not consider in
reaching its original decision to issue the permit.
(2) Any re-evaluation may result in a determination that it is appropriate to suspend,
modify or revoke the permit.
7-09-090. Enforcement.
(a) The City Engineer, Building Official, and their designee(s) are hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all provisions of this Chapter. For such purposes the Engineer and Building Official
and their designee(s) shall have the authority necessary to direct appropriate action in upholding the
provisions of this Chapter.
(b) The City Engineer and/or Building Official shall have the power to render interpretation of
this Chapter and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this Chapter as they may
deem necessary in order to clarify the application of the provisions of this Chapter. Such interpretations,
rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this Chapter.
(c) Upon obtaining approval from the City Council, the City Engineer and/or Building Official
may appoint such technical officers and inspectors and other employees as shall be authorized from time
to time to carry out the duties and purposes of this Chapter.
(d) In circumstances where it becomes necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of
the provisions of this Chapter, or in circumstances where the City engineer, Building Official or their
authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists on the site any condition or
code violation which makes the site unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, or if the City Engineer or Building
Official has reason to believe that any person has violated the requirements of this Chapter or violated the
terms of any permit issued under this Chapter, the City Engineer or Building Official or their authorized
representative may enter the premises covered by the permit to inspect the same or to perform any duty
imposed by this Chapter.
(e) If any work is performed contrary to the requirements of this Chapter or the requirements
and conditions of any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, the City Engineer or Building Official may
order the work stopped by serving notice, in writing, on any person engaged in doing or causing such
activity to be done. Any such person served shall forthwith stop work until authorized by the City
Engineer or Building Official to proceed with the work. Prior to proceeding with the work, the applicant
may be required to comply with the following requirements:
(1) Submit a report from a reputable certified testing agency certifying that the fill
material from each generating site is free from hazardous or toxic materials or wastes.
(2) Keep and make available for inspection by the City, accurate records of all sites
and locations from which fill material is generated, and the location on each site within the City at
which fill material is placed. These records shall include, at minimum, the preparation and
maintenance of manifests to be completed and signed by the driver of any truck or other vehicle
in which fill material is hauled which states the following:
(i) The nature and content of the fill material;
(ii) The date and time each truck or other vehicle is loaded;
(iii) The address and location at which the truck or vehicle is loaded;
(iv) The address and location from which the fill material originates, if
different from the location at which it is loaded;
(v) The date and time the material is placed on the site to be filled; and
(vi) If the fill site is larger than one acre, a detailed description of the location
on the site at which each load of material is placed.
(f) Any person aggrieved by any action of the City Engineer, Building Official, or their
designee or deputy, may appeal any decision or stop order issued by the City. The first level of appeal
shall be to the City Administrator and shall be commenced by filing a detailed written statement of appeal
with the City Administrator. The decision of the City Administrator shall be issued within five (5) working
days of the receipt of a written appeal. Any person not satisfied with the decision of the City
Administrator, may appeal said decision in writing to the City Council which shall schedule a hearing of
the matter within fifteen (15) working days of the date of the decision of the City Administrator. The
decision of the City Council shall be final.
7-09-100. Penalty.
(a) A violation of any section, subsection, or requirement of this Chapter and/or a violation of
any requirement or condition of a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall constitute, and be punished
as, a Class B misdemeanor as defined under the laws of the State of Utah.
(b) Each day of any violation shall constitute a separate offense.
7-09-110. Fees.
(a) Until otherwise amended by ordinance or resolution, the fees required for a permit under
this Chapter shall be identical to those called for by the currently adopted edition of the Building Code for
grading permit fees.
(b) A fill permit shall not be issued by the City until all required fees are paid to the City.

CHAPTER 7-12: GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
7-12-010. Definitions.
7-12-020. Unauthorized Dumping and Accumulation.
7-12-030. Garbage Services to be Provided.
7-12-040. Service Charge.
7-12-050. Rules and Regulations.
7-12-060. Containers.
7-12-070. Covering of Vehicles Required.
7-12-080. Spilling on Streets.
7-12-010. Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter the following terms shall have the following meanings:
(a) “Commercial Property” includes all property which is not a “dwelling unit” as defined in
this Section.
(b) “Dump” means to discard or relinquish control or possession of, and includes any act of
littering.
(c) “Dwelling unit” means a residential, single family dwelling and each separate apartment
dwelling of a duplex, triplex or fourplex up to and including four apartments, and including upstairs,
basement, garage or detached apartment or housing units. The term does not include apartment
buildings of four or more units designed for separate households, commercial, manufacturing, or
industrial property used for those purposes and also does not include condominium developments,
planned unit developments, churches or other institutional users.
(d) “Garbage” shall mean all waste and other objects or substances ordinarily or usually
discarded by persons at private (as distinguished from commercial, manufacturing, or industrial) property
units or dwelling units, except sewage, and animal or human body waste. The term shall also include
rubbish, offal, refuse, trash, tree cuttings not exceeding three inches in width, shrub trimmings, and grass
and weed clippings, as such words are commonly defined, and as the same are properly contained or
bundled as provided herein or by regulations of the City. The word “garbage” shall not include tree
branches and trunks, construction materials, lawn sod, and other materials not defined herein as
garbage. These latter objects or substances shall be delivered by the owner of applicable property units
to a sanitary land fill designated for such purpose.
(e) “Solid Waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible materials or substances
discarded or rejected as being spent, useless, worthless or in excess to the owner’s needs at the time of
discard or rejection, including garbage, refuse, industrial and commercial waste, sludges from air or water
control facilities, rubbish, ashes, contained gaseous material, incinerator residue, demolition and
construction debris, discarded automobiles and offal, but not including sewage and other highly diluted
water carried materials or substances and those in gaseous form.
(f) “Person” shall mean and include individuals, companies, firms, corporations,
partnerships, trusts, associations or combination thereof.
7-12-020. Unauthorized Dumping and Accumulation.
(a) City Land. No person shall dump garbage on any street or other real property owned by
the City other than in containers provided for garbage disposal.
(b) Private Land. No person shall dump garbage on real property owned by another person:
(1) Without the previously obtained consent of the person owning the property;
(2) Or even with such consent, if garbage thus dumped shall remain in such property
in violation of any applicable federal, state or local law.
7-12-030. Garbage Services to be Provided.
The City shall provide garbage collection and disposal service for all dwelling units as defined
herein within the boundary limits of the City. All persons owning or occupying commercial property and
real property not otherwise herein provided for, shall remove such garbage in a manner which is
consistent with these provisions and shall dispose of all Solid Waste as defined herein by delivering such
waste for processing to the Davis County Solid Waste Management and Energy Recovery Special
Service District.
7-12-040. Service Charge.
(a) Imposed. There is hereby levied and imposed upon the owner or owners of each
dwelling unit served by the City (or its contractor or agent) in accordance with the preceding Section, a
monthly service charge for each such dwelling unit. The City may place said service charge on a bill for
other services.
(b) Late Charges. The City may also impose late charges and interest on any past due
service charges or unpaid part thereof. Collection of said late charges may be effected through such
action as the City may deem necessary including, but not limited to: termination and disconnection of
water service to delinquent dwelling units; litigation in court of competent jurisdiction for collection;
enforcement of penalties provided for; and/or other methods as the City may deem proper from time to
time.
(c) Payment by Occupant. The owner or owners of the dwelling unit or units serviced are
responsible for payment of the service charge or charges levied and imposed hereunder. However, an
occupant or person in possession or control of a property unit other than the owner may pay the service
charge and thereby cause a credit on the corresponding property, however, nothing herein shall relieve
the property owner from responsibility for payment of charges imposed hereunder.
(d) Amount. The amount of the monthly service charge and all associated late charges and
interest may be set or altered by resolution of the City Council.
7-12-050. Rules and Regulations.
The City may promulgate rules and regulations relating to garbage collection and disposal within
the City in the manner and form provided in Title 2 of these Ordinances.
7-12-060. Containers.
(a) All garbage collected by the City or its contractor from dwelling units within the City shall
be placed only in approved garbage containers which are the approved one hundred five (105) gallon
containers furnished residential users by the City or its contractor and constructed of high-density
polyethylene. Said containers are equipped with wheels and permanently attached, tight fitting lids. No
garbage shall be collected unless it is placed in a garbage container approved by the City. Use of
containers issued to others for garbage disposal is prohibited.
(b) All containers furnished for dwelling units shall be kept free from destructive or decorative
markings and users shall maintain the original color thereof and shall keep the inside of said containers
clean and free from build-up of fungus or bacteria or any other type of contaminant or substance that
causes odor or facilitates deterioration of the inside or outside of such containers. Residential users and
owners of dwelling units shall report any damage to or malfunctioning of the containers to the authorized
garbage hauler. Residential users shall exercise due care to protect containers against loss through theft
or misappropriation. Upon discontinuance of use by the residential user, containers shall be returned to
the owner thereof.
(c) Approved garbage containers shall not be overfilled to the extent that the contents may
be spilled during the process of pick-up and dumping into the garbage collection vehicle. All garbage
subject to garbage collection by the City or its Contractor shall be placed on the edge of the street next to
the driveway on the opposite side of the driveway approach from the mailbox, but in no event within 5 feet
of a mailbox, and with the container’s wheels as close to the curb as reasonably possible, with the hinge
thereof to curbside and the lid opening facing toward the street. Containers must be placed to have clear
access from the street to be picked up with the automated collection trucks. Users having two or more
containers shall place each container at least two feet distant from the next container to allow proper pickup.
When snow or street construction prevents placing of the approved garbage container against the
curb, the container shall be placed not over two feet from the edge of said snow or construction and in a
manner that will not obstruct traffic or unduly impede the snow plowing activities of the City. Containers
shall not be placed or permitted to block driveways or through traffic. Unless otherwise provided by
regulation, garbage must not be set out upon the street for collection prior to the evening of the day
before collection and must be set out prior to 7 a.m. on the day of collection. All empty garbage
containers must be removed from the street as soon as practicable after being emptied, and in every
case, must be removed from the street the same day they are emptied. It shall be unlawful to park a
vehicle upon a public street within the City during the hours of garbage pick-up on said street in a manner
that interferes with access to garbage containers by the garbage collection vehicle.
7-12-070. Covering of Vehicles Required.
No person shall transport through or upon any of the public streets of the City, any garbage or
other trash or material in open trucks, open trailers, or other open vehicles unless covered completely by
a means capable of preventing the material transported from leaving the vehicle.
7-12-080. Spilling on Streets.
No person operating a motor vehicle shall permit to fall from such vehicle any garbage, trash, or
refuse on any public street in the City.

CHAPTER 7-15 GENERAL FIRE REGULAITONS
7-15-010. South Davis Metro Fire.
7-15-020. Fire Code.
7-15-030. Delegation of Authority.
7-15-040. Fire Code Official.
7-15-050. Liability for Damages.
7-15-060. Fire Board of Appeals.
7-15-070. Cost Recovery for Negligently Caused Fire Emergencies.
7-15-080. Right of Way.
7-15-090. May Blockade Street.
7-15-100. Right to Enter Upon Premises.
7-15-110. Removal of Obstructions.
7-15-120. Use of Water.
7-15-130. False Alarms.
7-15-140. Wilfully or Negligently Causing Fire.
7-15-150. Unlawful Interference.
7-15-160. Driving Over Fire Hose.
7-15-170. Penalties.
7-15-010. South Davis Metro Fire Agency.
Woods Cross City is a participant member of the South Davis Metro Fire Agency (the
“Agency”), a separate legal entity duly organized and created under the laws of Utah by Interlocal
Cooperation Agreement entered into by participating entities of the Agency. The Agency shall
provide all fire, emergency medical and other emergency first responder services for the City in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the Interlocal Cooperation Agreement entered into
by the participating entities, as amended (the “Interlocal Agreement”).
7-15-020. Fire Code.
The International Fire Code (IFC), 200 Edition, promulgated by the International Code
Council, as adopted by the State of Utah, including all appendices thereto except as amended
herein, is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of Woods Cross City. The IFC is hereby incorporated
as if set out at length herein, and from the effective date of this Ordinance, the provisions thereof
shall be controlling within the corporate limits of Woods Cross City. A copy of the IFC has been
filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the Woods Cross City Recorder as
required by law. Section 109.3 of the IFC is hereby modified and amended to read in its entirety
as follows:
109.3 Penalties. Any person convicted of violating any provision of the IFC, shall be
guilty of a Class Be misdemeanor and such violations shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a term not longer
than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
7-15-030. Delegation of Authority.
Woods Cross City hereby delegates power and responsibility for fire suppression,
prevention, primary investigation, primary enforcement, emergency medical, and other
emergency and first responder services within the jurisdiction of Woods Cross City to the Agency
and hereby recognizes the Agency as the governmental and political subdivision for such
purposes consistent and in accordance with the Interlocal Agreement and the Fire Code.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 7, Page 18
7-15-040. Fire Code Official.
The Agency shall serve as the fire code official for Woods Cross City as more particularly
described in Section 104 of the Fire Code.
7-15-050. Liability for Damages.
Except as otherwise provided by law, this Chapter shall not be construed to hold the Cit
or any officer or employee responsible for any damage to persons or property arising from any
inspection or re-inspection authorized herein, the approval or disapproval of any equipment or
process authorized herein, or for any action in connection with the control or extinguishment of
any fire or in connection with any other official duties.
7-15-060. Fire Board of Appeals.
(a) The Fire Board of Appeals of the South Davis County Fire District is hereby
appointed as the Fire Board of Appeals in Woods Cross City to determine the suitability of
alternate materials and type of construction and to hear and decide appealable orders, decisions
and determinations made by the Fire Chief or Fire Marshall relative to the application and
interpretation of the Uniform Fire Code, as adopted by Woods Cross City.
(b) Notice of Hearing. The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing
of the appeal, give any required public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in
interest. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the relevant
Construction Codes. Any party may appear in person or by attorney at the hearing.
(c) Limitation. The Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation
of the administrative provisions of the Fire Code, nor shall the Board of Appeals be empowered to
waive any requirements of the Fire Code.
(d) Stay of Proceedings Pending Appeal. An appeals stays all proceedings and
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Fire Chief certifies to the relevant Board of
Appeals after the request for hearing has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated, the stay
would in his or her opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Appeals
or by a court of competent jurisdiction on application, notice and good cause showing.
(e) Judicial Review of Board’s Decision, The City, or any person aggrieved by any
decision of the Board of Appeals, may have and maintain a plenary action for relief therefrom in
any court of competent jurisdiction, provided, the petition for such relief is presented to the Court
within thirty (30) days after the date such decision is rendered.
7-15-070. Cost Recovery for Negligently Caused Fire Emergencies.
(a) Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
(1) “Hazardous materials emergency” means a sudden or unexpected
release, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting,
escaping, leaching, or disposing into the environment (including the abandonment or
discarding of barrels, containers, and other receptacles containing any hazardous
material or substance or waste, pollutant or contaminant) any substance that, because of
its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, presents a
direct and immediate threat to public safety or the environment and requires immediate
action to mitigate that threat.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 7, Page 19
(2) “Aggravated fire emergency” means a fire caused or contributed to by
the failure to comply with an order form any State, County, City or local agency,
department or official; or occurs as a direct result of a deliberate act in violation of State
law or the ordinances or regulations of the City, County or other local agency; a fire that
constitutes arson or reckless burning as defined by the Utah Code; or an alarm that
results in a fire unit being dispatched, and the person transmitting or causing the
transmission of the alarm knows at the time of said transmission that no fire or fire related
emergency exists.
(3) “Aggravated medical emergency: means an alarm that results in an
emergency medical unit being dispatched, and the person transmitting or causing the
transmission of the alarm knows at the time of said transmission that there are no
reasonable grounds for believing that a medical emergency exists.
(4) “Expenses” means the actual costs of the City, County, South Davis Fire
District or any other Mutual Aid department, including workers’ compensation benefits,
fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs of equipment, operation, equipment repair
or replacement, costs of materials, decontamination, waste management (treatment,
storage or disposal), any contract labor and materials, and costs of any health
assessment or health effects study and related treatment carried out for responding
personnel as a necessity resulting form a hazardous materials incident.
(b) Cost Recovery Authorization. The City and/or its authorized agent is hereby
empowered to recover expenses incurred by virtue of the City’s or other local governmental
agencies’ response to a hazardous materials emergency, aggravated fire emergency or
aggravated medical emergency from any person, corporation, partnership or other individual or
entity who caused such an emergency, pursuant to the procedures set forth herein.
(c) Cost Recovery Procedure. The City or its authorized agent shall determine
responsibility for the emergency or response as defined above and notify the responsible party by
mail of the determination of responsibility and the expenses to be recovered. The South Davis
Fire District is hereby authorized to serve as the City’s agent for collecting invoices and billing the
responsible party for costs. Mutual Aid agencies of the District will be eligible to submit bills.
Invoices that identify eligible costs under this Chapter shall be submitted to the South Davis Fire
District Chief or his or her designee within ten (10) working days after the costs are incurred or
identified. Submitted invoices should include sufficient documentation for cost reimbursement
(e.g., copies of time sheets for specific personnel, copies of bills for materials, equipment and
supplies procured or used, etc). Accepting invoices from Mutual Aid agencies shall not incur
liability to the City or District to pay costs from such agencies until payment has been received by
the City or the District form the responsible party.
(d) Cost Recovery Appeal. The notice set forth in Subsection (c) shall specify that
the determined responsible party may appeal the decision before a hearing officer designated by
the City Council and establish a date by which the notice of appeal shall be filed. The appeal
date shall be no less than fifteen (15) days form the date of the notice. In the event the
determined responsible party appeals the determination, the hearing officer shall hold a hearing
to consider any issues raised by the appeal, at which hearing the appealing party and the South
Davis Fire District or local government shall be entitled to present evidence in support of their
respective positions. After the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a recommendation to the
City Council, which shall issue a decision determining responsibility and assessing expenses.
The Council may adopt, modify or remand the recommendation of the hearing examiner for
further proceedings. The Council may in its sole discretion, hear additional evidence prior to
issuing its decision.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 7, Page 20
(e) No Admission of Liability. The payment of expenses determined owing under
this Chapter does not constitute an admission of liability or negligence in any legal action for
damages, or a criminal fine.
(f) Action to Recover Expenses. The City or its authorized agent shall submit one or
a series of consolidated invoice(s) to the responsible party identifying agencies or agents and
their specific costs for reimbursement. The responsible party shall issue a certified check to the
City or its authorized agent within sixty (60) days of receiving any invoice. All funds received
under the authority of this ordinance shall be disbursed according to the claims submitted. Where
the reimbursement is less than the requested amount, each agency shall receive a pro rata share
of such reimbursement as the agencies’ reimbursable costs bear to the total reimbursable cost.
The City or its authorized agent shall not be liable to the agency for any deficiency. In the event
the party or parties determined to be responsible for the repayment of expenses incurred by the
City or its authorized agent fail to make payment after the final administrative determination of
any appeal to the City, or sixty (60) days form the deadline for appeal is filed, the City may initiate
legal action to recover form the determined responsible party the expenses determined to be
owing, including the City’s or its authorized agent’s reasonable attorney fees.
(g) Conflict Provision. Whenever the requirements or provisions of this Section are
in conflict with the requirements or provisions of any other lawfully adopted ordinance, the more
restrictive requirements shall apply. Further, this Section shall not restrict or replace cost
recovery form funding sources available under State and federal regulations.
7-15-080. Right of Way.
It is hereby provided that any fire truck and movable fire fighting apparatus traveling
within the City with emergency apparatus activated shall have the right-of-way over all other
vehicles of every kind, and it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to drive or
operate the same in head of said fire truck or at a distance less than five hundred (500) feet
therefrom, or to follow the same at a distance closer than five hundred (500) feet.
7-15-090. May Blockade Street.
Whenever a fire shall occur, it shall be lawful and within the authority of the officer in
charge to blockade any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or other place within the limits of the City,
if, in his or her judgment, it is necessary to secure the efficient working of the fire personnel, hose,
engines, or hook and ladder apparatus under his or her command, and to protect the hose form
injury. It shall be unlawful for any person to pass through or to break through said blockade.
7-15-100. Right to Enter Upon Premises.
Fire personnel shall at any time have the right to enter upon any premises for the
purpose of investigating, extinguishing or controlling fires; and they may, at any reasonable hour,
enter premises for the purpose of inspecting the same.
7-15-110. Removal of Obstructions.
When a fire is in progress, the officer in charge may order the removal or destruction of
any building, fence, or any telephone, telegraph, or electric light poles or wires, or any other
obstruction in order to prevent the progress of the fire, but no officer or fire personnel shall
unnecessarily or recklessly destroy or injure any building or other property.
7-15-120. Use of Water.
The officer in charge at a fire shall have the right to use water form any source for the
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 7, Page 21
purpose of extinguishing the fire or for saving property in danger of being destroyed by fire.
7-15-130. False Alarms.
Any person who shall, without cause make or send an alarm of fire by outcry, false
report, or otherwise, shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
7-15-140. Wilfully or Negligently Causing Fire.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently ignite or cause to be ignited
any trees, shrubs, cultivated crop, fence, building, weeds, grass, or other burnable material on
any land not his or her own, or to throw any lighted cigar, cigarette, match, or other burning
material whatsoever on any land cover or material which will ignite or carry fire.
7-15-150. Unlawful Interference.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully hinder any officer in the discharge of his or
her duty at a fire, or in any manner to injure, deface, or destroy any engine, hose, or other fire
apparatus or to interfere with any fire company or person, or to willfully break or injure any water
pipe, or in any way interfere with the water or its source of supply.
7-15-160. Driving Over Fire Hose.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge or control of any motor vehicle or for
anyone driving or operating any other type of vehicle to drive the same over any unprotected fire
hose when laid down on any street in the City to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the
consent of the fire department official in command.
7-15-170. Penalties.
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire Code or standards
hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order
made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or
plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and
from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed
or modified by the Chief or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall
severally for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for violation shall not excuse the violation or permit
it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or =remedy such violations or
defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 7, Page 22
(This page left intentionally blank)
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 7, Page 23
CHAPTER 7-18: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
7-18-010. Definitions.
7-18-020. Intended Construction.
7-18-030. Permit Required.
7-18-040. Permit Procedure.
7-18-050. Consent to Audit or Inspection.
7-18-060. Permit Period.
7-18-070. Permit Fee.
7-18-080. Hazardous Material Audit Fees.
7-18-090. Re-Audit.
7-18-100. Fees for Re-Audits.
7-18-110. Quantity Ranges for Reporting Hazardous Material.
7-18-120. Penalties.
7-18-130. Fee Disposition.
7-18-140. Recovery of Expenses.
7-18-150. Payment of Expenses Not an Admission.
7-18-010. Definitions.
(a) “Hazardous Materials” are those materials defined as such by the Fire Code in effect at
the time of the application for permit provided herein, pursuant to Title 53, Chapter 7, Utah Code
Annotated, as amended.
(b) “Hazardous Materials Emergency” means a sudden and unexpected release of any
substance that because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics
presents a direct and immediate threat to public safety or the environment and requires immediate action
to mitigate the threat.
(c) “Expenses” as they refer to a “Hazardous Materials Emergency” mean the actual costs of
government and volunteer personnel, including workers compensation benefits, fringe benefits,
administrative overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials, and the
costs of any contract labor and materials.
(d) “Fire Chief” refers to the chief fire officer of this jurisdiction, including, should fire
protection have been contracted to any fire district or other legal entity, the chief fire officer of such district
or other legal entity providing fire protection services to this jurisdiction.
(e) “Audit” refers to a visit to any premises by the Fire Chief or a designee of the Fire Chief
for the purpose of protecting public safety by determining the type and quantity of hazardous materials
present.
(f) “Inspection” refers to visits to any premises by the Fire Chief or a designee of the Fire
Chief for the purpose of determining the conditions of storage or manufacture of hazardous materials to
protect public safety.
(g) “Material Change” means a change in the type of hazardous material stored or produced
and includes changes in the form of the hazardous material generated or produced, such as liquid to solid
form, even though the hazardous material is of the original type for which a permit was issued by the Fire
Chief. A material change has also occurred when the Fire Chief has reasonable grounds to conclude that
a change in quantity of hazardous material generated or stored from that originally permitted by the Fire
Chief has enhanced the risk of damage or injury to persons and/or property above the risk inherent in the
quantity originally permitted.
7-18-020. Intended Construction.
Hazardous materials as defined in the Fire Code, present a clear danger to public safety and
health if not properly handled by those who generate, transport, dispose and store such material. This
ordinance shall be construed to promote the public health and safety of this jurisdiction.
7-18-030. Permit Required.
Any person, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other legal entity
whatsoever that generates and/or stores hazardous materials, shall, prior to generation or storage, obtain
a permit for the generation and/or storage of hazardous materials as required herein. A permit is required
for each type of hazardous material generated or stored and for each business address or premises upon
which the hazardous material is to be stored or generated.
7-18-040. Permit Procedure.
The permit required by Section 7-18-030 shall be issued upon application to the Fire Chief. The
permit shall issue upon the following conditions:
(a) Hazardous material to be generated or stored is specifically identified and listed by type
in the application.
(b) The required permit fee is paid.
(c) An audit by the Fire Chief or designee thereof is completed and establishes that the
proposed generation, storage, disposal and transportation of the hazardous materials to be permitted
complies with all statutes, rules and regulations pertaining to the generation, storage, transportation and
disposal of hazardous material of this jurisdiction, the State of Utah and of the United States.
(d) The required hazardous material audit fee is paid.
(e) The application for permit is fully completed and signed by an agent of the permittee.
(f) Any required land use approvals under the City Zoning Ordinance and/or Subdivision
Ordinance have been granted.
7-18-050. Consent to Audit or Inspection.
A completed application for a permit to generate and/or store hazardous materials shall constitute
consent of the Fire Chief or a designee thereof to enter without notice and inspect or audit the premises
upon which hazardous material is generated and/or stored for the purpose of determining compliance
with the Fire Code and all applicable laws and regulations of this jurisdiction, the State of Utah and the
United States pertaining to the generation, transportation, disposal and storage of hazardous materials.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to restrict other persons duly authorized by law from
inspecting or auditing the permitted premises.
7-18-060. Permit Period.
Each permit issued upon application shall be for a term of one year from the date of initial issue of
a permit and must be renewed on an annual basis upon meeting the terms and conditions for the initial
issuance of a permit.
7-18-070. Permit Fee.
The fee to obtain a permit for the use and/or storage of hazardous materials (and each additional
permit required for one business premise) shall be set forth in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule.
7-18-080. Hazardous Material Audit Fees.
There is hereby imposed upon each permit holder a fee, in addition to the permit fee, for the first
inspection or audit of the permitted premises made by the Fire Chief to determine the eligibility for the
required permit. The fee shall be the cost factor multiplied by the quantity range of each hazardous
material for each street address of the premises upon which hazardous material is generated and/or
stored, provided, however:
(a) If the hazardous material inspected or audited is held in a container, the calculation of the
fee is based on the container capacity without regard to the actual amount of hazardous material present
in the container at the time of audit.
(b) The permit fee provided above includes the provision of any 704M placards and/or
required use permits and no additional charge may be assessed for them. However, replacement of
required placards is the responsibility of the permittee and any permittee shall be charged in the amount
as set forth in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule for each replacement placard.
The Fire Chief shall determine and recommend for purposes of calculating the audit fees for each
calendar year the cost factor, which shall then be presented to the South Davis Fire District Board for its
approval and adoption. The adopted cost factor shall be that cost which reasonably approximates the
cost to the Fire District, including indirect costs, to conduct an inspection or audit before factoring in the
increased cost caused by a particular quantity of hazardous material being present. The Fire Chief shall
publish the annual calculation of the adopted cost factor by posting it conspicuously at each location
where permits are issued.
7-18-090. Re-Audit.
In addition to an audit conducted in connection with the original issue of a permit, permit holders
shall be subject to an audit under the following circumstances:
(a) A material change with respect to hazardous materials stored or generated has occurred
or is anticipated to occur.
(b) The ownership of or the chief operations officer of the facility at which the hazardous
material is generated or stored is changed.
(c) There is substantial change in the nature of the business operation concerning the
storage or operation of hazardous materials including, but not limited to, changing from storage to
production activity, changing the method of, or the standard container used for storage of hazardous
materials, and/or cessation of business for a period longer than thirty (30) days.
(d) A spill or release of hazardous materials has occurred of sufficient toxicity and quantity as
to be required by any law or regulation of any jurisdiction to be reported to any legal authority.
7-18-100. Fees for Re-Audits.
A fee is hereby assessed for any audit conducted pursuant to Section 7-18-080. The fee shall be
that fee which is required for an initial audit of the premises for the purpose of issue or renewal of a permit
as set forth in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule, provided, however, the fee for additional audits
required because of a material change in the quantity of hazardous materials stored or generated shall be
such amount as set forth in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule times the quantity of material added to
the original quantity of material permitted at the time of initial issue of the current permit.
7-18-110. Quantity Ranges for Reporting Hazardous Material.
The quantity ranges for reporting hazardous materials for purpose of calculating the fees stated
herein shall be as follows:
RANGE DESCRIPTION
(a) Solids: Up to 500 lbs.
Liquids: 55 gals. above grade
1000 gals. below grade
Gases: 200 cu. ft. STP
(b) Solids: 501 to 5,000 lbs.
Liquids: 56 to 550 gals. above grade
1001-10,000 below grade
Gases: 201 - 2,000 cu. ft. STP
(c) Solids: 5,001 - 25,000 lbs.
Liquids: 551 - 2,750 gal. above grade
10,001-50,000 gals. below grade
Gases: 2,001 - 10,000 cu. ft. STP
(d) Solids: 25,001 - 50,000 lbs.
Liquids: 2,751 - 5,000 gals. above grade
50,001-100,000 gals. below grade
Gases: 10,001 - 20,000 cu. ft. STP
(e) Solids: (More than) 50,001 lbs.
Liquids: (More than) 5,001 gals. above grade
100,001 gals. below grade
Gases: (More than) 20,001 cu. ft. STP
7-18-120. Penalties.
(a) Willful omission or false statement of material information in a permit application shall be
a Class B misdemeanor. Additionally, any such omission or statement shall be grounds for revocation of
any permit issued.
(b) Generation and/or storage of hazardous materials without registering such materials and
obtaining a permit therefore as provided in this ordinance shall constitute an offense which is a Class B
misdemeanor for each day such materials are present without authorization or permit.
7-18-130. Fee Disposition.
The fees paid for permits and audits or inspections hereunder shall be retained by the Fire District
for the operation of hazardous materials enforcement programs.
7-18-140. Recovery of Expenses.
The City shall be entitled to recover from those persons whose negligent actions cause any
hazardous materials emergency all expenses incurred by the City directly associated with a response to a
hazardous materials emergency taken under the provisions of this Chapter or of Utah Code Ann. § 53-2-
105, as amended, and from any other persons or entities who may, under State or federal law or
regulations, be held liable in whole or in part for any hazardous materials emergency within the City.
7-18-150. Payment of Expenses Not an Admission.
The payment of expenses to the City under this Chapter does not constitute an admission of
liability or negligence in any legal action for damages.

CHAPTER 7-21: ANIMAL CONTROL
7-21-010. Powers of Davis County Animal Control Division.
7-21-020. Adoption of Regulations.
7-21-030. Penalty.
7-21-010. Powers of Davis County Animal Control Division.
The Davis County Animal Control Division is hereby authorized and empowered to act within the
incorporated limits of Woods Cross City for the purpose of providing animal control services.
7-21-020. Adoption of Regulations.
The applicable and duly adopted animal control ordinance and regulations of Davis County are
hereby adopted by this reference as ordinances of Wood Cross City, insofar as they are not in conflict
with other effective ordinances of the City not adopted by reference. This adoption by reference includes
any such regulations or amendments thereof adopted by Davis County after the effective date of this
Chapter, unless repealed by further ordinance.
7-21-030. Penalty.
Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of the ordinances adopted in
Section 7-21-020, either by failing to do those acts required therein or by doing a prohibited act, shall be
subject to the penalty specified therein, or in the event no penalty is specified, shall be guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor.

Woods Cross Municipal Code March 2020
Title 7, Page 30
CHAPTER 7-24: NOISE CONTROL
7-24-010. Prohibited Noise.
7-24-020. Regulated Noise.
7-24-030. Factors.
7-24-040. Exceptions.
7-24-050. Special Permit.
7-24-060. Violations.
7-24-010. Prohibited Noise.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully or with reckless disregard create the following noise
disturbances within the City.
(a) Disruption of Dwelling. To make, cause or permit any excessive noise which annoys,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of any neighborhood or person residing therein
which under the circumstances would disturb a person of average and reasonable sensitivities.
(b) Disruption of Meeting. To make, cause or permit any excessive noise which prevents or
disrupts a lawful meeting, gathering, business or other lawful activity, which under the circumstances
would disturb a person of average and reasonable sensitivities.
(c) Automobiles. To operate or permit the operation of a motor vehicle which causes
excessive noise levels as a result of a defective or modified exhaust system, or as a result of any
unnecessary rapid acceleration, deceleration, engine revving or tire squealing.
(d) Street Performances. To use or permit the use of bells, whistles, sirens, music horns or
any other noise-making device for the purpose of business, amusement or otherwise which tends to cause
persons to congregate on the streets or sidewalks of the City.
(e) Emergency Signals. To make, cause or permit the sounding of any fire, burglar,
automobile or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar emergency signaling device other than for
emergency or testing purposes. Any testing permitted herein shall be conducted between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and shall be conducted for the minimum test cycle time not to exceed three (3)
minutes.
7-24-020. Regulated Noise.
It shall be unlawful to cause, permit or perform the following acts between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. within the City when such acts create a noise disturbance within a residential area.
(a) Loading Operation. To load, unload, open, close, or otherwise handle boxes, crates,
containers, building materials, garbage containers or similar objects.
(b) Construction Work. To operate any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling,
repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures or streets.
(c) Power Equipment. To operate any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn
or garden tool, lawnmower or other similar device, other than powered snow removal equipment.
(d) Garbage Collection. To collect garbage, waste or refuse.
Woods Cross Municipal Code March 2020
Title 7, Page 31
(e) Loudspeakers. To operate or use any loudspeaker, public address system, or mobile
sound vehicle amplifying sound therefrom.
(f) Radios. To operate or play any radio, television, musical instrument or similar audio
device.
7-24-030. Factors.
The factors to be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this Chapter
exists include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(a) The level of the noise;
(b) The nature of the noise; i.e. usual or unusual;
(c) The origin of the noise; i.e. natural or unnatural;
(d) The level and intensity of any background noise;
(e) The proximity of the noise to residential areas;
(f) The nature and zoning of the surrounding area;
(g) The density of inhabitants in the surrounding area;
(h) The time of day of the noise; and
(i) The recurrence or consistency of the noise.
7-24-040. Exceptions.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to emergency situations, the lawful exercise of free
speech except as regulated herein by reasonable time, place and manner restrictions, and conduct
permitted by license or permit of the City or otherwise authorized by law. In addition, this Chapter shall
not apply to agricultural equipment or operation, unless such equipment or operation is determined by the
City to constitute a nuisance from the negligent or improper operation of any such equipment or
operation.
7-24-050. Special Permit.
Persons may file an application with the City for a special temporary Noise Permit authorizing the
applicant to take certain action or conduct certain activities not otherwise permitted herein. Any permit
issued hereunder shall be in addition to any and all other licenses or permits required by law, and shall be
subject to all other State and County laws regarding noise emissions.
(a) Application. Applications for a special temporary Noise Permit shall be made in writing to
the City Community Development Department and shall include the following items:
(1) Name and address of the applicant;
(2) Activity or purpose for which the permit is desired;
Woods Cross Municipal Code March 2020
Title 7, Page 32
(3) Reasons why the permit is necessary, including an explanation of undue
hardship and lack of reasonable alternatives;
(4) The specific date, time and location to be covered by the permit;
(5) Any other relevant information requested by the City.
(b) Fees. Each Application for the special temporary Noise Permit filed hereunder shall be
accompanied by any required permit fees set forth in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule. No permit shall
be issued until the proper fees have been paid to the City. Unless otherwise provided, the fees required
herein shall be in addition to any and all other license or permit fees imposed by any other law.
(c) Issuance. The Community Development Director shall review all applications filed
hereunder and may issue or deny a permit, in whole or in part, based upon consideration for public health
and safety. Any permit issued hereunder shall contain any conditions upon which the permit has been
granted, including the effective dates, time restrictions, location and other reasonable requirements
necessary to minimize adverse affects upon surrounding areas and any persons therein.
(d) Denial. If the proper fees have not been paid, or the Community Development Director
determines that the application does not conform with applicable law or it is not in the public’s best interest
to issue the permit, the Community Development Director shall deny the permit and notify the applicant in
writing of such denial. The notice shall state the reasons for denial and inform the applicant that he or she
may file a written appeal of such denial pursuant to Subsection (i).
(e) Term. Any permit issued hereunder shall specifically state the term and purpose for which
it was issued, not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(f) Limitation. Except as provided herein, each permit issued hereunder shall be valid only
for the person to whom it is issued. Permit holders shall ensure that the permit is available for inspection
by City officials at the place and time for which it is issued.
(g) Records. The Community Development Director shall keep a record of all permits issued
hereunder, including the name of the person to whom the permit was issued, the type of permit issued,
and the fees collected.
(h0 Revocation. Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by the
Community Development Director due to the permit holder’s failure to comply with the provisions hereof or
other applicable law. Prior to revocation of any permit, proper notice and an opportunity to be heard shall
be provided to the permit holder.
(i0 Appeal. Any determination made by the Community Development Director relative to the
issuance, denial or revocation of a permit hereunder may be appealed to the City Manager by filing, within
ten (10) days from the date of said determination, a written notice of appeal setting for the grounds for the
appeal and any other pertinent information. Such notice of appeal shall be filed by delivering an original
and three (3) copies to the City Manager during regular business hours. Upon receipt of the appeal, the
City Manager shall thoroughly and objectively investigate the matter and issue a written decision stating
the reasons for the decision and informing the appellant of any right to judicial review provided by law.
7-24-060. Violations.
Any person found in violation of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and
subject to imprisonment and/or fines as provided by law. Violations of this Ordinance shall also constitute
a public nuisance and may be enjoined and abated as such by the City.
TITLE 8
STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
CHAPTER 8-01: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 8-03: STREET TREE PROGRAM
CHAPTER 8-06: PARKS
TITLE 8
STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
CHAPTER 8-01: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 8-03: STREET TREE PROGRAM
CHAPTER 8-06: PARKS
CHAPTER 8-01: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
8-01-010. Administration.
8-01-020. Street Map.
8-01-030. Vacating or Altering.
8-01-040. Standards and Specifications.
8-01-050. Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
8-01-060. Criminal and Traffic Regulations.
8-01-070. Permit Required.
8-01-080. Obstructions.
8-01-090. Construction Debris.
8-01-100. Encroachments.
8-01-110. Littering.
8-01-120. Signs and advertising Materials.
8-01-130. Placards and Handbills.
8-01-140. Flags and Banners.
8-01-150. Sidewalk and Parkstrip Maintenance.
8-01-160. Snow Removal.
8-01-170. Clogging of Gutters.
8-01-180. Utility Poles and Facilities.
8-01-010. Administration.
The Public Works Department within Woods Cross City is responsible for maintaining
public properties within the City as created and authorized in Title 3 of this Code. The Public
Works Director shall be responsible for the administration of this Title.
8-01-020. Street Map.
The City has adopted an Official Street Map as part of its General Plan in accordance
with provisions of Utah Code Ann. §§ 72-5-401, et seq., as amended, and Utah Code Ann.§§ 10-
9-306, et seq., as amended.
8-01-030. Vacating or Altering
(a) Request. A person owning a lot or other parcel of real property within the City
may request that a street or alley in the immediate vicinity of that person’s property be
vacated, narrowed or the name changed. On its own initiative, the City Council may
enact an Ordinance declaring that a street, alley or part thereof is vacated, narrowed or
the name changed upon compliance with the requirements of this Section.
(b) Public Hearing. Before vacating, narrowing or changing the name of any street
within the City, the City Council shall hold a public hearing regarding the proposed action.
Following completion of the public hearing, a street may be vacated, narrowed or the
name thereof changed provided that the City Council finds that there is good cause for
the action and that the action will not be detrimental to the public interest.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2005
Title 8, Page 1
(c) Notice Required. Prior to the public hearing, the City Council shall notify in
writing and consult with the owners or operators of underground facilities as defined in
Section 54-8a-2 of the Utah Code Annotated and utility facilities within the street or alley.
In addition, notice of the intention of the City Council to vacate, narrow or change the
name of any street shall be given by publishing in a newspaper of general circulation
within the City, once a week for four consecutive weeks preceding the action, and by
mailing such notice to all owners of record of land abutting the street or alley proposed to
be vacated, narrowed or the name changed. All such notices shall be addressed to the
mailing addresses appearing on the rolls of the Davis County Assessor at the time the
action is taken. No notice shall be required when there is filed with the City Council
written consent to such vacation or other action signed by the owners of the property
abutting the part of the street or alley proposed to be vacated or narrowed.
(d) Action by Ordinance. Following the conclusion of the public hearing the City
Council may declare by Ordinance that a street or alley is vacated or narrowed or the
name of a street or alley is changed. The City Council may include in one Ordinance a
declaration changing the name of, vacating or narrowing more than one street or alley.
8-01-040. Standards and Specifications.
All streets, sidewalks and related public improvements within the City shall be laid out
and constructed in accordance with City Standards and specifications as adopted by the City. It
shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or contractor to construct or repair a street,
sidewalk or related public improvement in such a manner that fails to conform to and comply with
the standards and specifications established by the City for such improvement, unless otherwise
approved in writing by the City Council.
8-01-050. Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances.
The construction, establishment and design of streets, sidewalks and related
improvements within the City shall be conducted in accordance with applicable provisions of this
Code, including, but not limited to, the Land Development Code and Zoning Ordinance as set
forth in Titles 11 and 12 of this Code, respectively.
8-01-060. Criminal and Traffic Regulations.
Use of public streets sidewalks and parks shall be subject to rules and regulations of the
City Criminal and Traffic Codes as set forth in Titles 13 and 14 of this Code, respectively.
8-01-070. Permit Required.
Prior to the commencement of the construction or repair or any street, sidewalk or related
public improvement, an excavation permit shall be obtained from the City in accordance with
provisions of Chapter 9-12 of this Code. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, change
or modify the construction of any street, sidewalk or related public improvement without first
obtaining an excavation permit to do so.
8-01-080. Obstructions.
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or place in, on or within any street, sidewalk, gutter, or
other public grounds any trash, garbage, ice, snow, building materials, lumber, yard clippings, or
any other matter which shall obstruct the free use and enjoyment thereof or the free passage over
and upon such pubic ways or grounds, except as expressly authorized by City Ordinance, such
as for garbage collection or Spring cleanup.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2005
Title 8, Page 2
8-01-090. Construction Debris.
It shall be unlawful in connection with any construction activity for any person to place or
permit to be placed in, on or within any street, sidewalk, gutter or other public grounds, any dirt,
gravel, roadbase, asphalt, oil or other like materials or substances, unless otherwise expressly
permitted by the City.
8-01-100. Encroachments.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or permit any stairway, porch,
awning or other physical structure or material to encroach upon any public street, sidewalk, park
or other public grounds.
8-01-110. Littering.
It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any ashes, garbage or other offensive matter in,
on or within any street, sidewalk, park or public ground.
8-01-120. Signs and Advertising Materials.
Except as otherwise provided in Title 12 of this Code regarding signs, it shall be unlawful
to post any signs or other advertising material in, on or within any street, sidewalk, park or public
ground.
8-01-130. Placards and Handbills.
It shall be unlawful to exhibit, distribute or carry any placards or handbills in, on or within
any street, sidewalk, park or public ground.
8-01-140. Flags and Banners.
It shall be unlawful to fly or hang any flags, banners or signs across or within any street or
sidewalk.
8-01-150. Sidewalk and Parkstrip Maintenance.
Every owner, occupant, lessor or agent of any property fronting upon or abutting any
street, sidewalk, parkstrip and/or right-of-way shall be responsible for removing all weeds and
noxious vegetation from such property and in front thereof to the curb line of the street, including
but not limited to, the sidewalk and parkstrip area, and shall keep the sidewalks in front of such
property free from litter, ice and obstructions.
8-01-160. Snow Removal.
Every owner, occupant, lessor or agent of any property abutting on any sidewalk shall be
responsible for removing or causing to be removed form such sidewalks all snow, hail and/or
sleet falling thereon within twenty-four (24) hours after such snow, hail or sleet has ceased falling.
It is unlawful to place snow removed from private property in, on or within any street, sidewalk or
public way or in a manner so as to cause a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
8-01-170. Clogging of Gutters.
It shall be unlawful for any person removing snow, dirt, leaves or any other materials from
said person’s premises to deposit, or cause to be deposited, snow, dirt, leaves or other materials
in the gutter so as to clog or prevent the free flow of water therein.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2005
Title 8, Page 3
8-01-080. Utility Poles and Facilities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to set or erect in, on or within any street, sidewalk or
public way, or on any public ground within the City, any utility poles or facilities without prior
express written approval by the City.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2005
Title 8, Page 3a
CHAPTER 8-03: STREET TREE PROGRAM
8-03-010. Street Tree Program.
8-03-020. Street Tree Maintenance.
8-03-030. Street Tree Restrictions.
8-03-040. Street Tree Permit.
8-03-050. Public Nuisances.
8-03-060. Abatement of Public Nuisances.
8-03-070. Damage to Street Trees.
8-03-080. Interference with Enforcement.
8-03-090. Street Tree Topping.
8-03-010. Street Tree Program.
The City has adopted provisions within the Land Development Code as set forth in Title 11 of this
Code regarding the establishment of street trees within the public right-of-way within residential
subdivisions within the City (hereinafter referred to as the AStreet Tree Program@).
8-03-020. Street Tree Maintenance.
In accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Street Tree Program, the City shall
maintain street trees, shrubs and plants (exclusive of lawn or sod) planted in any public right-of-way, park
or public place within the City.
8-03-030. Street Tree Restrictions.
Unless otherwise authorized by permit in accordance with Section 8-03-040, no person shall:
(a) Plant, remove, top, prune or in any way injure or mutilate a street tree;
(b) Fasten any sign, wire or injurious material to any street tree; or
(c) Excavate any ditch or tunnel or place concrete or other pavement within a distance of six
(6) feet of the center of the trunk of any street tree.
8-03-040. Street Tree Permit.
(a) Application. Any person desiring to do any work described in Section 8-03-030 shall
apply for a permit from the Community Development Department. The applicant shall state the nature of
the work and location where it will be done.
(b) Issuance of Permit. A permit to perform work on street trees, shrubs or plants owned and
maintained by the City may be issued in the discretion of the Community Development Director upon a
determination that the work:
(1) Will not create, continue or aggravate any hazardous condition or public
nuisance;
(2) Will not prevent or interfere with the growth, location or planting of approved
street trees; and
(3) Is consistent with the planting plan being followed by the City.
8-03-050. Public Nuisances.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following are defined to be public nuisances:
(a) Any dead, diseased or dying tree in any street, or on any public property so near to any
street tree as to constitute a danger to street trees, or streets or portions thereof.
(b) Any tree or shrub on any private property or on any street of any type or species apt to
destroy, impair or otherwise interfere with any street improvements, sidewalks, curbs, approved street
trees, gutters, sewers or other public improvements, including utility mains or services.
(c) Any street tree limbs, shrubs or plants reaching a height more than three (3) feet above
the curb grade, within the thirty (30) foot triangle of public or private property measured from the projected
curb lines at the intersections of any street approved for vehicular traffic flow. In addition, no street tree
limbs, shrubs or plants may interfere with any traffic signals, stop signs or yield signs at any street
intersections.
(d) Vines or climbing plants growing into or over any street tree or any public hydrant, pole or
other street improvement.
(e) Existence of any tree within the City limits that is infested, infected or in danger of
becoming infested or infected with objectionable insects, scales, fungus or growth injurious to trees.
(f) The existence of any branches or foliage which interfere with the visibility on or free use
of or access to any portion of any public street.
(g) Hedges or dense thorny shrubs or plants on any street or part thereof.
(h) Shrubs or plants more than two (2) feet in height in any street measured above top back
of curb.
(i) Trees projecting into the street traveled way below twelve (12) feet above the pavement.
8-03-060. Abatement of Public Nuisances.
When any public nuisance as defined herein exists, a notice may be sent by mail to the owner or
tenant involved. Such notice shall describe the conditions, state the work necessary to remedy the
condition, and shall specify the time within which the work must be performed. If at the end of the time
specified, such work has not been performed, the City may perform such work and the cost thereof shall
constitute a charge against such owner or tenant, and such charge shall be a lien against the property,
and may be assessed on the property taxes of such property.
8-03-070. Damage to Street Trees.
Damages to any street tree caused by any act or omission by any person, whenever such act or
omission is prohibited by or not authorized pursuant to this Chapter, shall be charged to such person or
persons.
8-03-080. Interference with Enforcement.
No person shall interfere with or delay the authorized representatives of the City from the
execution and enforcement of this Chapter except as provided by law.
8-03-090. Street Tree Topping.
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person to top any street tree, park tree or other
tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs within the tree=s
crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy or disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged
by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where standard pruning
practices are impractical may be exempt from this Section by determination of the Community
Development Director.

Woods Cross Municipal Code September 2020
Title 8, Page 9
CHAPTER 8-06: PARKS
8-06-010. Parks.
8-06-020. Regulations.
8-06-030. Motor Vehicles.
8-06-035. Storage of motorized vehicles and trailers prohibited.
8-06-040. Bicycles and Skateboards.
8-06-050. Golf.
8-06-060. Skiing.
8-06-070. Paths, Trails or Roads.
8-06-080. Animals.
8-06-090. Firearms and Explosives.
8-06-100. Fire Making.
8-06-110. Camping.
8-06-120. Defacing or Destruction of Property.
8-06-130. Littering.
8-06-140. Restroom Facilities.
8-06-150. Prohibited Conduct.
8-06-160. Hunting and Fishing.
8-06-170. Park Hours.
8-06-180. Concessions.
8-06-190. Alcoholic Beverages.
8-06-200. Eviction.
8-06-210. Park Reservations.
8-06-010. Parks.
The City may purchase, layout, establish and maintain parks and playgrounds for the benefit of the
citizens of the City. For purposes of this Chapter, a park shall be defined as real property owned, leased, or
controlled by Woods Cross City and operated and maintained by Woods Cross City and set apart for the
use of the general public, whether developed or undeveloped, and which is usually, or may be planted with
trees, lawns, and other landscaping and which may include within its boundaries facilities for sport,
entertainment, dancing, recreation, picnicking, swimming or is planned for such future use.
8-06-020. Regulations.
The City may promulgate rules and regulations relating to the City parks and may amend such
rules and regulations from time to time.
8-06-030. Motor Vehicles.
(a) Motor Vehicles Specified. For purposes of this Section, motor vehicles include, but are not
limited to, automobiles, trucks, off-road vehicles, motorcycles, motor bikes, snowmobiles, and any and all
other self-propelled mechanical vehicles.
(b) Locations. No motor vehicles may be drive at any place within a City park, other than in
those areas specifically designated and posted as allowing such vehicles. This shall not apply, however, to
motorized or self-propelled equipment or emergency vehicles used within the park by officers or employees
of the City in the performance of their official duties.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 2020
Title 8, Page 10
(c) Snowmobiles and Off-Highway Vehicles. It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any
snowmobile or other off-highway vehicle within any City park or recreation area at any time.
(d) Speed. It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any motor vehicle within any City park or
recreation area at a speed in excess of that speed posted on the particular road, trail or pathway within
the park.
(e) Manner of Operation. No motor vehicles, even though operated within the speed
permitted on the places provided for such vehicles, shall be operated in a careless or reckless manner to
such an extent that it will endanger the peace, health and safety of any other person within the City park
area.
8-06-035. Storage of motorized vehicles and trailers prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to store any type of motorized vehicle or trailer within any city park or city park
parking lot. Storage of such vehicles or trailers within the city park other than a parking lot is prohibited at
any time. The parking of any type of motorized vehicle or trailer within a city park parking lot for more
than a continuous twenty-four (24) hour period will be considered storage. Any motorized vehicle or
trailer found to be stored within any city park or city park parking lot may be summarily abated by means
of towing, or otherwise.
8-06-040. Bicycles and Skateboards.
Except as otherwise posted, self-propelled vehicles such as bicycles, skateboards, roller skates,
roller blades, scooters and similar types of vehicles may be used within public parks. No self-propelled
vehicles shall be operated in a careless or reckless manner to such an extent that it will endanger the
peace, health and safety of any other person within the City park area or in any way that will damage the
facilities, plants or property within the park.
8-06-050. Golf.
It shall be unlawful to play or practice golf within any City park except as part of classes or
programs approved by the City.
8-06-060. Skiing.
It shall be unlawful to ice skate or ski within any City park, except in specific areas as designated
by the City.
8-06-070. Paths, Trails or Roads.
When a trail, path or road is designated for any specific purpose or purposes, such as an
equestrian trail, bicycle path or other use, then such trail may, unless the City shall otherwise permit, only
be used for the specific purposes designated or for incidental uses in connection therewith which are
necessary to accomplish the use permitted.
8-06-080 Animals.
(a) Animals Prohibited. Except as provided herein, no person shall lead, let loose or bring any
animal of any species in any City park. A service animal, defined as any guide dog, signal dog or any
other animal individually trained to provide assistance to an individual with a disability, shall be allowed
to enter and be in City parks when accompanied by the animal=s owner. Animals, other than service
animals accompanied by their owner, found within any City park are subject to pick-up by the animal
control officer. The foregoing provision shall not apply to any educational classes or other events
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 2020
Title 8, Page 11
featuring animals where the sponsors of such events have obtained permission from the City to conduct
the event within the City park.
(b) Tethering. No person shall hitch or fasten any animal to any tree or any other place or structure
on any City park property.
8-06-090. Firearms and Explosives.
No person shall carry or discharge any firearms, firecrackers, rockets, or any other fireworks or
explosives within a City park except persons who have obtained a special permit from the City to put on
a fireworks show.
8-06-100. Fire Making.
No person shall make or kindle a fire within a City park for any purpose unless such person shall do the
same in designated areas and at designated times where a fireplace or other facility intended to contain
a fire is available.
8-06-110. Camping.
No person shall camp or lodge in any City park or playground.
8-06-120. Defacing or Destruction of Property.
Except as permitted by the City, no person shall remove, injure, deface, destroy or disturb any wood,
turf, grass, soil, sand, gravel, tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, sign, fence, bench, or other structure,
apparatus or property within a City park; or cut, take or remove any plant, or mark or write upon any
building, sign, fence, bench or other structure within a City park.
8-06-130. Littering.
No dumping or littering shall be allowed on any City park premises. No garbage generated outside of
the park premises shall be transported to or dumped within the park or within any garbage receptacles
belonging to the City and located within the park. Any garbage generated through use of the park
premises shall be deposited within designated garbage receptacles.
8-06-140. Restroom Facilities.
No male person over six (6) years of age and no female person over such age shall enter or use any
restroom designated and marked for use by members of the opposite sex in a City park or playground,
except that City personnel may for maintenance purposes enter any restroom.
8-06-150. Prohibited Conduct.
No person shall engage in fighting or indulge in riotous, boisterous, intoxicated, threatening,
promiscuous or indecent conduct or use any abusive, threatening, profane or indecent language in a City
park.
8-06-160. Hunting and Fishing.
No person shall hunt or fish in any City park.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 2020
Title 8, Page 12
8-06-170. Park Hours.
Unless otherwise provided by ordinance or resolution of the City Council, City parks may be used
between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. City parks shall not be used or occupied between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except by special permission of the City.
8-06-180. Concessions.
Food, beverages or other items may be sold in City parks only during City-sponsored events. Alcoholic
beverages are not permitted in City parks and shall not be sold at any City-sponsored event. Any person
desiring a concession to sell food, beverages or other items shall:
(a) Apply, pay and receive a permit from the Community Development Director; and
(b) Hold all licenses required by law including, without limitation, a business license and food
handler’s permit.
8-06-190. Alcoholic Beverages.
No person shall consume, sell or have in their possession any alcoholic beverage within a City park.
8-06-200. Eviction.
Any person violating any of the instructions, signs or rules established by the City may be forthwith
evicted from the park by any police officer of the City.
8-06-210. Park Reservations.
Certain facilities and areas within the City parks as designated by the City may be reserved by any
person upon payment of an applicable park reservation fee established by the City. Park reservation
policies may be adopted and amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
TITLE 9
UTILITIES AND SERVICES
CHAPTER 9-01: WATER
CHAPTER 9-02: STORM WATER
CHAPTER 9-03: IRRIGATION WATER AND NATURAL WATER COURSES
CHAPTER 9-06: SEWER REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 9-09: TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 9-12: EXCAVATION PERMITS
CHAPTER 9-13: FLOOD DAMAGE PRVENTION
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 1
+
TITLE 9
UTILITIES AND SERVICES
CHAPTER 9-01: WATER
CHAPTER 9-03: IRRIGATION WATER AND NATURAL WATER COURSES
CHAPTER 9-04: DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION
CHAPTER 9-06: SEWER REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 9-09: TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 9-12: EXCAVATION PERMITS
CHAPTER 9-13: FLOOD DAMAGE PRVENTION
CHAPTER 9-01: WATER
9-01-010. Purpose and Title.
9-01-020. Public Works Department.
9-01-030. Water Superintendent.
9-01-040. Water System.
9-01-050. Rules and Regulations.
9-01-060. Duty to Maintain.
9-01-070. Authority to Shut Off.
9-01-080. Duty to Treat.
9-01-090. Access for Water Superintendent.
9-01-100. Liability.
9-01-110. Application for Connection and/or Service.
9-01-120. Water Service Authorized.
9-01-130. Obligation of Owner.
9-01-140. Misrepresentation.
9-01-150. Applications Non-Transferable.
9-01-160. Fees.
9-01-170. Special Rates.
9-01-180. Billing.
9-01-190. Delinquent Payments.
9-01-200. Notice of Shut Off.
9-01-210. Shut Off.
9-01-220. Stay of Shut Off.
9-01-230. Legal Action.
9-01-240. Voluntary Discontinuance.
9-01-250. Service Lateral Installation.
9-01-260. Service Lateral Maintenance.
9-01-270. Service Lateral Replacement.
9-01-280. Service Lateral Repair or Alteration.
9-01-290. Service Lateral Location.
9-01-300. Extension of Water System Within the City.
9-01-310. Extension of Water System Outside the City.
9-01-320. Meter Installation and Maintenance.
9-01-330. Meter Required.
9-01-340. Meter Accuracy.
9-01-350. Meter Tampering.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 2
9-01-360. Illegal Use of Water Pressure.
9-01-370. Unauthorized Service.
9-01-380. Unauthorized Connection.
9-01-390. Damage to Water System.
9-01-400. Emergencies.
9-01-410. Waste Prohibited.
9-01-420. Sprinklers.
9-01-430. Curtailment.
9-01-440. Turning Water Off.
9-01-450. Cross Connections.
9-01-460. Maintenance and Control of Hydrants.
9-01-470. Tampering with Hydrants.
9-01-480. Hydrant Use by City Departments.
9-01-490. Private Use of Fire Hydrant Water.
9-01-500. Fire Hydrant Water Use Permit.
9-01-510. Secondary Water Connection.
9-01-520. Wellhead Protection.
9-01-530. Penalty.
9-01-540. Board of Equalization.
9-01-010. Purpose and Title.
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish and provide requirements, regulations and procedures
for the governing and administration of the Woods Cross City Water System. This Chapter shall be
known as and may be referred to as the Woods Cross City Water System Ordinance.
9-01-020. Public Works Department.
The Public Works Department shall have authority to operate and maintain the Woods Cross City
Water System, hereinafter referred to as the "water system," and to furnish water service to the residents
of the City in accordance with the provisions of this Title. To accomplish these purposes, the Public
Works Department is empowered to employ persons, purchase and approve real property, acquire
equipment and perform all other acts necessary or incidental to the accomplishing of the above- described
purposes, subject to all applicable ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and policies of the City.
9-01-030. Water Superintendent.
There is hereby created the office of Water Superintendent. The Water Superintendent shall
administer and enforce this Chapter under the direction of the Public Works Director and the City
Administrator and shall manage the City's water system pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter and all
other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations and policies of the City. The Water Superintendent shall
have such other duties and responsibilities as designated by the City Council.
9-01-040. Water System.
The water system constructed or otherwise acquired by the City to supply water is the property of
the City and shall be under the sole and exclusive control and jurisdiction of the City. The City may enter
into contracts with other governmental entities and/or wholesale water delivery providers for the purchase
of water and may acquire water rights, water shares, etc., as it deems appropriate or desirable for the
City's water system.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 3
9-01-050. Rules and Regulations.
The City Council may from time to time by resolution establish rules and regulations regarding the
establishment, installation, operation, control and modification of the City water system in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter.
9-01-060. Duty to Maintain.
The Public Works Department shall keep the water system in good repair. Any leaks, breaks or
equipment failures of the City water system shall be promptly repaired in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter.
9-01-070. Authority to Shut Off.
The Public Works Department shall have the power and authority to temporarily discontinue water
service to any area without notice, for the purpose of repairing and maintaining the water system.
9-01-080. Duty to Treat.
The Public Works Department shall treat or cause to be treated the water furnished to the water
users hereunder using current water treatment methods such that the water shall conform to State and
Federal standards of purity and fitness for culinary use.
9-01-090. Access for Water Superintendent.
As a condition of a person receiving water service from the City, the Water Superintendent and
his or her authorized agents shall, at all reasonable hours and/or upon such notice as is reasonable under
the circumstances, have free access to any place supplied with water service from the City's water system
for the purpose of examining the apparatus, the amounts of water used, the manner of use, and to make
any and all necessary adjustments to said systems or shut off for vacancy, delinquency or violation of
applicable ordinances, rules or regulations of the City.
9-01-100. Liability.
Except as otherwise provided in the Utah Governmental Immunity Act, set forth in Utah Code Ann.
§§ 63-30-1, et seq., as amended, the City shall not be liable or responsible for any loss, damage, or injury,
direct or indirect, to a water user, the user's family, guests, tenants, invitees, or any person, or the real or
personal property of any person arising out of or caused by the City water system, or by the cessation or
interruption of City water supply.
9-01-110. Application for Connection and/or Service.
The record owner of property desiring to connect to and to receive service from the City water
system shall submit an application for water connection and/or service to such property in writing to the
City in such form as provided by the City. If the property is not already connected to the City water system
through an approved service lateral or if an extension of the water main is required for service, the
provisions of this Chapter regarding the installation of service laterals and extensions shall be followed.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 4
9-01-120. Water Service Authorized.
Water service may be furnished or restored to premises if the person requesting such service
substantially complies with the following provisions.
(a) Application. The property owner of the premises fills out, signs and files with the City an
application for water service as provided in Section 9-01-110.
(b) Deposit. The applicant pays a deposit in the amount set forth by resolution in the City
Consolidated Fee Schedule.
(c) Fees. The applicant shall pay the cost of a water meter as set forth in the Consolidated
Fee Schedule. In the event the property owner is required to install a service lateral or extend the water
system prior to connection, the applicant shall be required to make all installments and connections at
applicants cost.
(d) Current Charges. Before water will be turned on to any premises, all charges due and
owing to the City by the applicant(s) for water must be paid.
9-01-130. Obligation of Owner.
The record owner of property to be served by the City water system must appear as the applicant
for water connection and service and shall be held responsible to the City for payment of all water service
fees and charges incurred by that connection. Owners of property that rent, lease or otherwise give the
said property over to the tenancy of another, shall remain liable for the water services furnished to the
property, including all fees and charges incurred by a renter or lessee or other occupant of the owner's
premises. It shall be the duty of the property owner to notify the City of termination or change in ownership
of the property as well as any mailing address changes and occupant/tenant(user) name and contact
information changes.
9-01-140. Misrepresentation.
It shall be unlawful to misrepresent a material fact in applying for water connection and service.
Material facts include, but shall not be limited to, the identity of the applicant as the owner or tenant of the
property to be connected and the purpose for which the water service to be provided will be used.
9-01-150. Applications Non-Transferable.
Water service and connections shall not be transferred to a location different from that shown on
the application for water service nor from where originally used, nor may a larger water connection be
subdivided into several smaller connections.
9-01-160. Fees.
The City Council shall, by resolution, set forth in the Consolidated Fee Schedule the fees to be
charged for the base rate water service charge, service charges other than the base rate, water meter fee,
impact fees, fee for use of water from fire hydrants, water service deposits, and all other appropriate fees
required herein. Rates for services furnished shall be uniform with respect to each class or classes of
service established by the City or that may hereinafter be established.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 5
9-01-170. Special Rates.
The City Council may from time to time fix by agreement or resolution, special rates and
conditions for users using exceptionally large amounts of water service or making use of the water system
under exceptional circumstances, upon such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate.
9-01-175 Date Calculations for Billing Purposes
Any billing date that falls on a weekend will be recognized on the Monday following a weekend
date. Any billing date that falls on a Federal or State Holiday will be recognized on the day following.
9-01-180. Billing.
The Utility Billing Clerk shall furnish a statement to each utility customer each month. Charges in
the statement will reflect utility charges for the previous month. The statement will be a combined
statement for water, garbage collection and other services provided by the City, which statement shall
separately specify the amount of the bill for the water service, garbage collection and any other service,
the place of payment, and the due date. All bills shall be paid in full by the 25th day of the month in which
the statement is sent out.
9-01-190. Delinquency
If any user, owner, or account holder fails to pay the utility statement charges in full, prior to the
tenth (10th) day of the month following the due date, the account shall be considered delinquent and a
service fee, as set forth in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule, shall be assessed. Partial payments shall
not be sufficient to prevent the account from being declared delinquent, unless written consent is provided
by the Utility Billing Clerk.
9-01-200. Notice of Delinquency
The Utility Billing Clerk shall furnish to the occupant(user) of the premises and/or the property
owner or owner’s duly authorized agent, a notice of delinquency stating water service will be discontinued
to said premises if full payment of the past due balance, and any accrued fees is not received by the date
stated in the delinquent notice, which will be no sooner than ten(10) days following the date of said notice.
9-01-210. Notice of Shut Off.
If any user, owner or account holder fails to pay the delinquent utility charges and any assessed
fees prior to 8:00 am on the eighth(8th) day after the date of the Notice of Delinquency the Utility Billing
Clerk shall cause a notice to be posted on the service premises explaining the reason for the proposed
shut off and stating water service may thereafter be shut off if payment is not made within two(2) days
from the date of such notice. The notice shall also outline the terms and conditions that need to be met in
order to restore service should the water service be shut off. If the delinquent utility charges and all
assessed fees are not paid within two (2) days from the date of such notice, and no stay has been issued
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, the City may shut off water service to the premises
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 6
9-01-220 Restoration of Water Service
Before water service to the premises is restored, all delinquent utility charges must be paid,
together with all assessed fees including the above mentioned reconnect fee. Payment extensions will not
be afforded once the water service has been shut off for non-payment. If payment has not been made to
the City office by 2:00 pm on any day after the water is shut off, the water will remain turned off until the
next day of business. Any unauthorized action to turn the water back on by the property owner and/or
occupants will be deemed as theft of services and the account will be assessed a water meter tampering
fee as outlined in the City Consolidated Fee Schedule.
9-01-220. Stay of Shut Off.
The Utility Billing Clerk may extend the time up to fifteen days for bringing current a delinquent
account. In addition, the customer may file a written request for review of the billing with the City
Administrator. Such request for review shall either set forth the customer's good reason to believe an
error has occurred in the billing, which error has resulted in a billing amount in excess of service actually
rendered or identify a hardship under which the customer has little or no control that justifies a stay of the
shut off. The written request for review of a water billing shall set forth the facts and arguments in favor of
the customer's position. Any appeal of a bill as set forth herein, shall stay any action by the City to shut off
water service for fifteen (15) days or until a determination has been made by the City Administrator,
whichever occurs first. Written notice of the decision and the action to be taken shall be provided to the
customer.
9-01-230. Legal Action.
The City Recorder or Treasurer, is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the payment of
all delinquent City service charges and connection fees whether for water, garbage or other services, by
an action at law in the corporate name of the City.
9-01-240. Voluntary Discontinuance.
Any user desiring to discontinue service permanently or temporarily shall notify the Utility Billing
Clerk in writing at least ten (10) days before the date when such service is to be discontinued. Any credit
balance in favor of the user as a result of deposit will be refunded promptly after receipt of notice of
permanent discontinuance of service, unless other arrangements have been made with the Utility Billing
Clerk.
9-01-250. Service Lateral Installation.
The property owner, or his or her agent, desiring to obtain water service, shall be responsible at
his or her sole expense for installing a service lateral to the curb or property boundary line of his or her
property which meets the following requirements.
(a) The service lateral shall be made of such material and quality specified in the City's
construction codes and standards.
(b) The service lateral installation shall include all pipe mechanisms, meter boxes, valves and
other equipment, except meters and other equipment to be installed by the City, required for proper
service as designated by the City construction codes and standards and the provisions of this Chapter.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 7
(c) The service lateral shall be buried at a depth and grade specified in the City construction
codes and standards.
(d) The service lateral shall be located and installed the required distance from other service
pipes in accordance with City construction codes and standards.
(e) The service lateral shall not run across property owned in fee by a person other than the
property owner who is applying for connection, unless written permission is obtained from the City and a
satisfactory easement is obtained from the affected property owner.
(f) The service lateral shall supply water to no more than one building, except that where
permission is obtained by the property owner from the City. Connection of more than one building may be
made to such a service lateral, if the property owner applying for the connection is the owner of all
buildings connected to said service lateral. For the purpose of payment of fees required under the
provisions of this Chapter, each building which receives water service through a common service lateral
shall be deemed to receive water service through a separate service lateral and the property owner shall
be required to pay appropriate charges for each building receiving water service.
(g) The service lateral to be connected to the City water system shall be inspected by an
inspector of the City Public Works Department and found to conform to the provisions of this Chapter, the
Plumbing Code as amended and adopted by the City, and all other applicable construction standards,
ordinances, rules and regulations, prior to backfilling. It shall be the property owner's responsibility to
ensure that the service lateral and all other underground water lines or connections to be inspected are
open and visible to the inspector at the time of the inspection.
(h) No service lateral shall be connected to the City water system until all requirements of this
Section are complied with and the lateral has been inspected and approved by the City.
9-01-260. Service Lateral Maintenance.
Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, water service users shall keep their service laterals and
connections and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at their own expense. Each
property owner shall own and shall bear the sole responsibility for repair, upkeep and maintenance of the
service lateral from the property side of the water meter to the premises being served. The City shall not
accept nor bear any responsibility for any leaks, or damages caused by leakage, in the service lateral.
Without incurring any liability to the property owner, the City may make emergency repairs to service
laterals in order to mitigate damage, prevent waste of water, and prevent contamination of the water
supply. Any such repairs shall be at the property owner's expense and shall be billed to the property
owner by the City.
9-01-270. Service Lateral Replacement.
The replacement of a previously used service lateral shall be deemed a connection and the
provisions for installation and connection of a new service lateral shall apply to said replacement.
9-01-280. Service Lateral Repair or Alteration.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open, alter, repair, or connect to any existing service lateral
without first having received a permit therefore from the Public Works Department. Except as otherwise
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 8
provided herein, no permit shall authorize the alteration of or connection to a service lateral which results
in the availability of water service to a building to which such service was not furnished before the
alteration or connection is made.
9-01-290. Service Lateral Location.
The City assumes no responsibility for nor shall it warrant or guarantee the specific location of
water service laterals as shown on as-built drawings furnished by developers and/or contractors. Persons
applying for building permits may inspect the as-built drawings by developers and/or contractors if they
desire to do so in connection with locating service laterals, however, the City will not take responsibility for
the accuracy of such documents. Persons desiring to obtain such information from the City shall be
required to sign an appropriate disclaimer.
9-01-300. Extension of Water System Within the City.
(a) Application. Whenever any person, firm or corporation subdivides, develops or builds
upon any property within the City which requires the installation or extension of a water main from an
existing main, the person, firm or corporation seeking approval of the subdivision or development of the
property shall submit an application for extension of and service from the City water system for the
development. The application shall set forth the distance and location of the proposed extension, a map
of the extension, the size, location and number of connections that applicant will require, and the intended
use; i.e. residential, multi-family, commercial and/or industrial.
(b) Review. The application shall be submitted to the City by the developer with the
preliminary plat or site plan review for the development and shall be reviewed by the City Engineer. Upon
a finding by the City that the City has available water rights, water source capacity, and water distribution
and storage facility capacity to serve the proposed development with a year round supply of water, the
application may be accepted.
(c) Agreement. Upon acceptance of the application for extension and water service, the
developer shall enter into a written extension agreement with the City specifying the terms and conditions
under which the water extensions and connections shall be made to the City water system and the
payments that shall be required.
(d) Expense. The developer shall be required, at his or her own expense, to make,
construct, and lay such extension from the existing main to the proposed subdivision, development or
building. Developer shall construct at its sole expense, the internal or on-site water distribution system
required to serve the individual consumers within developer's subdivision or development, including all
booster pumps, on-site storage, and other appurtenant facilities as well as any off-site reservoir required
for the development. All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the City's specifications.
Service and connection to the City water system shall not be permitted until such improvements are
inspected, approved and accepted by the City.
(e) Easements. Where possible, provisions shall be made for the construction of all line
extensions and distribution lines within public streets and easements. Where lines must cross private
property, developer shall obtain at developer's sole expense, all required and necessary easements in
satisfactory and recordable form.
(f) Dedication. Upon compliance with all conditions and requirements set forth herein,
developer shall convey to the City, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, except for those
specifically agreed to in writing by the City, and by conveyancing instrument acceptable to the City, the
following:
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 9
(1) Any extension of the City's main transmission system constructed by developer
and donated to the City as provided herein, together with all necessary pipeline easements and
rights-of-way for the operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the same.
(2) The internal subdivision distribution system and all appurtenant facilities
specifically including but not limited to all distribution lines, pumps, storage facilities, booster
pumps, and any required treatment facilities, together with all appurtenant easements and rightsof-
way for the operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the same.
(g) Reimbursement. Where any person, firm or corporation subdivides or develops property
subject to these provisions and is required to make expenditures which in the opinion of the City Council
should not be borne wholly and solely by such developer because other subsequent developments will
benefit directly therefrom, the City Council may enter into an agreement with the developer for
reimbursement on a proportionate basis for his or her actual costs as subsequent users connect to the
main extension. As a condition of such reimbursement and prior to final approval and acceptance of the
main extension by the City, the developer shall submit to the City a verified list of costs which shall form
the basis of the reimbursement agreement taking into consideration the benefit of the line to the
developer.
9-01-310. Extension of Water System Outside the City.
The City may furnish water service from its water system to persons outside the City in
accordance with the provisions of this Section provided that such water service is available and will in no
way deprive the residents of Woods Cross City of water consumption. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed to obligate the City to extend its system to provide water service to persons outside the
boundaries of the City.
(a) Petition. Any person or persons located outside the City limits who desires to be supplied
with water service from the City water system may make application to the City Council for such extension
and service by petition. The petition shall set forth the distance and location of the proposed extension, a
map of the extension, the size, location and number of connections that petitioner will require, and the
intended use. Petitioner shall be required to pay in advance the entire cost of extending the City water
system to provide such service. In addition to the requirements set forth in this Section, the petition shall
contain a certified acknowledgment that the petitioner understands that the City in granting the petition
need only supply such water to the petitioner from time to time as shall be deemed by the City Council to
be available beyond the requirements of water use within the City limits and that such extension shall be
the property of and subject to the control of the City.
(b) Review. The City shall review the petition, including review by the Public Works
Department, City Engineer and City Attorney. The Public Works Department shall determine what portion,
if any, of the extension of the City's water mains to the City limits the City shall construct, and shall prepare
a verified statement showing the whole cost and expense of making such an extension. Such costs and
expenses shall include administrative and supervisory expenditures of the City, which shall in no event be
deemed to be less than ten percent (10%) of the cost of materials and labor. Upon a finding by the City
that the City has available water rights, water source capacity, and water distribution and storage facility
capacity to serve the proposed development the application may be accepted.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 10
(c) Agreement. If the City grants the petition or any portion thereof, the petitioner and the City
shall enter into an acceptable written water system extension agreement, which agreement shall be
executed prior to the commencement of any work upon said extension.
(d) Dedication. Upon compliance with all conditions and requirements set forth herein,
petitioner shall convey to the City, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, except for those
specifically agreed to in writing by the City, and by conveyancing instrument acceptable to the City, the
following:
(1) Any extension of the City's main transmission system constructed by petitioner
and donated to the City as provided herein, together with all necessary pipeline easements and
rights-of-way for the operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the same.
(2) The internal subdivision distribution system and all appurtenant facilities
specifically including but not limited to all distribution lines, pumps, storage facilities, booster
pumps, and any required treatment facilities, together with all appurtenant easements and rightsof-
way for the operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the same.
(e) Reimbursement. The City shall have the right to allow third parties to connect to any
water line or facilities constructed pursuant to this Section in which case the City may enter into an
agreement providing partial reimbursement to the developer. As a condition of such reimbursement, the
petitioner shall, prior to final approval and acceptance of the main extension by the City, submit to the City
a verified list of costs which shall form the basis of the reimbursement agreement taking into consideration
the benefit of the line to the petitioner.
9-01-320. Meter Installation and Maintenance.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not authorized by the Public Works Department to open
or connect into any City water main. Any person desiring to open or connect into the City water system
shall obtain the appropriate permits required herein and all work performed under such permit shall be
inspected by the City. Any person connecting to the water system shall install a connection pipe of
suitable quality under the street and a meter box, meter, and stopcock at a location determined by the
Public Works Department. Said connection pipe, meter box, meter and stopcock are and shall remain the
property of the City, which retains the sole right to maintain, repair, and service said facilities. The City
shall own and maintain the shutoff valve, the water meter and its appurtenances, regardless of whether
the water meter was installed at the street or inside the structure receiving service.
9-01-330. Meter Required.
All water delivered by the City to its customers shall be metered through water meters owned and
approved by the City. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use or have in their
possession any water from the City water system that has not first been passed through and the quantity
thereof measured by a City water meter.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 11
9-01-340. Meter Accuracy.
Any user may submit a request for a test of his or her water meter. The Water Superintendent
may, if under the circumstances it is deemed advisable, order a test of the requested meter measuring the
water delivered to the user. If such request to test the meter is made within twelve (12) months after the
date of the last previous test, the user may be required to pay the costs of such test if the meter is found
to record from 97% to 103% of accuracy under methods of testing that are satisfactory to the Water
Superintendent. In the event a meter is found to be recording less than 97% or more than 103% of
accuracy, the City shall make such adjustments in the user's previous bill as are just and fair under the
circumstances. If a meter fails to register at any time, the water delivered during such period shall be
estimated on the basis of previous consumption. To the extent possible, the period of time used to
assess previous consumption shall be a seasonally similar time period.
9-01-350. Meter Tampering.
Meters may be checked, opened, inspected or adjusted at the discretion of the City by City
personnel. It shall be unlawful for any person other than authorized agents of the City to adjust, open,
manipulate, disconnect or tamper with City water meters in any manner. If any meter tampering by an
owner and/or occupant of property is deemed to be done to restore water services to a property where
water has been disconnected for non-payment such tampering shall be deemed theft of services and the
account for that property will be assessed a water meter tampering fee as outlined in the City
Consolidated Fee Schedule. A user shall prevent any damage to the water meter used by such user and
shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the water meter other than normal wear and
tear.
9-01-360. Illegal Use of Water Pressure.
The water provided through any connection to the City water system shall not be used for the
purpose of driving any motor, syphon, turbine, or other wheels, or any hydraulic engines, or elevators, or
for driving or propelling machinery of any kind whatsoever.
9-01-370. Unauthorized Service.
It shall be unlawful for any person to provide oneself or others with, or to make use of water
service from the City water system without prior authorization from the City and payment therefore as
herein provided. It is unlawful for any person to restore discontinued water service by self-help or other
means without authorization by the City. Regularly applicable charges shall be assessed for unauthorized
water service and may be collected as provided in this Chapter.
9-01-380. Unauthorized Connection.
It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to connect to, disconnect, repair or alter
the City water system or any part thereof, including, but not limited to, any water line or water meter,
without prior authority obtained from the City in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. It shall be
unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to open any fire hydrant, stopcock, valve, or other fixtures
attached to the City water system without prior authority obtained from the City in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 12
9-01-390. Damage to Water System.
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface, damage or interfere with
the operation of any part, pipe, fixture, appliance, appurtenance or property of the City water system or
any source of water supplying to said system, to interfere with the flow or control of distribution of the
water system, or to pollute, contaminate or introduce into such system any substance poisonous to human
life or harmful to human health or detrimentally affecting the taste, smell, color, odor, or other aesthetic
characteristic of the City water system.
(b) Restitution. All damages or injury to the water, lines, meters or other equipment of the
City water system caused by any act or neglect of the user or his or her agents or any violation of this
Chapter shall, in the discretion of the City, be repaired by or at the expense of the user, and the user shall
pay all costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees, which may arise or accrue to the City
through its efforts to repair or recover expenses for the repair of the damage to the water, lines, meters or
other equipment of the City water system or Public Works Department.
9-01-400. Emergencies.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, in the case of leaks or other accidents damaging
service laterals or other apparatus connected with the water system, plumbers or other qualified persons
may shut off the water at the curb box to make the necessary repairs, and turn on the water upon
completion of such repairs without obtaining authorization.
9-01-410. Waste Prohibited.
All users of water service shall be required to keep their sprinklers, faucets, valves, hoses and all
apparatus connected to the water system in good condition at their own expense and all waterways closed
when not in use. No person, unless authorized by the City in accordance with this Chapter, shall turn on
or discharge water from any fire hydrant, and no water user or other person shall waste water or allow it to
be wasted by imperfect stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes, or to allow tanks or watering troughs to
leak or overflow, or to wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets, basins, sinks, or other apparatus, or to
use any water from the water system except for culinary and domestic purposes, including lawn sprinkling,
unless so authorized by the City, or to use the water for purposes other than those for which he or she has
paid, or use water in violation of the rules and regulations adopted by the City Council.
9-01-420. Sprinklers.
All sprinkler systems shall comply with applicable provisions of the Plumbing Code, as adopted
and amended by the City, and shall only be allowed in connection with other water service provided to the
premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or use a sprinkling system which materially affects
the pressure or supply of water in the City water system or any part thereof.
9-01-430. Curtailment.
Water shall be supplied first for culinary purposes. In times of water scarcity, the Mayor may, by
proclamation, declare a water emergency and limit, ration, or otherwise regulate the distribution or use of
water to such extent as may be required for public good of the City. Such action of the City may include,
but shall not be limited to, limiting the use of water for lawn sprinkling or imposing a moratorium on new
water connections until the emergency has been alleviated.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 13
9-01-440. Turning Water Off.
If any water user shall waste water, or shall, within two (2) days after notice is given by the Public
Works Department, fail to repair any service connection or plumbing on his or her premises, or fail to
comply with any regulations or restrictions with respect to the use of water, he or she shall be liable to
have the water shut off from his or her premises by the Public Works Department. Upon the occurrence
of any of the foregoing, the Public Works Department shall notify the occupant of the premises and the
owner thereof in writing, by personal delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, of the violation and
that the water service will be discontinued if the violation is not remedied within three (3) days. If the
violation is not remedied within the required time frame after service of the notice of discontinuance, the
Public Works Department shall cause a notice to be left on the property explaining the reason for
discontinuance, and the water service may thereafter be discontinued. If water is turned off because of
defective plumbing or waste, as provided herein, the water shall not be turned on again until the same
have been repaired in accordance with the requirements of the Public Works Department, and a fee has
been paid for shut off, turn on and inspection as set forth by resolution in the City Consolidated Fee
Schedule.
9-01-450. Cross Connections.
(a) Generally. This Section shall be known as the "Woods Cross City Cross Connection
Ordinance," and may be so cited. The purpose of this Section is to protect the public potable water supply
from contamination or pollution by isolating within its customers' internal distribution system(s) or its
customers' private water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon
into the public potable water supply system. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Section R309-102-5
of the Utah Safe Drinking Water Rules and Regulations.
(b) Requirements. No water service connection to any premises within the City shall be
installed or maintained unless the water supply is protected. Unprotected cross connections shall not be
an integral part of any consumer's water system within the City. In the event a cross connection cannot be
eliminated, it must be protected by the installation of an air gap or approved backflow prevention
assembly/device in accordance with the provisions set forth herein.
(c) Responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to purchase, install or
cause to be installed, test and maintain any backflow prevention assembly/device required to herein. It
shall be the responsibility of the City Public Works and Building Departments to administer and enforce
the provisions of this Section to ensure compliance herewith.
(d) Compliance. All connections to the City water system and backflow prevention devices
required herein shall conform to the provisions of this Section, the Plumbing Code, as amended and
adopted by the City, the Utah Safe Drinking Water Act, and other relevant provisions of the Utah Code
Annotated, as amended.
(e) Enforcement. Service of water to any building or location, in the discretion of the City,
may be discontinued if a backflow prevention assembly required by this Section is not installed, tested,
and maintained, if a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or by-passed, or if an unprotected
cross connection exists at the building or location. In addition, water service may be terminated to any
building or location when the Public Works Director or Building Official determines that the service
connection's water usage constitutes a sufficient hazard or risk to the water supply or to the City's water
system. The City shall give reasonable notice to the customer and/or owner of the building or location of
the termination of water service to a building or location, and where the consumer could not reasonably be
so notified before termination, then notice shall be given promptly afterwards. Service will not be restored
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 14
until such conditions or defects are corrected to the requirement of this Section and the satisfaction of the
City.
(f) Record Keeping. Officers and employees of the Public Works Department and the
Building Department shall report all installations of backflow prevention devices, assemblies and methods
of cross connection correction installed by or communicated to them to the Public Works Director or his or
her designee. The Public Works Director, or his or her designee, shall maintain or cause to be maintained
an inventory of all said assemblies, as well as test and repair records on all such assemblies, and shall be
responsible for notifying customers of annual testing requirements or other enforcement requirements.
9-01-460. Maintenance and Control of Hydrants.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 15
Fire hydrants are the property of the City and are under the control of and shall be kept in repair
by the Public Works Department.
9-01-470. Tampering with Hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall not be tampered with and no one shall use, adjust, alter or change any fire
hydrant except the Public Works Department or persons duly authorized by the City. It is unlawful for any
person, other than those duly authorized, to open or operate any City fire hydrant or to tamper or interfere
with or attempt to draw water therefrom, or in any way to obstruct the approach thereto.
9-01-480. Hydrant Use by City Departments.
Duly authorized fire protection personnel shall at all times have free and unrestricted access to all
fire hydrants. In the event of a fire within the City, a fireman, policeman, or employee of the Public Works
Department may order that all valves, taps, and stopcocks connected to the plumbing systems of any
property supplied with water service by the City be closed and remain closed until the fire is extinguished.
Other City Departments or agencies may use fire hydrants with the approval of the Public Works
Department.
9-01-490. Private Use of Fire Hydrant Water.
The private use of City fire hydrants for obtaining water is discouraged and shall be used as a
measure of last resort and all other means of obtaining water for construction purposes, dust control and
other private uses must be explored and used whenever possible. Any private use of fire hydrants shall
require a permit as provided herein.
9-01-500. Fire Hydrant Water Use Permit.
(a) Permit Required. Any person or entity desiring to obtain water from a City fire hydrant
shall submit an application for a Fire Hydrant Water Use Permit on forms provided by the City to the Public
Works Department. The application shall be signed by the applicant or applicant's authorized and certified
agent, and shall state the purpose for which the water is to be used, the location of the intended fire
hydrant to be used, and the desired term of the permit, not to exceed thirty (30) days. Applicants must
agree to and abide by all conditions, charges and liabilities of the permit.
(b) Fees. Each application for a Fire Hydrant Water Use Permit shall be accompanied by the
required permit fees as set forth in the City Fee Schedule. No permit shall be issued until the proper fees
have been paid to the City. Unless otherwise provided, the permit and fees required herein shall be in
addition to any and all other licenses, permits and fees imposed by any other ordinance, regulation or law.
(c) Issuance of Permit. The Water Superintendent shall review all applications for Fire
Hydrant Water Use Permits and may issue or deny such applications based upon consideration of the
effect of the proposed use, the location of the hydrant, the availability of water from the system, assurance
that the use of the hydrant(s) will not adversely affect delivery of water to existing connections to the City
water system, and compliance with all conditions and requirements of this Chapter. Permit terms may not
exceed thirty (30) days. Permits shall be valid only for the applicant for whom it was issued and only for
the location and use for which it was issued and shall not be assignable or transferable.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 16
(d) Water Meter. Upon issuance of a Fire Hydrant Water Use Permit and payment of all
required fees and deposits, the permit holder shall obtain a meter and other required equipment from the
Public Works Department necessary to obtain and meter the water drawn from the hydrant in accordance
with the permit. A deposit shall be required for the use of the meter and other equipment provided by the
City in an amount set forth in the City Fee Schedule in order to insure return of the meter and equipment
in good condition. The meter number and reading shall be noted on the permit at the time of issuance.
(e) Payment. Upon completion of the use of fire hydrant water or expiration of the permit,
whichever is sooner, Applicant shall return the meter and other equipment provided by the City and pay
the appropriate fee in accordance with the rates set forth in the City Fee Schedule for the amount of water
used as indicated on the returned meter. In the Citys discretion, the City may require an applicant to prepay
for the good faith estimate of the amount of water to be used at the appropriate rate set forth in the
City Fee Schedule. Upon completion of the use of fire hydrant water or expiration of the permit, actual
water usage shall be determined and the Applicant shall pay to the City any deficiency in water fees owed.
All fees, deposits and payments shall be submitted to the City Treasurer's Office for receipt and
remittance.
(f) Inspection. The City reserves the right to supervise and/or inspect the use of any City fire
hydrant in accordance with any permit issued hereunder. Applicant shall close the hydrant and disconnect
the meter from the hydrant when not using the water, thereby leaving the hydrants free and clear for use
by the fire department and City officials.
(g) Free Access. No private use of City fire hydrants as permitted herein, may interfere with
the use of any fire hydrant by City officials, and the fire department shall at all times have free access to all
fire hydrants.
(h) Records. The Public Works Department shall keep a record of all permits issued
hereunder, including the name of the person to whom the permit was issued, the term of the permit and
the fees and deposit collected.
(i) Rules and Regulations. The Public Works Department may establish and adopt, with the
advice and consent of the City Council, rules and regulations governing the use of City fire hydrants and
permits for the same.
(j) Indemnification. Applicant shall be responsible for returning the meter and equipment to
the City in good condition when due. A late fee may be charged for any meter or equipment which is not
returned to the City within twenty-four (24) hours from the expiration of the permit as provided in the City
Fee Schedule. Applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the City for the cost to replace any meter or
equipment not returned and shall be liable for any and all damage to the City fire hydrant(s) or equipment
in connection with applicant's use of the hydrant. Applicant shall further indemnify and hold harmless the
City, its officers, employees, agents and sureties, from liability of any kind or nature which may result from
use of the hydrant, meter, equipment or water as permitted herein.
(k) Revocation. Any Fire Hydrant Water Use Permit issued hereunder may be revoked or
suspended by the City upon applicant's failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the Public
Works Department and the ordinances of the City governing the use of water from City fire hydrants. Prior
to revocation of any permit, proper notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be provided to the permit
holder.
Woods Cross Municipal Code December 2019
Title 9, Page 17
(l) Appeals. Any person aggrieved of the denial or revocation of a Fire Hydrant Water Use
Permit may appeal such decision to the City Council by filing written notice of appeal within fifteen (15)
days from the date of the decision.
9-01-510. Secondary Water Connection.
(a) New Residential Buildings. All new residential building sites shall be served by pressure
irrigation in accordance with the City Subdivision Ordinance. No new building permits will be issued until
the applicant has made arrangements to connect to an irrigation water system. Each owner shall extend
to the pressure irrigation system and provide a connection for the building site concurrent with
construction of the residence.
(b) Existing Residential Buildings. All owners of existing residences having access to
pressurized irrigation systems are encouraged to connect to such systems for all outside watering.
9-01-520. Wellhead Protection.
In order to protect ground water sources that supply water to the City potable water system, the
City shall adopt a Wellhead Protection Ordinance set forth in the City Zoning Ordinance restricting land
use and development within the vicinity of any well that supplies potable water to the City water system in
order to protect such areas from urban development which may cause pollutants to be discharged into the
ground water supply. All development within the City must comply with the provisions of the Wellhead
Protection Ordinance.
9-01-530. Penalty.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall
be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall be subject to fines and/or imprisonment as provided in Utah
Code Ann.  76-2-301 and 76-3-204, as amended. In instances where the violation is a continuing
violation, a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day in which the violation occurs or
continues. This Section shall not limit the authority of any court of competent jurisdiction to impose any
other sanction or order any other relief as may be appropriate under the laws of the State of Utah.
9-01-540. Board of Equalization.
The City Council is hereby designated as the board of equalization of water rates to hear
complaints and make corrections of any assessment alleged to be illegal, unequal or unjust. All
complaints shall be filed in writing to the City Recorder and shall state the grounds for the complaint.
Chapter 9-02: STORM WATER
9-02-010 Purpose
9-02-020 Definitions
9-02-030 Storm Water Utility Created
9-02-040 Ownership of City Storm Sewer Facilities and Assets.
9-02-050 Utility Administration.
9-02-060 Service Charge Imposed.
9-02-070 System of Rates and Charges.
9-02-080 Billing and Collection.
9-02-090 Appeal of Charges.
9-02-100 No Polluted Waters Discharged to Storm Sewers.
9-02-110 Obstruction.
9-02-120 Dumping.
9-02-130 Enforcement.
9-02-140 Annual Report to Storm Sewer Utility Customers.
9-02-010. Purpose
The City finds and declares that absent effective maintenance, operation, regulation, and
control, existing storm water drainage conditions in all areas within the City constitute a potential
hazard to the health, safety and general welfare of the City. The City Council further finds that
natural and manmade storm sewer facilities and conveyances constitute a storm sewer system
and that effective, regulation, and control of storm water through formation, by the City, of a
Storm Sewer Utility requires the transfer to the Utility of all storm sewer facilities and
conveyances and related rights belonging to the City.
9-02-020. Definitions
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms phrases and words shall mean:
(a) “City” – Woods Cross City, a municipal corporation of the State of Utah.
(b) “County” – Davis County
(c) “Council” – Woods Cross Council
(d) “Customer” or “Person” – Any individual; public or private corporation
and its officers; partnership; association; firm; trustee; executor of an estate; the State or
its departments, institutions, bureaus, agencies; county; city; political subdivision; or any
other government or legal entity recognized by law.
(e) “Director” – The Director of the Woods Cross City Public Works
Department or the Director’s designee.
(f) “Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU)” – An ERU is equal to 3,000 square
feet of impervious surface area. This is based on an average single-family residential
parcel, which has an impervious surface area of approximately 3,000 square feet.
(g) “Impervious Surface” – A parcel’s hard surface area that causes water to
run off its surface at a velocity or flow rate greater than under natural conditions. Some
examples of impervious surfaces are rooftops, concrete or asphalt paving, walkways,
patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, and gravel that has been subject to
surface traffic, including compacted gravel surfaces.
(h) “Mitigation” – On-site facilities or practices which reduce storm water
quantity and/or improve storm water quality.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2004
Title 9, Page 17
(i) “Parcel” – The smallest, separately segregated unit of land having an
owner. A parcel has boundaries and surface area, and is documented with a property tax
identification number by the County.
(j) “Developed Parcel” – Any parcel whose surface has been altered by
grading, filing, compacting or construction of any improvement.
(k) “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water
Regulations” – The provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act establishing specific permit
requirements for the control of storm water discharge.
(l) “Single Family Residential Parcel” – Any parcel of land containing a
single-family or duplex dwelling unit.
(m) “Storm Water” – Water produced by storms, surface drainage, snow and
ice melt and other water handled by the storm water system.
(n) “Storm Sewer Facilities” – Any facility, improvement, development or
property used for controlling storm water quantity and quality.
(o) “Storm Water System” – All man-made storm sewer facilities and
conveyances, and natural storm water systems including designated
open spaces: owned or maintained by the City that store, control, treat,
and/or convey storm water.
(p) “Storm Sewer Utility” or “Utility” – The utility created by this ordinance,
which operates, maintains, regulates and improves storm sewer facilities and programs
within Woods Cross City.
(q) “Undeveloped Parcel” – Any parcel that has not been altered by grading,
filing, compacting or construction.
9-02-030. Storm Water Utility Created
There is hereby created and established a Storm Sewer Utility and service charge rate
structure. The Utility will have regulatory authority and responsibility for planning, design,
construction, maintenance, administration and operation of all City storm sewer conveyances and
facilities.
9-02-040. Ownership of City Storm Sewer Facilities and Assets.
The City Manager shall determine which of the City’s storm water assets will be
transferred to the Utility. Until such transfer, the Utility shall operate, maintain and improve all
existing City storm water facilities used for the conveyance of storm waters, through, under or
over lands or watercourses, beginning at a point where the storm waters first enter the storm
sewer system of the City and ending in each instance at a point where the storm waters exit from
the system. Government-owned streets and those storm sewer facilities operated and
maintained by, or for the County or the State of Utah shall not be deemed storm water facilities.
9-02-050. Utility Administration.
The Storm Water Utility shall be administered by the City’s Public Works Director.
9-02-060. Service Charge Imposed.
All persons otherwise responsible for impervious surfaces within the City which contribute
runoff to the storm water system or who otherwise use or benefit from the Storm Water Utility of
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2004
Title 9, Page 18
the City will be responsible for paying the Storm Water Utility fees as set forth in the Consolidated
Fee Schedule.
9-02-070. System of Rates and Charges.
(a) Service fees imposed: The City will impose storm fee rates
and charges on each parcel of real property within the City except governmentally-owned
streets and storm water facilities operated and maintained by, or for, the Storm Water
Utility, the County or the State of Utah. The charges shall fund the administration,
planning, design, construction, water quality programming, operation, maintenance and
repair of existing and future storm water facilities.
(b) Methods of determining contribution of storm water.
(1) Contributions of storm water from non-residential parcels and
residential parcels larger than duplexes have been ascertained through aerial
photography by evaluating land surface and measuring the amount of impervious
surface.
(2) Contributions of storm water from residential parcels have been
established by estimating average residential impervious areas.
(c) Method of determining service fee rates: Storm water service fees shall
be assessed to each parcel of real property within the City (including City-owned
properties). Government-owned streets and utilities and, State or County storm water
facilities shall not be assessed. Service fees shall be set forth in Woods Cross City’s
“Consolidated Fee Schedule” and may be differentiated according to the following
classifications:
(1) Residential parcels: Single-family residential and duplex parcels
Shall constitute one ERU per month.
(2) Undeveloped parcels: Undeveloped parcels shall have no
charges applied.
(3) Other parcels: Charges for all other parcels shall be computed
by multiplying the total ERUs for a parcel by the monthly rate. Total ERUs are
calculated by dividing the total square feet of impervious surface by 3,000 (one
ERU), rounded up to the nearest whole number.
(4) Credit for on-parcel mitigation:
Storm water control facilities located on a parcel may either hold
runoff for a period of time and release it at a controlled rate to the storm sewer
water system (detention).
9-02-080. Billing and Collection.
(a) Enterprise Fund Established. The City Council hereby establishes a
Storm Sewer Utility Enterprise Fund to handle all income, expenses and other financial
transactions related to the operation, maintenance and improvement of existing storm
sewer facilities within the City. All storm sewer utility fees collected shall be deposited in
the storm sewer utility enterprise fund. Monies in the storm sewer utility enterprise funds
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2004
Title 9, Page 19
shall not be commingled with or transferred to other City funds. However, the storm
sewer utility enterprise fund may pay other City funds for services and expenses directly
attributable to the utility’s activities. The storm sewer utility enterprise fund shall be
operated according to State law and City ordinances, rules, regulations and policies.
(b) Billing. The City shall bill, or cause to be billed, property owners for
storm sewer utility services. Fees and charges shall be considered delinquent if not paid
as determined by the procedures established by the City and will be a debt to the City,
which shall be subject to recovery in a civil action.
9-02-090. Appeal of Charges
(a) Any non-residential customer who disagrees with the storm water user
fee for his or her parcel may apply to the City Manager for a user fee adjustment. The
adjustment request must state the grounds for adjustment and must be filed in writing
with the City Manager no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of billing. The City
Manager shall review the request and basis for user charges to determine whether an
error was made in the calculation or application of the fee. The City Manager may
approve an adjustment to the fee.
(b) An appeal of a City Manager decision may be brought before the City
Council within thirty (30) days after the date of the City Manager’s decision. Decision of
the City Council shall be final and conclusive.
(c) If an appeal of charges is successful, credit will be applied to all charges
from the time of the appealed billing, and will be reflected on a future billing after the
appeal is granted.
9-02-100. No Polluted Waters Discharged to Storm Sewers.
The only water allowed to be discharged into the City’s storm water system is storm
water, surface drainage, subsurface drainage, groundwater, or roof runoff. Such water may be
discharged only into storm sewer facilities which have adequate capacity, as determined by the
city, for the accommodation of such water. Such discharged water shall comply with the City’s
storm water quality standards.
9-02-110. Obstruction.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or contribute to the obstruction of
the flow of storm water runoff or non-storm water runoff into any sump, detention basin,
storm drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other associated structural controls that
convey storm water and/or non-storm water runoff, unless the obstruction is authorized
by the City Engineer or his appointee and granted with the issuance of a permit signed by
the City Engineer or his appointee.
(b) Paragraph (a) of this section shall not apply during clean-up
periods established by the City, provided the materials are placed according to any
directions from the City and do not obstruct drain inlets.
9-02-120. Dumping.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to dump, or allow to be dumped into any
sump, detention basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other storm drainage
structure that conveys storm water and/or non-storm water, any type of debris, petroleum
product, chemical, paint, pesticide, herbicide, heavy metal, acid or acid based product,
solid or liquid waste product, hazardous waste product, and/or human or animal waste.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2004
Title 9, Page 20
(b) The restrictions set forth in paragraph a shall not be construed to
prohibit the normal runoff of non-storm water related to domestic home uses; for
example, lawn watering, washing cars, etc.
9-02-130. Enforcement.
This Chapter may be enforced through the provisions of the Woods Cross City Code, or
by filing civil or criminal actions in the District Court as provided by law. The City has sole
discretion to decide whether to file a civil or criminal case for a violation. The City may file both,
or one or the other. The possibility of an administrative remedy pursuant to this Chapter shall in
no way interfere with the City’s right to prosecute violations of this Title as criminal offenses. The
City may use any of the remedies available under the law in both civil and criminal prosecution. If
the City chooses to file both civil and criminal charges for the same violation, no civil penalties
may be assessed, but all other remedies are available.
9-02-140. Annual Report
The Public Works Director shall prepare an annual report substantiating the city’s
compliance with the NPDES Storm Water Regulations. The report shall be submitted to the City
Council for it’s review and approval prior to submittal to State for it’s review.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2004
Title 9, Page 21
CHAPTER 9-03: IRRIGATION WATER AND NATURAL WATER COURSES
9-03-010. Prohibited Uses of Non-Potable or Irrigation Water.
9-03-020. Distribution of Non-Potable Water.
9-03-030. Damming or Obstructing Water Course or Stream.
9-03-040. Permit Necessary for Culvert or Other Obstruction.
9-03-010. Prohibited Uses of Non-Potable or Irrigation Water.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to:
(a) Use or cause to be used any untreated or non-potable water from a pressure irrigation
system for other than irrigation purposes;
(b) Interconnect or cause to be interconnected the potable and non-potable portions,
distribution systems or service lines of dual water supplies or extensions thereof in violation of the Woods
Cross City Cross Connection Ordinance;
(c) Install or cause to be installed in the same trench or trenches the distribution or service
lines of potable and non-potable water;
(d) Connect or cause to be connected a service line to any distribution system or main line
carrying non-potable water without authority of the district, municipality, company or person having
jurisdiction of the non-potable water supply;
(e) Extend or cause to be extended into any building a non-potable water supply system or
service line;
(f) Connect or cause to be connected to any fire hydrant, a non-potable water supply or
service line;
(g) Expose or cause to be exposed any portions of a non-potable water supply or extensions
or service lines thereof without identifying the same by distinctive coloring or other suitable means
sufficient to distinguish the same from potable water supply systems, extensions or service lines; or
(h) Contaminate or cause to be contaminated any source of supply, distribution system, or
service line furnishing or carrying non-potable water or potable water.
9-03-020. Distribution of Non-Potable Water.
All hydrants and sprinkling system control valves for the distribution of non-potable water shall be
operated by a removable key, unless such valves are of the quick-coupling type, and all such keys and
coupling valves shall be removed when said hydrant or sprinkling system is not in use.
9-03-030. Damming or Obstructing Water Course or Stream.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, replace, or maintain any dam or other obstruction of
any kind in the channel of any natural or artificial water course or living stream within the limits of the City
so as in any way to interfere with or impede the flowing of the water therein, without first obtaining a
permit to do so from the City Council.
9-03-040. Permit Necessary for Culvert or Other Obstruction.
Any person desiring any permit to build a dam or place a culvert or other obstruction in
such water course or stream shall file with his petition plans and specifications for the
construction of the same; and no such permit shall be issued until plans and specifications have
the approval of the City Engineer or the City Council.
CHAPTER 9-06: SEWER REGULATIONS
9-06-010. South Davis County Sewer District.
9-06-020. When Owner Required to Connect to Sewer.
9-06-030. Permit Required.
9-06-040. Independent Service Lines Necessary.
9-06-050. Discharging Excessive Water into Sewer.
9-06-060. Subdivision and Other Developments.
9-06-070. Damage.
9-06-080. Manholes.
9-06-090. Runoff.
9-06-100. Pretreatment and Discharge Permit Requirements.
9-06-110. Wastewater Discharge Prohibitions and Limitations.
9-06-120. Authorization Necessary to Reconnect.
9-06-130. Authorized Representative to Have Free Access.
9-06-010. South Davis County Sewer District.
The corporate limits of Woods Cross City are within the area of the South Davis County Sewer
District (the District), which is organized under Utah law. All ordinances, rules and regulations of the
District are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
9-06-020. When Owner Required to Connect to Sewer.
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation, commercial, industrial or other like purposes, situated within the corporate limits of the City
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be
located a public sanitary or combined sewer owned and operated by the City or owned or operated by the
District, is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable facilities therein, and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, within
ninety (90) days after date that said public sewer is available for use, provided that said public sewer line
is within three hundred feet (300) of any such building discharging sanitary or industrial waste.
9-06-030. Permit Required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof for any reason without first obtaining a written permit
from the District or the owner of such sewer facilities.
9-06-040. Independent Service Lines Necessary.
A separate and independent service lateral shall be provided for every building, except where one
building stands at the rear of another or on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the service lateral
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one service
lateral.
9-06-050. Discharging Excessive Water into Sewer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage into any sanitary sewer. Such storm
water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated
as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet consisting of water courses, ponds, ditches, lakes, or other bodies
of surface or ground water provided for receiving the same.
9-06-060. Subdivision and Other Developments.
No subdivision plat, industrial park, or commercial development shall be approved or
recommended by the City Planning Commission, nor shall a building permit or certificate of occupancy be
issued for any lot or part thereof or for the whole thereof, unless the City shall have first received a signed
document from the District approving the sewer aspects of the proposed development.
9-06-070. Damage.
No person shall intentionally or negligently cause any damage to the sewer system.
9-06-080. Manholes.
No person shall open a manhole of the sewer system without first receiving authorization to do so
from the District.
9-06-090. Runoff.
No owner or occupant shall permit a condition to exist on his property whereby surface water,
storm drainage, cooling water, or ground water is discharged into the sewer system, nor shall any person
install or create such a condition.
9-06-100. Pretreatment and Discharge Permit Requirements.
(a) Those persons required to pretreat wastewater in order to comply with Federal
pretreatment standards and/or District wastewater control rules and regulations and any permits issued
thereunder shall provide, operate, and maintain the necessary pretreatment facilities in accordance with
the District pretreatment regulations.
(b) Industrial users required to apply for a discharge permit pursuant to the District
wastewater control rules and regulations shall obtain such permit prior to discharging into the sewer
system. Applications shall be in the form prescribed by the District Board.
9-06-110. Wastewater Discharge Prohibitions and Limitations.
(a) Generally. No person shall discharge into the sewer system any substance or in a
manner which, under ordinary circumstances, either (1) is harmful or detrimental to or interferes with
either the sewer system, the functioning of the sewer system, the environment, or the public health, or (2)
causes sewage to pass through the sewer system without treatment and thereby creating a significant
health hazard or diminishing the quality of the environment.
(b) Discharge Prohibitions. No person shall discharge into the sewer system any substance
or discharge into the system in a manner which violates the wastewater discharge prohibitions and
limitations contained within the District wastewater control rules and regulations currently in force and as
amended from time to time, which are incorporated by this reference as a part hereof as though fully set
forth herein, together with any schedules or appendices which are a part of the District wastewater control
rules and regulations.
(c) Immediate Reporting. Immediately upon discharging a prohibited substance or upon
discovering that a prohibited substance has been discharged, the person performing or discovering such
discharge shall immediately notify the staff of the District of the discharge by the most rapid available
means, if such person knows or reasonably should have known that (1) the substance was discharged,
and (2) the discharge of the substance was prohibited. Notification pursuant to this Subsection does not
relieve the person notifying of any liability, except liability for violation of this Subsection.
(d) Preventing Accidental Discharge.
(1) Generally. Every person conducting an activity which creates a substantial risk
that a prohibited substance will be discharged into the sewer system shall provide adequate
protection against accidental discharge of such a prohibited substance by either (1) implementing
procedures or practices which tend to reduce the likelihood of such a discharge and/or (2)
installing facilities designed to prevent such accidental discharge. The District General Manager
may identify persons required to provide such protection and direct them to comply with this
Subsection.
(2) District Requirements. The District General Manager is hereby authorized to
specify particular procedures, practices, and/or facilities which shall be implemented by any
person, (1) if the District General Manager finds that there is substantial risk of a discharge
prohibited by this Section if preventive measures are not undertaken, and (2) if such procedures,
practices and/or facilities substantially reduce the risk of discharge prohibited by this Section, and
(3) if the cost of implementing such procedures, practices, and/or installing such facilities is found
by the District Board to be reasonable in light of both the potential damage to the sewer system
and/or the environment if an accidental discharge occurs, and the effectiveness of the equipment
in preventing such an accidental discharge.
(3) Plans. In every case where facilities are required to be installed pursuant to this
Subsection, the District General Manager is hereby authorized to require submission of detailed
plans for the required facilities and their operation before construction of the facilities is begun.
(e) Preventive Requirements.
(1) Report. Within five (5) days after the discharge of a prohibited substance, the
person who discharged such substance shall file with the District Board a written report
describing (1) the nature and content of the discharge, (2) the cause(s) of the discharge, and (3)
remedial measures to be taken by the discharger to prevent similar discharges in the future. The
District pretreatment administrator may inspect the site of the accidental discharge and interview
any person involved in the discharge in order to ascertain or confirm what happened and assure
that remedial measures adequate to prevent future accidents are carried out as represented.
(2) Authorization to Require Changes. If (1) a person has discharged a prohibited
substance, and (2) it is likely that the same person will again discharge a similar prohibited
substance in the future if preventive measures are not undertaken, then the District General
Manager is hereby authorized to require the person who discharged the prohibited substance to
make change(s) in equipment, facilities, procedures, or practices, which change(s) (1) have the
effect of substantially reducing the risk of a similar discharge in the future, and (2) are found by
the District General Manager to be reasonable in cost in light of the potential damage to the
system and environment arising out of a similar prohibited discharge in the future. Nothing in this
Subsection relieves any person of any liability, except liability for violation of this Subsection.
(f) Self-Monitoring and Reporting. The District General Manager is hereby authorized to
require that persons discharging into the sewer system, other than persons discharging only ordinary
domestic sewage, monitor and report their sewage discharges in a manner and to the extent necessary
to: (1) provide adequate compliance with and enforcement of the District's wastewater control rules and
regulations; (2) assess the source of the components of the sewage transmitted, treated, and disposed of
by the District; and (3) charge reasonable fees and surcharges to dischargers based on actual discharges
or reasonable classifications of discharges. The District General Manager is further hereby authorized to
require that such monitoring and reporting be performed at the expense of the person discharging. Every
person required to monitor and report pursuant to this Section shall monitor and report as required by the
District wastewater control rules and regulations and in conformity with this Section.
(g) Compliance Monitoring. The District Pretreatment Administrator is hereby authorized to
sample and analyze the sewage of, and inspect the facilities of persons discharging into the sewer
system in order to determine or verify compliance with this Section. The District Board is further
authorized to require the installation of reasonable facilities, such as manholes, to enable such sampling.
However, nothing in this Section limits any power that the District may have to investigate or enforce
compliance with other sections of this Ordinance or through means not specified in this Subsection.
(h) Strict Liability. Any person violating any provision of this Section shall be guilty without
regard to fault, knowledge, intent, or the state of mind of the person committing the violation.
(i) Nuisance. Any condition or situation which causes a violation of this Section is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as provided by law.
9-06-120. Authorization Necessary to Reconnect.
It shall be unlawful for any person, after sewer service to any premises has been discontinued or
disconnected for any reason whatsoever, to reconnect or resume such service or for the owner or
occupant of such premises to allow the same to be reconnected or resumed without being authorized by
the District or other owner of such sanitary sewer.
9-06-130. Authorized Representative to Have Free Access.
Free access shall, at all ordinary hours, be allowed to authorized representatives of the District or
other owner of such sanitary sewer to inspect and examine such facilities, including service laterals
connected to the building, to inspect the plumbing and facilities therein and the manner of use of such
sewer facilities, and to determine compliance with the rules and regulations of the District or other owner
of such sanitary sewer facilities.

CHAPTER 9-09: TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
9-09-010. Declaration of Finding and Intent.
9-09-020. Scope of Ordinance.
9-09-030. Excluded Activity.
9-09-040. Definitions.
9-09-050. Non-Exclusive Franchise.
9-09-060. Every Provider Must Obtain.
9-09-070. Nature of Grant.
9-09-080. Current Providers.
9-09-090. Nature of Franchise.
9-09-100. Regulatory Approval Needed.
9-09-110. Term.
9-09-120. Compensation.
9-09-130. Timing.
9-09-140. Fee Statement and Certification.
9-09-150. Future Costs.
9-09-160. Taxes and Assessments.
9-09-170. Interest on Late Payments.
9-09-180. No Accord and Satisfaction.
9-09-190. Not in Lieu of Other Taxes or Fees.
9-09-200. Continuing Obligation and Holdover.
9-09-210. Costs of Publication.
9-09-220. Franchise Application.
9-09-230. Application Criteria.
9-09-240. Franchise Determination.
9-09-250. General Requirement.
9-09-260. Quality.
9-09-270. Licenses and Permits.
9-09-280. Relocation of the System.
9-09-290. Protect Structures.
9-09-300. No Obstruction.
9-09-310. Safety Precautions.
9-09-320. Repair.
9-09-330. System Maintenance.
9-09-340. Trimming of Trees.
9-09-350. Notification of Sale.
9-09-360. If PSC Approval is No Longer Required.
9-09-370. Insurance, Indemnity, and Security.
9-09-380. Oversight.
9-09-390. Maintain Records.
9-09-400. Confidentiality.
9-09-410. Provider's Expense.
9-09-420. Right of Inspection.
9-09-430. Enforcement and Remedies.
9-09-440. Force Majeure.
9-09-450. Extended Operation and Continuity of Services.
9-09-460. Removal or Abandonment of Franchise Property.
9-09-470. Publicizing Work.
9-09-480. Conflicts.
9-09-490. Severability.
9-09-500. New Developments.
9-09-510. Notices.
9-09-520. Exercise of Police Power.
9-09-530. Construction.
9-09-540. Ordinance Applicability.
9-09-550. Other Applicable Ordinances.
9-09-560. City Failure to Enforce.
9-09-570. Construed According to Utah Law.
9-09-010. Declaration of Finding and Intent.
(a) Findings Regarding Rights-of-Way. The City of Woods Cross finds that the Rights-of-Way
within the City:
(1) Are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in the business
and social life of the City;
(2) Are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled consistent
with that intent;
(3) Can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and other public service
entities delivering utility and public services rendered for profit, to the enhancement of the health,
welfare, and general economic well-being of the City and its citizens; and
(4) Are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper management to
maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to
minimize the inconvenience to and negative effects upon the public from such facilities'
construction, placement, relocation, and maintenance in the Rights-of-Way.
(b) Finding Regarding Compensation. The City finds that the right to occupy portions of the
Rights-of-Way for limited times for the business of providing Telecommunications Services is a valuable
use of a unique public resource that has been acquired and is maintained at great expense to the City
and its taxpayers, and, therefore, the taxpayers of the City should receive fair and reasonable
compensation for use of the Rights-of-Way.
(c) Finding Regarding Local Concern. The City finds that while Telecommunications
Systems are in part an extension of interstate commerce, their operations also involve Rights-of-Way,
municipal franchising, and vital business and community service, which are of local concern.
(d) Finding Regarding Promotion of Telecommunications Services. The City finds that it is in
the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote the rapid development of Telecommunications
Services, on a nondiscriminatory basis, responsive to community and public interest, and to assure
availability for municipal, educational and community services.
(e) Findings Regarding Franchise Standards. The City finds that it is in the interest of the
public to Franchise and to establish standards for franchising Providers in a manner that:
(1) Fairly and reasonably compensates the City on a competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory basis as provided herein;
(2) Encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under which
Providers may use valuable public property to serve the public;
(3) Fully protects the public interest and the City from any harm that may flow from
such commercial use of Rights-of-Way;
(4) Protects the police powers and Rights-of-Way management authority of the City
in a manner consistent with federal and state law;
(5) Otherwise protects the public interest in the development and use of the City
infrastructure;
(6) Protects the public's investment in improvements in the Rights-of-Way; and
(7) Ensures that no barriers to entry of Telecommunications Providers are created
and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting Telecommunication Services, within the meaning of the Telecommunications Act of
1996 ("Act") [P.L. No. 96-104].
(f) Power to Manage Rights-of-Way. The City adopts this Telecommunications Ordinance
pursuant to its power to manage the Rights-of-Way, pursuant to common law, the Utah Constitution and
statutory authority, and to receive fair and reasonable, compensation for the use of Rights-of-Way by
Providers as expressly set forth by Section_253 of the Act.
9-09-020. Scope of Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall provide the basic local scheme for Providers of Telecommunications
Services and Systems that require the use of the Rights-of-Way, including Providers of both the System
and Service, those Providers of the System only, and those Providers who do not build the System but
who only provide Services. This Ordinance shall apply to all future Providers and to all Providers in the
City prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, whether operating with or without a Franchise as set
forth in Section 9-09-540.
9-09-030. Excluded Activity.
(a) Cable TV. This Ordinance shall not apply to cable television operators otherwise
regulated by other state, federal or municipal franchises or ordinances.
(b) Wireless Services. This Ordinance shall not apply to Personal Wireless Service Facilities.
(c) Provisions Applicable to Excluded Providers. Providers excused by other law that
prohibits the City from requiring a Franchise shall not be required to obtain a Franchise, but all of the
requirements imposed by this Ordinance through the exercise of the City's police power and not
preempted by other law shall be applicable.
9-09-040. Definitions.
For purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall
have the meanings set forth in this Section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is
intended. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the single number include
the plural number, words in the plural number include the singular. The words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary
meaning.
(a) "Application" means the process by which a Provider submits a request and indicates a
desire to be granted a Franchise to utilize the Rights-of-Way of all, or a part, of the City. An Application
includes all written documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum,
made by a Provider to the City concerning: the construction of a Telecommunications System over,
under, on or through the Rights-of-Way; the Telecommunications Services proposed to be provided in the
City by a Provider; and any other matter pertaining to a proposed System or Service.
(b) "Completion Date" means the date that a Provider begins providing Services to
customers in the City.
(c) "Construction Costs" means all costs of constructing a System, including make ready
costs, other than engineering fees, attorneys or accountants fees, or other consulting fees.
(d) "Control" or "Controlling Interest" means actual working control in whatever manner
exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt
instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the System or of a Provider. A rebuttable
presumption of the existence of Control or a Controlling Interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership,
directly or indirectly, by any Person, or group of Persons acting in concert, of more than thirty-five percent
(35%) of any Provider (which Person or group of Persons is hereinafter referred to as "Controlling
Person"). "Control" or "Controlling Interest" as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one
Person or group of Persons.
(e) "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto.
(f) "Franchise" means the rights and obligations extended by the City to a Provider to own,
lease, construct, maintain, use or operate a System in the Rights-of-Way within the boundaries of the
City. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include: (i) any other permit or
authorization required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City required
by the ordinances and laws of the City; (ii) any other permit, agreement or authorization required in
connection with operations on Rights-of-Way or public property including, without limitation, permits and
agreements for placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned by the City or
a private entity, or for excavating or performing other work in or along the Rights-of-Way.
(g) "Franchise Agreement" means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions
of this Ordinance between the City and a Franchisee that sets forth, subject to this Ordinance, the terms
and conditions under which a Franchise will be exercised.
(h) "Gross Revenue" includes all revenues of a Provider that may be included as gross
revenue within the meaning of Chapter 26, Title 11 of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended. In the
case of any Provider not covered within the ambit of Chapter 26, Title 11 of the Utah Code Annotated, as
amended, the definition of Gross Revenue shall be that set forth in the Franchise Agreement.
(i) "Infrastructure Provider" means a Person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing Telecommunication Services to customers, all or part of the necessary System which uses the
Rights-of-Way.
(j) "Open Video Service" means any video programming services provided to any Person
through the use of Rights-of-Way, by a Provider that is certified by the FCC to operate an Open Video
System pursuant to Sections 651, et seq., of the Telecommunications Act (47 U.S.C. Title VI, Part V),
regardless of the System used.
(k) "Open Video System" means the system of cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides,
optic fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any associated converters, equipment, or facilities designed and
constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying or distributing Open Video Services to or
from subscribers or locations within the City.
(l) "Operator" means any Person who provides Service over a Telecommunications System
and directly or through one or more Persons owns a Controlling Interest in such System, or who
otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a System.
(m) "Ordinance" or "Telecommunications Ordinance" means this Telecommunications
Ordinance concerning the granting of Franchises in and by the City for the construction, ownership,
operation, use or maintenance of a Telecommunications System.
(n) "Person" includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock
company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the City.
(o) "Personal Wireless Services Facilities" has the same meaning as provided in Section 704
of the Telecommunications Act (47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly known as
cellular and PCS Services that do not install any System or portion of a System in the Rights-of-Way.
(p) "Provider" means an Operator, Infrastructure Provider, Resaler, or System Lessee.
(q) "PSC" means the Public Service Commission, or any successor thereto.
(r) "Resaler" refers to any Person that provides local exchange service over a System for
which a separate charge is made, where that Person does not own or lease the underlying System used
for the transmission.
(s) "Rights-of-Way" means the surface of and the space above and below any public street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public way of any type whatsoever, now or hereafter existing as such within the
City.
(t) "Signal" means any transmission or reception of electronic, electrical, light or laser or
radio frequency energy or optical information in either analog or digital format.
(u) "System Lessee" refers to any Person that leases a System or a specific portion of a
System to provide Services.
(v) "Telecommunications" means the transmission, between or among points specified by
the user, of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data, video, and voice), without change in the form or
content of the information sent and received.
(w) "Telecommunications System" or "System" means all conduits, manholes, poles,
antennas, transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and appurtenances
owned, leased, or used by a Provider, located in the Rights-of-Way and utilized in the provision of
Services, including fully digital or analog, voice, data and video imaging and other enhanced
Telecommunications Services. Telecommunications System or Systems also includes an Open Video
System.
(x) "Telecommunications Service(s)" or "Services" means any telecommunications or
communications services provided by a Provider within the City that the Provider is authorized to provide
under federal, state and local law, and any equipment and/or facilities required for and integrated with the
Services provided within the City, except that these terms do not include "cable service" as defined in the
Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection
and Competition Act of 1992 (47 U.S.C. 521, et seq.), and the Telecommunications Act.
Telecommunications System or Systems also includes an Open Video System.
(y) "Wire" means fiber optic Telecommunications cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other
transmission medium that may be used in lieu thereof for similar purposes.
9-09-050. Non-Exclusive Franchise.
The City is empowered and authorized to issue non-exclusive Franchises governing the
installation, construction, operation, use and maintenance of Systems in the City's Rights-of-Way, in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The Franchise is granted through a Franchise
Agreement entered into between the City and Provider.
9-09-060. Every Provider Must Obtain.
Except to the extent exempted by federal or state law, every Provider must obtain a Franchise
from the City prior to constructing a Telecommunications System or providing Telecommunications
Services, and every Provider must obtain a Franchise before constructing an Open Video System or
providing Open Video Services via an Open Video System and shall be subject to the customer service
and consumer protection provisions applicable to the Cable TV companies. The fact that particular
Telecommunications Systems may be used for multiple purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a
Franchise for other purposes. By way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system
must obtain a cable franchise, and, should it intend to provide Telecommunications Services over the
same System, must also obtain a Telecommunications Franchise.
9-09-070. Nature of Grant.
A Franchise shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the Rights-of-Way. A Franchise is only the
right to occupy Rights-of-Way on a non-exclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the limited period
stated in the Franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned, or subleased, except as may be
expressly provided in a Franchise Agreement. A Franchise does not excuse a Provider from obtaining
appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its System on the property of
others, including the City's property. This Section shall not be construed to prohibit a Provider from
leasing conduit to another Provider, so long as the Lessee has obtained a Franchise.
9-09-080. Current Providers.
Except to the extent exempted by federal or state law, any Provider acting without a Franchise on
the effective date of this Ordinance shall request issuance of a Franchise from the City within ninety (90)
days of the effective date of this Ordinance. If such request is made, the Provider may continue providing
service during the course of negotiations. If a timely request is not made, or if negotiations cease and a
Franchise is not granted, the Provider shall comply with the provisions of Section 9-09-460.
9-09-090. Nature of Franchise.
The Franchise granted by the City under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be a nonexclusive
Franchise providing the right and consent to install, operate, repair, maintain, remove and replace its
System on, over and under the Rights-of-Way in order to provide Services.
9-09-100. Regulatory Approval Needed.
Before offering or providing any Services pursuant to the Franchise, a Provider shall obtain any
and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of such
Services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities, if required, and shall submit to the City
upon the written request of the City evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.
9-09-110. Term.
No Franchise issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall have a term of less than five (5) years or
greater than fifteen (15) years. Each Franchise shall be granted in a non-discriminatory manner.
9-09-120. Compensation.
As fair and reasonable compensation for any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance, a
Provider shall have the following obligations:
(a) Application Fee. In order to offset the cost to the City to review an Application for a
Franchise and in addition to all other fees, permits or charges, a Provider shall pay to the City, at the time
of Application, Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) as a non-refundable Application fee. The Application fee
shall also be paid when an amendment to an Application is filed with the City.
(b) Franchise Fees. The Franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the Franchise Agreement.
The obligation to pay a Franchise fee shall commence on the Completion Date. The Franchise fee is
offset by any business license tax or fee enacted by the City.
(c) Excavation Permits. The Provider shall also pay fees required for an excavation permit as
provided in the City's Excavation Permit Ordinance.
9-09-130. Timing.
Unless otherwise agreed to in the Franchise Agreement, all Franchise Fees shall be paid on a
monthly basis within forty-five (45) days of the close of each calendar month.
9-09-140. Fee Statement and Certification.
Unless a Franchise Agreement provides otherwise, each fee payment shall be accompanied by a
statement showing the manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to its accuracy.
9-09-150. Future Costs.
A Provider shall pay to the City or to third parties, at the direction of the City, an amount equal to
the reasonable costs and expenses that the City incurs for the services of third parties (including but not
limited to attorneys and other consultants) in connection with any renewal or Provider-initiated
renegotiation, transfer, amendment or other modification of this Ordinance or a Franchise, provided,
however, that the parties shall agree upon a reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations. Any
costs associated with any work to be done to provide space on City owned poles shall be borne by the
Provider.
9-09-160. Taxes and Assessments.
To the extent taxes or other assessments are imposed by taxing authorities, other than the City
on the use of the City property as a result of a Provider's use or occupation of the Rights-of-Way, the
Provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such taxes, payable annually unless
otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable
pursuant to this Ordinance.
9-09-170. Interest on Late Payments.
In the event that any payment is not actually received by the City on or before the applicable date
fixed in the Franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the rate charged for
delinquent state taxes.
9-09-180. No Accord and Satisfaction.
No acceptance by the City of any fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in
fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of any
claim the City may have for additional sums payable.
9-09-190. Not in Lieu of Other Taxes or Fees.
The fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment except as
specifically provided in this Ordinance, or as required by applicable law. By way of example, and not
limitation, excavation permit fees are not waived and remain applicable.
9-09-200. Continuing Obligation and Holdover.
In the event a Provider continues to operate all or any part of the System after the Term of the
Franchise, such operator shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and the
Franchise, including, without limitation, all compensation and other payment provisions throughout the
period of such continued operation, provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be
construed as a renewal or other extension of the Franchise, nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any,
available to the City as a result of such continued operation after the Term, including, but not limited to,
damages and restitution.
9-09-210. Costs of Publication.
A Provider shall assume any publication costs associated with its Franchise that may be required
by law.
9-09-220. Franchise Application.
To obtain a Franchise to construct, own, operate, maintain or provide Services through any
System within the City, to obtain a renewal of a Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance, or to obtain
the City approval of a transfer of a Franchise, as provided in Section 9-09-350, granted pursuant to this
Ordinance, an Application must be filed with the City on a form provided by the City.
9-09-230. Application Criteria.
In making a determination as to an Application filed pursuant to this Ordinance, the City may, but
shall not be limited to, request or consider the following:
(a) Obtaining a copy of the order from the PSC granting a Certificate of Convenience and
Necessity, if any is necessary for Providers offering of services within the State of Utah;
(b) Certification of the Provider's financial ability to compensate the City for Provider's
intrusion, maintenance and use of the Rights-of-Way during the Franchise term proposed by the Provider;
(c) Provider's Agreements to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance; and
(d) Prior to making any attachments to poles, the willingness to enter into a pole attachment
agreement with the City.
9-09-240. Franchise Determination.
The City, in its discretion, shall determine the award of any Franchise on the basis of these and
other considerations relevant to the use of the Rights-of-Way, without competitive bidding.
9-09-250. General Requirement.
No Provider shall receive a Franchise unless it agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth
in this Ordinance governing construction and technical requirements for its System, in addition to any
other requirements or procedures specified by the City or the Franchise, including requirements regarding
co-location and cost sharing. A Provider shall obtain a City Excavation Permit, pursuant to the Excavation
Permit Ordinance, before commencing any work in the Rights-of-Way.
9-09-260. Quality.
All work involved in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade and removal of the
System shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable
quality. If, at any time, it is determined by the FCC or any other agency granted authority by federal law or
the FCC to make such determination, that any part of the System, including, without limitation, any means
used to distribute Signals over or within the System, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or
quality of service or reliability, then a Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such
conditions.
9-09-270. Licenses and Permits.
A Provider shall have the sole responsibility for diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense,
all permits, licenses or other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, operate, maintain,
upgrade or repair the System, including but not limited to any necessary approvals from Persons and/or
the City to use private property, easements, poles and conduits. A Provider shall obtain any required
permit, license, approval or authorization, including but not limited to excavation permits, pole attachment
agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for which the permit, license, approval or
authorization is required.
9-09-280. Relocation of the System.
(a) New Grades or Lines. If the grades or lines of any Rights-of-Way are changed at any
time in a manner affecting the System, then a Provider shall comply with the requirements of the
Excavation Permit Ordinance.
(b) The City Authority to Move System. The City may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or
other emergency, as determined by the City in its reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of the
System and appurtenances on, over or under the Rights-of-Way of the City, in which event the City shall
not be liable therefor to a Provider. The City shall notify a Provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in
any event as soon as possible and in no case later than the next business day following any action taken
under this Section. Notice shall be given as provided in Section 9-09-510.
(c) A Provider Required to Temporarily Move System. A Provider shall, upon prior
reasonable written notice by the City or any Person holding a permit to move any structure, and within the
time that is reasonable under the circumstances, temporarily move any part of its System to permit the
moving of said structure. A Provider may impose a reasonable charge on any Person other than the City
for any such movement of its Systems.
(d) Rights-of-Way Change - Obligation to Move System. When the City is changing any
Rights-of-Way and makes a written request, a Provider is required to move or remove its System from the
Rights-of-Way, without cost to the City, to the extent provided in the Excavation Permit Ordinance. This
obligation exists whether or not the Provider has obtained an Excavation Permit.
9-09-290. Protect Structures.
In connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the
System, a Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to
the City and all designated landmarks, as well as all other structures within any designated landmark
district. A Provider shall obtain the prior written consent of the City to alter any water main, power facility,
sewerage or drainage system, or any other municipal structure on, over or under the Rights-of-Way of the
City required because of the presence of the System. Any such alteration shall be made by the City or its
designee on a reimbursable basis. A Provider agrees that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by the
City to replace or repair and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably specified by
the City, any municipal structure or any other Rights-of-Way of the City involved in the construction,
operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the System that may become disturbed or
damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of a Provider pursuant to the Franchise.
9-09-300. No Obstruction.
In connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, upgrade, repair or removal of the
System, a Provider shall not unreasonably obstruct the Rights-of-Way of fixed guide way systems,
railways, passenger travel, or other traffic to, from or within the City without the prior consent of the
appropriate authorities.
9-09-310. Safety Precautions.
A Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to
prevent accidents at its work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences,
barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such other requirements
prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A Provider shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local
requirements including but not limited to the National Electric Safety Code.
9-09-320. Repair.
After written reasonable notice to the Provider, unless, in the sole determination of the City, an
eminent danger exists, any Rights-of-Way within the City which are disturbed or damaged during the
construction, operation, maintenance or reconstruction by a Provider of its System may be repaired by
the City at the Provider's expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing before such work was
commenced. Upon doing so, the City shall submit to such a Provider an itemized statement of the cost for
repairing and restoring the Rights-of-Ways intruded upon. The Provider shall, within thirty (30) days after
receipt of the statement, pay to the City the entire amount thereof.
9-09-330. System Maintenance.
A Provider shall:
(a) Install and maintain all parts of its System in a non-dangerous condition throughout the
entire period of its Franchise;
(b) Install and maintain its System in accordance with standard prudent engineering
practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the National Electrical Safety Code and all other
applicable federal, state and local laws or regulations; and
(c) At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the
City of the System and its effect on the Rights-of-Way.
9-09-340. Trimming of Trees.
A Provider shall have the authority to trim trees, in accordance with all applicable utility
restrictions, ordinance and easement restrictions, upon and hanging over Rights-of-Way so as to prevent
the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its System.
9-09-350. Notification of Sale.
(a) PCS Approval. When a Provider is the subject of a sale, transfer, lease, assignment,
sublease or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale,
consolidation or otherwise, such that it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek the approval
of the PSC, the Provider or its successor entity shall promptly notify the City of the nature of the
transaction and, if applicable, request a transfer of the Franchise to the successor entity. A request for a
transfer shall include a certification that the successor entity unequivocally agrees to all of the terms of
the original Provider's Franchise Agreement.
(b) Transfer of Franchise. Upon receipt of a request to transfer a Franchise, the City
designee, as provided in Section 9-09-430, may send notice approving the transfer of the Franchise to
the successor entity. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. If the City has reason to believe
that the successor entity may not comply with this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, it may require
an Application for the transfer. The Application shall comply with Section 9-09-220.
9-09-360. If PSC Approval is No Longer Required.
If the PSC no longer exists, or if its regulations or state law no longer require approval of
transactions described in Section 9-09-350, then the following events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment or other transfer of the Franchise requiring compliance with Section_9-09-350: (i) the sale,
assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a Provider's assets to another Person; (ii) the sale,
assignment or other transfer of capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interests in a
Provider by one or more of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to
create a new Controlling Interest in a Provider; (iii) the issuance of additional capital stock or partnership,
membership or other equity interest by a Provider so as to create a new Controlling Interest in such a
Provider; or (iv) the entry by a Provider into an agreement with respect to the management or operation of
such Provider or its System.
9-09-370. Insurance, Indemnity, and Security.
Prior to the execution of a Franchise, a Provider will deposit with the City an irrevocable,
unconditional letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the Franchise, and shall obtain
and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the Franchise. A Provider shall also indemnify
the City as set forth in the Franchise.
9-09-380. Oversight.
The City shall have the right to oversee, regulate and inspect periodically the construction,
maintenance, and upgrade of the System, and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the
Franchise and applicable law. A Provider shall establish and maintain managerial and operational
records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a Provider to prove, in reasonable detail, to the
satisfaction of the City at all times throughout the Term, that a Provider is in compliance with the
Franchise. A Provider shall retain such records for not less than the applicable statute of limitations.
9-09-390. Maintain Records.
A Provider shall at all times maintain:
(a0 On file with the City, a full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" hard copy
maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an electronic format, they shall be made in electronic
format compatible with the City's existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the
types of equipment and Systems installed or constructed in the Rights-of-Way, properly identified and
described as to the types of equipment and facility by appropriate symbols and marks which shall include
annotations of all Rights-of-Ways where work will be undertaken. As used herein, "as-built" maps includes
"file construction prints." Maps shall be drawn to scale. "As-built" maps, including the compatible
electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted within thirty (30) days of completion of work or
within thirty (30) days after completion of modification and repairs. "As-built" maps are not required of the
Provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the existing System to the extent they do not
exist.
(b0 Throughout the Term, a Provider shall maintain complete and accurate books of account
and records of the business, ownership, and operations of a Provider with respect to the System in a
manner that allows the City at all times to determine whether a Provider is in compliance with the
Franchise. Should the City reasonably determine that the records are not being maintained in such a
manner, a Provider shall alter the manner in which the books and/or records are maintained so that a
Provider comes into compliance with this Section. All financial books and records which are maintained in
accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that regulates utilities in the
State of Utah, and generally accepted accounting principles shall be deemed to be acceptable under this
Section.
9-09-400. Confidentiality.
If the information required to be submitted is proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by
federal, state or local law, upon proper request by a Provider, such information shall be treated as a
Protected Record within the meaning of the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act,
making it available only to those who must have access to perform their duties on behalf of the City,
provided that a Provider notifies the City of, and clearly labels the information which a Provider deems to
be confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling shall be the sole responsibility of
the Provider.
9-09-410. Provider's Expense.
All reports and records required under this Ordinance shall be furnished at the sole expense of a
Provider, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance or a Franchise.
9-09-420. Right of Inspection.
For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of the Franchise fee, the books and records of the
Provider pertaining thereto shall be open to inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of the
City at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to inspect or audit the books
and records. The Provider agrees to reimburse the City the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit
discloses that the Provider has paid ninety-five percent (95%) or less of the compensation due the City for
the period of such audit. In the event the accounting rendered to the City by the Provider herein is found
to be incorrect, then payment shall be made on the corrected amount within thirty (30) calendar days of
written notice, it being agreed that the City may accept any amount offered by the Provider, but the
acceptance thereof by the City shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute
or is later found to be incorrect.
9-09-430. Enforcement and Remedies.
(a0 Enforcement - City Designee. The City is responsible for enforcing and administering this
Ordinance, and the City or its designee, as appointed by the Council, is authorized to give any notice
required by law or under any Franchise Agreement.
(b0 Enforcement Provision. Any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall contain
appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and protection of the public, consistent with the
other provisions of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for
accessing the Bond/Security Fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
9-09-440. Force Majeure.
In the event a Provider's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by
this Ordinance or a Franchise is prevented by a cause or event not within a Provider's control, such
inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result
thereof. For the purpose of this Section, causes or events not within the control of a Provider shall
include, without limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of
utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides,
and fires.
9-09-450. Extended Operation and Continuity of Services.
(a0 Continuation After Expiration. Upon either expiration or revocation of a Franchise granted
pursuant to this Ordinance, the City shall have discretion to permit or require a Provider to continue to
operate its System or provide Services for an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from
the date of such expiration or revocation. A Provider shall continue to operate its System under the terms
and conditions of this Ordinance and the Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance.
(b0 Continuation by Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier. If the Provider is the incumbent local
exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to operate its System and provide Services without
regard to revocation or expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a renewal in good faith.
9-09-460. Removal or Abandonment of Franchise Property.
(a0 Abandoned System. In the event that: (1) the use of any portion of the System is
discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, and thirty (30) days after no response to
written notice from the City to the last known address of Provider; (2)_any System has been installed in
the Rights-of-Way without complying with the requirements of this Ordinance or Franchise; or (3) the
provisions of Section 9-09-090 are applicable and no Franchise is granted, a Provider, except the
Provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall be deemed to have abandoned such System.
(b0 Removal of Abandoned System. The City, upon such terms as it may impose, may give a
Provider written permission to abandon, without removing, any System, or portion thereof, directly
constructed, operated or maintained under a Franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless
otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a Provider shall remove within a reasonable time the abandoned
System and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any affected Rights-of-Way to their
former state at the time such System was installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its
plant, structures and equipment, a Provider shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation necessarily
made by it and shall leave all Rights-of-Way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal
without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles or
attachments. The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the Rights-of-Way
cables, Wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance
provisions of this Ordinance and any security fund provided in a Franchise shall continue in full force and
effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a Provider with the terms and conditions of
this Section.
(c0 Transfer of Abandoned System to City. Upon abandonment of any System in place, a
Provider, if required by the City, shall submit to the City a written instrument, satisfactory in form to the
City, transferring to the City the ownership of the abandoned System.
(d0 Removal of Above-Ground System. At the expiration of the term for which a Franchise is
granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for by this Ordinance, in any such case
without renewal, extension or transfer, the City shall have the right to require a Provider to remove, at its
expense, all above-ground portions of a System from the Rights-of-Way within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the Provider is the incumbent local
exchange carrier, it shall not be required to remove its System, but shall negotiate a renewal in good faith.
(e0 Leaving Underground System. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this
Ordinance, a Provider may abandon any underground System in place so long as it does not materially
interfere with the use of the Rights-of-Way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or
other Person.
9-09-470. Publicizing Work.
Before entering onto any private property, a Provider shall make a good faith attempt to contact
the property owners in advance and describe the work to be performed.
9-09-480. Conflicts.
In the event of a conflict between any provision of this Ordinance and a Franchise entered
pursuant to it, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
9-09-490. Severability.
If any provision of this Ordinance is held by any federal, state or local court of competent
jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state statute, or is ordered by a court to be
modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law and all appellate remedies
with regard to the validity of the Ordinance provisions in question are exhausted, such provision shall be
considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this Ordinance, and such holding shall not affect
the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law is subsequently
repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or
modified is no longer in conflict with such law the provision in question shall return to full force and effect
and shall again be binding on the City and the Provider, provided that the City shall give the Provider
thirty (30) days, or a longer period of time as may be reasonably required for a Provider to comply with
such a rejuvenated provision, and written notice of the change before requiring compliance with such
provision.
9-09-500. New Developments.
It shall be the policy of the City to liberally amend this Ordinance, upon Application of a Provider,
when necessary to enable the Provider to take advantage of any developments in the field of
Telecommunications which will afford the Provider an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or
economically serve itself or the public.
9-09-510. Notices.
All notices from a Provider to the City required under this Ordinance or pursuant to a Franchise
granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be directed to the officer as designated by the City Council. A
Provider shall provide in any Application for a Franchise the identity, address and phone number to
receive notices from the City. A Provider shall immediately notify the City of any change in its name,
address, or telephone number.
9-09-520. Exercise of Police Power.
To the full extent permitted by applicable law either now or in the future, the City reserves the
right to adopt or issue such rules, regulations, orders, or other directives that it finds necessary or
appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police powers.
9-09-530. Construction.
This Ordinance shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state
statutes.
9-09-540. Ordinance Applicability.
This Ordinance shall apply to all Franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this
Ordinance. This Ordinance shall further apply, to the extent permitted by applicable federal or state law to
all existing Franchises granted prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and to a Provider providing
Services, without a Franchise, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
9-09-550. Other Applicable Ordinances.
A Provider's rights are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances
necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. A Provider shall comply with all applicable
general laws and ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all Providers
shall comply with the City zoning and other land use requirements.
9-09-560. City Failure to Enforce.
A Provider shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this
Ordinance or any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance by reason of any failure of the City to
enforce prompt compliance.
9-09-570. Construed According to Utah Law.
This Ordinance and any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be construed and
enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the State of Utah.

CHAPTER 9-12. EXCAVATION PERMITS
9-12-010. Definitions.
9-12-020. Permit Required.
9-12-030. Permit Application Requirements.
9-12-040. Emergency Work.
9-12-050. Permit Fees.
9-12-060. Permit - Contents, Duration and Extensions.
9-12-070. Permit - No Transfer or Assignment.
9-12-080. Compliance with Specifications, Standards, Traffic-Control Regulations; Site
Permittee Identification.
9-12-090. Other Highway Permits.
9-12-100. Relocation of Structures in Public Ways.
9-12-110. Impact of Excavation on Existing Improvements.
9-12-120. Restoration of Public Property.
9-12-130. Insurance Requirements.
9-12-140. Bond - When Required, Conditions, Warranty.
9-12-150. Hold Harmless Agreement; Limitations on City Liability.
9-12-160. Work Without Permit - Penalty.
9-12-170. Failure to Comply; Default in Performance.
9-12-180. Failure to Conform to Development Regulations - Penalty.
9-12-190. Appeal of Suspension, Revocation, or Stop Order.
9-12-200. Tampering with Traffic Barricades.
9-12-210. Conflict with Governing Provisions.
9-12-220. Violation - Penalty.
9-12-010. Definitions.
(a0 "Applicant" means any person who makes application for a permit.
(b0 "Business" means any place in the City in which there is conducted or carried on
principally or exclusively any pursuit or occupation for the purpose of gaining a livelihood.
(c0 Development Regulations" shall mean the Woods Cross City Development
Regulations, Specifications and Engineering Standards as adopted and amended by the City.
(d0 "Emergency" means any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of
which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or property, or which causes interruption of
utility services.
(e0 "Failure" means a work site restoration which fails to meet City Development
Regulations, or which results in a deteriorated or substandard condition within the duration of the
warranty period. Failure may be settlement of surfaces, deterioration of materials, or other surface
irregularities. Measurement of failure shall be further defined in the Woods Cross Development
Regulations.
(f0 "Infrastructure Provider" means a person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication or utility services to customers, all or part of the necessary System which
uses the public right-of-way.
(g0 "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" means the manual on traffic control devices
for streets and highways as published by the U.S. Department of Transportation and/or the Federal
Highway Administration.
(h0 "Operator" means any person who provides service over a System and directly or
through one or more affiliates owns a controlling interest in such System, or who otherwise controls or is
responsible for the operation of such a System.
(i0 "Permittee" means any Person which has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed
to fulfill the requirements of this Chapter.
(j0 "Person" means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association, Provider,
corporation, company, organization, or entity of any kind.
(k0 "Pipe Driveway" means a driveway approach which uses a pipe or other means to bridge
the gutter.
(l0 "Property Owner" means person or persons who have legal title to property and/or
equitable interest in the property, or the ranking official or agent of a company having legal title to
property and/or equitable interest in the property.
(m0 "Provider" means an Operator, Infrastructure Provider, Reseller, System Lessee, or
Public Utility Company.
(n0 "Public Utility Company" means any company subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah State
Public Service Commission, or any mutual corporation providing gas, electricity, water, telephone, or
other utility product or services for use by the general public.
(o0 "Public Way" means and includes all public rights-of-way and easements, public
footpaths, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public highways, public alleys, and public
drainage ways. It does not, however, include utility easements not within public ways of the City.
(p0 "Private Drain Line" means a pipe installed solely for the transmission of water collected
or generated on private property such as drainage, spring, or storm water, or condensate into the public
drainage system.
(q0 "Reseller" refers to any person that provides service over a System for which a separate
charge is made, where that person does not own or lease the underlying System used for the
transmission and does not install any System in the rights-of-way.
(r0 "Resident" means the person or persons currently making their home at a particular
dwelling.
(s0 "Storm Drain" means a dedicated pipe, conduit, water way, or ditch installed in a
right-of-way or easement for the transmission of storm and drainage water. This term does not include
private drain lines.
(t0 "System" means all conduits, manholes, poles, antennas, transceivers, amplifiers and all
other electronic devices, equipment, wire, water pipes, fittings and appurtenances owned, leased, or used
by a provider located in the construction, ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a
telecommunications or utility System.
(u0 System Lessee" refers to any person that leases a System or a specific portion of a
System to provide services.
(v0 "Work Site Restoration" means and includes the restoring of the original ground or paved
hard surface area to comply with Development Regulations, and includes but is not limited to repair,
cleanup, backfilling, compaction, and stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in
acceptable condition following the conclusion of the work, or the expiration or revocation of the permit.
9-12-020. Permit Required.
Any person desiring to perform work of any kind in a Public Way with the City, shall make
application for a permit. The decision by the City to issue a permit shall be based on, among other factors
determined by the City, the following:
(a0 The capacity of the Public Way to accommodate the facilities or structures proposed to
be installed in the Public Way;
(b0 The capacity of the Public Way to accommodate multiple wire in addition to cables,
conduits, pipes or other facilities or structures of other users of the Public Way, such as electrical power,
telephone, gas, sewer and water;
(c0 The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, or
landscaping previously existing in the Public Way; and
(d0 The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction from numerous
excavations of the Public Way.
9-12-030. Permit Application Requirements.
(a0 Application for a permit shall be filed with the City Engineer on a form or forms to be
furnished by the City. Property owners and/or tenants for whom work is being done shall be responsible
for obtaining the permits, provided, however, contractors may obtain the permit in the contractor's name.
(b0 No person shall be eligible to apply for or receive permits to do work within the Public
Ways of the City, save and except the following:
(1 Contractors licensed by the state as general contractors;
(2 Providers;
(3 Property owners installing, replacing, or maintaining less than five hundred
square feet or one hundred linear feet of sidewalk, curb, and gutter, or driveway approach, or
other work approved by the City Engineer, upon a portion of the Public Way adjacent to their
residence; or
(4 Persons offering a service which requires occupation of the Public Way, such as
scaffold or staging, staging of a crane, installation or maintenance of electric signs, glass,
awnings, and painting or cleaning of buildings or sign boards or other structures.
(c0 The City Engineer may deny the issuance of permits to contractors, utility companies, or
other permit Applicants who have shown by past performance that in the opinion of the City Engineer they
will not consistently conform to the Development Regulations, Specifications, Design Standards, or the
requirements of this Chapter.
(d0 When necessary, in the judgment of the City Engineer, to fully determine the relationship
of the work proposed to existing or proposed facilities within the Public Ways, or to determine whether the
work proposed complies with the Development Regulations, Construction Specifications and Design
Standards, the City Engineer may require the filing of engineering plans, specifications and sketches
showing the proposed work in sufficient detail to permit determination of such relationship or compliance,
or both, and the application shall be deemed suspended until such plans and sketches are filed and
approved.
(e0 It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work upon any Public Way until the City
Engineer has approved the application and until a permit has been issued for such work, except as
specifically approved to the contrary in this Chapter.
(f0 The disapproval or denial of an application by the City Engineer may be appealed by the
Applicant to the City Council by filing of a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the action of the
City Engineer. The City Council shall hear such appeal, if written request therefor is timely filed as soon
as practicable, and render its decision within two (2) weeks following notice of such appeal.
(g0 In approving or disapproving work within any Public Way, or permits therefor, in the
inspection of such work; in reviewing plans, sketches or specifications, and generally in the exercise of
the authority conferred upon him/her by this Chapter, the City Engineer shall act in such manner as to
preserve and protect the Public Way and the use thereof, but shall have no authority to govern the
actions or inaction of Permittees and Applicants or other persons which have no relationship to the use,
preservation or protection of the Public Way.
(h0 A permit is not required from the City Engineer for hand digging excavations for
installation or repair of sprinkler systems and landscaping within the non-paved areas of the Public Way.
However, conformance to all City specifications is required.
9-12-040. Emergency Work.
(a0 Any person maintaining pipes, lines, or facilities in the Public Way may proceed with work
upon existing facilities without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done
immediately; provided a permit could not reasonably and practicably have been obtained beforehand.
(b0 In the event that emergency work is commenced on or within any Public Way of the City
during regular business hours, the City Engineer shall be notified within one-half hour from the time the
work is commenced. The person commencing and conducting such work shall take all necessary safety
precautions for the protection of the public and the direction and control of traffic, and shall insure that
work is accomplished according to City Development Regulations, the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and other applicable laws, regulations, or generally recognized practices in the industry.
(c0 Any person commencing emergency work in the Public Way during other than business
hours without a permit shall immediately thereafter apply for a permit or give notice during the first hour of
the first regular business day on which City offices are open for business after such work is commenced.
A permit for such emergency work may be issued which shall be retroactive to the date when the work
was begun, at the discretion of the City Engineer.
9-12-050. Permit Fees.
(a0 The City shall charge and the Permittee shall pay upon issuance of the permit, fees for
costs associated with the work performed under the permit as outlined in the Consolidated Fee Schedule.
Such costs could include costs for reviewing the project and issuing the permit, inspections of the project,
deterioration of the Public Way or diminution of the useful life of the Public Way, and other costs to the
City associated with the work to be done under the permit. All costs shall be assessed in a
non-discriminatory manner.
(b0 The City Engineer may waive permit fees or penalties or portions thereof provided for in
this Chapter, when he/she determines that such permit fee or penalty:
(1 Pertains to construction or rehabilitation of housing for persons whose income is
below the median income level for the City; or
(2 Pertains to an encroachment on the Public Way involving a beautification project
which furthers specific goals and objectives set forth in the City's strategic plan, master plans, or
other official documents, including decorative street lighting, building facade lighting, flower and
planter boxes, and landscaping.
(c0 Additional charges to cover the reasonable cost and expenses of any required
engineering review, inspection, and work site restoration associated with each undertaking may be
charged by the City to each Permittee, in addition to the permit fee.
9-12-060. Permit - Contents, Duration and Extensions.
(a0 Each permit application shall state the starting date and estimated completion date. Work
shall be completed within five (5) days from the starting date or as determined by the City Engineer. Such
determination shall be based upon factors reasonably related to the work to be performed under the
permit. Such factors may include, in addition to other factors related to the work to be performed, the
following:
(1 The scope of work to be performed under the permit;
(2 Maintaining the safe and effective flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the
Public Way affected by the work;
(3 Protecting the existing improvements to the Public Way impacted by the work;
and
(4 The season of the year during which the work is to be performed as well as the
current weather and its impact on public safety and the use of the Public Way by the public;
(5) Use of the Public Way for extraordinary events anticipated by the City.
(b0 The City Engineer shall be notified by the Permittee of commencement of the work within
twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencing work. The permit shall be valid for the time period specified in
the permit.
(c0 If the work is not completed during such period, prior to the expiration of the permit, the
Permittee may apply to the City Engineer for an additional permit or an extension, which may be granted
by the City Engineer for good cause shown.
(d0 The length of the extension requested by the Permittee shall be subject to the approval of
the City Engineer. No extension shall be made that allows work to be completed in the winter period
without payment of winter fees.
9-12-070. Permit - No Transfer or Assignment.
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be performed under a permit in
any place other than that specified in the permit. Nothing herein contained shall prevent a Permittee from
subcontracting the work to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the permit
shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under the permit, and for all bonding,
insurance and other requirements of this Chapter and under said permit.
9-12-080. Compliance with Specifications, Standards, Traffic-Control Regulations; Site
Permittee Identification.
(a0 The work performed in the Public Way shall conform to the requirements of the Woods
Cross Development Regulations and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as adopted by the
City, copies of which shall be available from the City Engineer, kept on file in the office of the City
Recorder and open to public inspection during office hours.
(b0 Where a job site is left unattended, before completion of the work, signage with minimum
two inch (2") high letters shall be attached to a barricade or otherwise posted at the site, indicating the
Permittee's name, or company name, telephone number, and after hours telephone number.
(c0 All excavations shall be conducted in a manner resulting in a minimum amount of
interference or interruption of street or pedestrian traffic. Inconvenience to residents and businesses
fronting on the Public Way shall be minimized. Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades and/or other
structures will be available and used where necessary to prevent accidents involving property or persons.
Barricades must be in place until all of the Permittee's equipment is removed from the site and the
excavation has been backfilled and proper asphalt surface is in place. From sunset to sunrise, all
barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined by adequate signal lights, torches, etc. The Police
Department and Fire Department shall be notified at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of any
planned excavation requiring street closure or traffic detour. If access is to be denied to any street
overnight, prior written approval must be obtained from the City.
9-12-090. Other Highway Permits.
(a0 Holders of permits for work on highways owned or under the jurisdiction of other
government entities, but located within the City limits, shall not be required to obtain permits from the City
under the provisions of this Chapter, unless the work extends beyond the back side of the curb, or
beyond any other designated jurisdictional boundary. Any City permit shall not be construed to permit or
allow work on a County road or on a State highway within the City without an applicable County or State
permit.
(b0 The City Engineer, in his or her discretion, shall have the right and authority to regulate
work under permits issued by other governmental entities with respect to hours and days of work, and
measures required to be taken by the Permittee of said governmental entity for the protection of traffic
and safety of persons and property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this Chapter shall be
construed to impose any duty, implied or express, on the City or its employees, officers, agents or
assigns, relative to the protection of traffic and safety of persons or property, arising out of the issuance of
any permit issued by government entities other than the City, or arising out of any work performed on any
Public Way owned or within the jurisdiction of the City.
9-12-100. Relocation of Structures in Public Ways.
(a0 The City Engineer may direct any person owning or maintaining facilities or structures in
the Public Way to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or structures as the City Engineer may require.
Sewers, pipes, drains, tunnels, conduits, pipe driveways, vaults, trash receptacles and overhead and
underground gas, electric, utility, telephone, telecommunication and communication facilities shall
specifically be subject to such directives. The person owning or maintaining the facilities or structures
shall, at their own cost and expense and upon reasonable written notice by the City, promptly protect, or
promptly alter or relocate such facilities or structures, or part thereof, as directed by the City. In the event
that such person refuses or neglects to conform to the directive of the City, the City shall have the right to
break through, remove, alter or relocate such part of the facilities or structures without liability to such
person. Such person shall pay to the City all costs incurred by the City in connection with such work
performed by the City, including also design, engineering, construction, materials, insurance, court costs
and attorneys fees.
(b0 Any directive by the City Engineer shall be based upon one or more of the following:
(1 The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being maintained contrary to
law, or determined by the City Engineer to be structurally unsound or defective;
(2 The facility or structure constitutes a nuisance as defined under State statute or
City ordinance (this Section shall not, however, be deemed to diminish the vehicle impound
authority of the Police Department);
(3 The authority under which the facility or structure was installed has expired or
has been revoked;
(4 The facility or structure is not in conformity with public improvements consistent
with the General Plan of the City for the area;
(5 The Public Way is about to be repaired or improved and such facilities or
structures may pose a hindrance to construction; or
(6 The grades or lines of the Public Way are to be altered or changed.
(c0 Any person owning or maintaining facilities or structures in the Public Way who fails to
alter, modify or relocate such facilities or structures upon notice to do so by the City Engineer shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. All costs of alteration, modification or relocation shall be borne by the
person owning or maintaining the facilities or structures involved.
9-12-110. Impact of Excavation on Existing Improvements.
(a0 If any sidewalk or curb ramp is blocked by excavation work, a temporary sidewalk or curb
ramp shall be constructed or provided. Said temporary improvement shall be safe for travel and
convenient for users, and consistent with City standards for such.
(b0 Where excavations are made in paved areas, the surface shall be replaced with proper
asphalt surface until such time as the permanent repairs are completed.
(c0 (1) At any time a Permittee disturbs the yard, residence or the real or personal
property of a private property owner or the City, such Permittee shall insure that such property is
returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition that is comparable to the condition that existed
prior to the commencement of the work.
(2) The costs associated with the disturbance and the return, replacement and/or
restoration shall be borne by the Permittee. Further, a Permittee shall reimburse a property owner
or the City, for any actual damage caused by the Permittee, its subcontractor, or its independent
contractor, in connection with the disturbance of such property. However, nothing in this
Subsection shall require the Permittee to pay a subscriber or private property owner when that
subscriber or private property owner requests that the Permittee remove, replace or relocate
improvements associated with the service provided by the Permittee to the property owner and
when the Permittee exercises due care in the performance of that service, or when the subscriber
or private property owner provided false information to the Permittee on which the Permittee
relied to its detriment.
(d0 Examples of types of acts specifically included in this Section are the following:
(1 Removal of sod, lawn, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveways, or fence, to install,
trench, repair, replace, remove or locate, equipment, pipelines, cable or other appurtenances of
the Permittee;
(2 Installation or removal of equipment or other appurtenances of the Permittee's
System within a private property owner's property or residence which requires drilling, excavating,
plastering, or the like on the part of the Permittee;
(3 Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a fixture of a
private property owner (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air conditioning, heating unit, or the like)
in order to perform some sort of construction, maintenance or repair by the Permittee; or
(4 Permanently removing a Permittee's equipment or other appurtenances due to
the revocation, termination or non-renewal of the franchise, if applicable.
(e0 Existing drainage channels, such as gutters or ditches, shall be kept free of dirt or other
debris so that natural flow will not be interrupted. When it is necessary to block or otherwise interrupt flow
of the drainage channel, a method of rerouting the flow must be submitted for approval by the City
Engineer prior to the blockage of the channel.
(f0 The requirements imposed upon the Permittee extend to any subcontractor or
independent contractor that the Permittee might employ to perform the tasks pursuant to the permit.
(g0 The requirements of this Section shall not apply to the removal by a Permittee, of a
permanent structure placed by a property owner in a Public Way, unless such property owner has
received prior written permission from the City granting the property owner the right to install a permanent
structure on a Public Way, and such written permission has been recorded in the office of the County
Recorder.
9-12-120. Restoration of Public Property.
The Permittee shall, at its own expense, restore the surface of any Public Way to its original
condition and replace any removed or damaged pavement with the same type and depth of pavement as
that which is adjoining, including the gravel base material. All restoration shall conform to the
Development Regulations, Design Standards and Specifications promulgated by the City and shall be
accomplished within the time limits set forth in the permit, unless additional time is granted in writing by
the City Engineer.
9-12-130. Insurance Requirements.
(a0 Before a permit is issued, the Applicant shall furnish to the City evidence that such
Applicant has a comprehensive general liability and property damage policy that includes contractual
liability coverage endorsed with the following limits and provisions:
(1 A minimum of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) combined single limit per
occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, and property damage and not less than One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000) in the aggregate. The general aggregate limit shall apply separately to the
permit, or the general aggregate limit shall be two times the required occurrence limit. The
coverage shall be in the nature of Broad Form Commercial General Liability coverage. The City
Attorney may increase or decrease minimum insurance limits, depending on the potential liability
of any project.
(2 All policies shall include the City, its employees, officers, officials, agents,
volunteers and assigns, as insureds. Any reference to the "City" shall include the City, its
employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers and assigns.
(3 The coverage shall be primary insurance with respect to the City, its employees,
officers, officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by
the City, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns shall be in excess of
the Permittee's insurance and shall not contribute to or with it.
(4 Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policy shall not effect
coverage provided to the City, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns.
(5 Coverage shall state that the Permittee's insurance shall apply separately to
each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought, except with respect to the limits of
the insurer's liability.
(6 Underwriters shall have no right of recovery or subrogation against the City, it
being the intent of the parties that the insurance policy so affected shall protect both parties and
be primary coverage for any and all losses covered by the described insurance.
(7 The insurance companies issuing the policy or policies shall have no recourse
against the City for payment of any premiums due or for any assessments under any form of any
policy.
(8 Each insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that the coverage shall not be
suspended, voided, canceled, or reduced in coverage or in limits, except after thirty (30) days
prior written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested sent to the City.
(9 Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, save harmless and defend the City
and its officers and employees against any claim or loss, damage or expense sustained on
account of damages to persons or property occurring by reason of permit work done by the
Permittee, or his/her subcontractor or agent, whether or not the work has been completed and
whether or not the right-of-way has been opened to public travel.
(10 Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City,
and its officers and employees against any claim or loss, damage or expense sustained by any
person occurring by reason of doing any work pursuant to the permit including, but not limited to,
falling objects or failure to maintain proper barricades and/or lights as required from the time work
begins until the work is completed and right-of-way is opened for public use.
(b0 Insurance is to be placed with insurers with an AM Best rating of no less than an A
carrier, with a rating of "A7" or higher.
(c0 The Permittee shall furnish the City with certificates of insurance and original
endorsements affecting coverage required by the permit. The certificates and endorsements for each
insurance policy are to be signed by a person authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf.
The City expressly reserves the right to require complete, certified copies of all required insurance
policies at any time. Consequently, the Permittee shall be prepared to provide such copies prior to the
issuance of the permit.
(d0 If any of the required policies are, or at any time become, unsatisfactory to the City as to
form or substance, or if a company issuing any such policy is, or at any time becomes, unsatisfactory to
the City, the Permittee shall promptly obtain a new policy, submit the same to the City for approval, and
thereafter submit verification of coverage as required by the City. Upon failure to furnish, deliver and
maintain such insurance as provided herein, the City may declare the permit to be in default and pursue
any and all remedies the City may have at law or in equity, including those actions outlined in this
Chapter.
(e0 The Permittee shall include all subcontractors as insured under its policies or shall furnish
separate certificates and endorsements for each subcontractor. All coverages for subcontractors shall be
subject to all of the requirements stated herein.
(f0 Any deductibles or self-insured retentions shall be declared to and approved by the City.
At the option of the City, either the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured
retentions with respect to the City, its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers or assigns, or the
Permittee shall procure a bond, in a form acceptable to the City, guaranteeing payment of losses and
related investigations, claim administration, and defense expenses.
(g0 A property owner performing work adjacent to his or her residence may submit proof of a
homeowner's insurance policy in lieu of the insurance requirements of this Section.
(h0 A Provider may be relieved of the obligation of submitting certificates of insurance under
the following circumstances:
(1 If such company shall submit satisfactory evidence in advance that:
(i0 It is insured in the amounts set forth in this Chapter, or has complied with
State requirements to become self insured. Public utilities may submit annually evidence
of insurance coverage in lieu of individual submissions for each permit; and
(ii0 Said coverage provides to the City the same scope of coverage that
would otherwise be provided by a separate policy as required by this Chapter; or
(iii0 The work to be performed under the permit issued to the Applicant is to
be performed by the City, in which case insurance requirement shall be negotiated
between the City and the Applicant by separate agreement.
9-12-140. Bond - When Required, Conditions, Warranty.
(a0 Except as noted in this Chapter, each Applicant, before being issued a permit, shall
provide the City with an acceptable corporate surety bond in an amount determined by the City Engineer
to guarantee faithful performance of the work authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this Chapter.
The amount of the bond required may be increased or decreased at the discretion of the City Engineer
whenever it appears that the amount and cost of the work to be performed, and not satisfactorily
completed, may vary from the amount of bond otherwise required under this Chapter. The form of the
bond and the entity issuing the bond shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
(b) Public utilities franchised by the City shall not be required to file a corporate surety bond if
such requirement is expressly waived in the franchise documents.
(c) The bond required by this Section shall be conditioned as follows
(1) That the Permittee shall fully comply with the requirements of the City ordinances
and regulations, specifications and standards promulgated by the City relative to work in the
Public Way, and respond to the City in damages for failure to conform therewith;
(2) That after work is commenced, the Permittee shall proceed with diligence and
expedition and shall promptly complete such work and restore the Public Way to construction
specifications, so as not to obstruct the Public Way or travel thereon more than is reasonably
necessary;
(3) That the Permittee shall guarantee the materials and workmanship for a period of
two (2) years from completion of such work, with reasonable wear and tear excepted; and
(4) That unless authorized by the City Engineer on the permit, all paving, resurfacing
or replacement of street facilities on all streets shall be done in conformance with the regulations
contained herein within three (3) calendar days from the time the excavation commences except
as provided for during excavation in winter or during weather conditions which do not allow
paving according to Development Regulations. In winter, a temporary patch must be provided. In
all excavations, restoration of pavement surfaces shall be made immediately after backfilling is
completed or concrete is cured. If work is expected to exceed the above duration, the Permittee
shall submit a detailed construction schedule for approval. The schedule will address means and
methods to minimize traffic disruption and complete the construction as soon as reasonably
possible.
9-12-150. Hold Harmless Agreement; Limitations on City Liability.
(a) The Permittee agrees to save the City, its officers, employees and agents harmless from
any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any
work performed under the permit. The issuance and acceptance of any permit under this Chapter shall
constitute such an agreement by the Permittee to this Section.
(b) This Chapter shall neither be construed as imposing upon the City, its officers,
employees and agents, any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by or by reason of
the performance of any work within the Public Way, or under a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter; nor
shall the City, its officers, officials, employees, agents, volunteers or assigns thereof be deemed to have
assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspection authorized hereunder, the issuance of
any permit, or the approval of any work.
9-12-160. Work Without Permit - Penalty.
(a) A stop order may be issued by the City Engineer directed to any person or persons doing
or causing any work to be done in the Public Way without a permit. The abutting property owner shall be
responsible for causing work to be done.
(b) Any person found to be doing work in the Public Way without having obtained a permit,
as provided in this Chapter, shall be required to pay a permit fee equal to two times the normal permit fee.
For replacement work, where a fee is not normally charged, the normal permit fee for new construction
shall apply.
9-12-170. Failure to Comply; Default in Performance.
(a) Any permit may be revoked or suspended and a stop order issued by the City Engineer,
after notice to the Permittee for any of the following reasons:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit, the bond, or of any provision of this
Chapter;
(2) Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the City or law relating to the
work; or
(3) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act which does constitute, may
constitute or cause a condition endangering life or property.
(b) A suspension or revocation by the City Engineer, and a stop order, shall take effect
immediately upon entry thereof by the City Engineer and notice to the person performing the work in the
Public Way. Notice to the person performing the work shall be accomplished when the City Engineer has
posted a stop work order at the location of the work and written notice has been mailed, return receipt
requested, to the address indicated by the Permittee on the permit.
(c) Whenever the City Engineer finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any
term or condition of the permit, written notice thereof may be given to the principal and to the surety on
the bond, if there is a surety bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost
thereof, and the period of time deemed by the City Engineer to be reasonably necessary for the
completion of the work.
(d) In the event that the surety or principal, within a reasonable time following the giving of
such notice (taking into consideration the exigencies of the situation, the nature of the work, the
requirements of public safety and for the protection of persons and property), fails either to commence
and cause the required work to be performed with due diligence, or to indemnify the City for the cost of
doing the work, as set forth in the notice, the City may perform the work, at the discretion of the City
Engineer, with City forces or contract forces or both, and suit may be commenced by the City Attorney
against the contractor and bonding company and such other persons as may be liable, to recover the
entire amount due to the City, including attorney fees, on account thereof. In the event that cash has been
deposited, the cost of performing the work may be charged against the amount deposited, and suit
brought for the balance due, if any.
9-12-180. Failure to Conform to Development Regulations - Penalty.
(a) For failure to conform to the Development Regulations, the City Engineer may:
(1) Suspend or revoke the permit;
(2) Issue a stop order;
(3) Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
(4) Require an extended warranty period; and/or
(5) Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance costs.
9-12-190. Appeal of Suspension, Revocation, or Stop Order.
Any suspension, revocation or stop order by the City Engineer may be appealed by the Permittee
by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Council within ten (10) days of the action of the City
Engineer. The City Council shall hear such appeal, if written request therefor is timely filed, as soon as
practicable, and render its decision within a reasonable time following filing of notice of appeal.
9-12-200. Tampering with Traffic Barricades.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly or without authorization and legal
cause, extinguish, remove or diminish any light illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down,
remove or in any manner alter any rail, fence or barricade protecting any excavation or other construction
site.
9-12-210. Conflict with Governing Provisions.
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of any other
ordinance, agreement, franchise, or other document governing the excavation of a Public Way, the more
restrictive provisions of the aforesaid documents shall apply.
9-12-220. Violation - Penalty.
Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, a violation of any provision of this Chapter, or failure
to comply with an order of suspension, revocation or stop work, shall be a Class B misdemeanor. Each
day the violation exists shall be a separate offense. No criminal conviction shall excuse the person from
otherwise complying with the provisions of this Chapter.
CHAPTER 9:13 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
9-13-010. Statement of Purpose Generally.
9-13-020. Definitions.
9-13-030. General Provisions.
9-13-040. Designation of the Administrator.
9-13-050. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator.
9-13-060. Permit Procedures.
9-13-070. Appeal Procedure.
9-13-080. Variance Procedure.
9-13-090. General Standards.
9-13-100. Specific Standards.
9-13-110. Penalty.
9-13-010. Statement of Purpose Generally.
(a) Findings of Fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of Woods Cross City are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(2) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other
lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood proofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
(b) Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
(1) To protect human life and health;
(2) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) To minimize damage to the public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in special
flood hazard areas;
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of special flood hazard areas so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
(7) To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
(8) To ensure that those who occupy a special flood hazard area assume
responsibility for their actions.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 55
(c) Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this
ordinance includes methods and provisions for:
(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
9-13-20. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
ordinance its most reasonable application. Any discrepancies that may arise between these
definitions and other definitions contained in this Title shall be resolved in favor of these
definitions in interpreting and administering the provisions of this Chapter.
(a) "Alluvial Fan Flooding." Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or
similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active
processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
(b) "Apex." A point on an alluvial fan or similar land form below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can
occur.
(c) "Area of Shallow Flooding." A designated AH or AO zone with a one percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
(d) "Base Flood." The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
(e) “Base Flood Elevation.” The computed elevation to which floodwater is
anticipated to rise during the base flood. Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) are shown on Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and on the flood profiles.
(f) “Basement.” Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
(g) "Development." Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the special
flood hazard area.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 56
(h) “Elevated Building.”
(1) A non-basement building which is:
(i) Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor elevated above the
ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls
parallel to the floor of the water; and
(ii) Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood
(2) In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D,
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood
waters.
(i) “Existing Construction.” For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before
January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing construction” may also be
referred to as “existing structures.”
(j) "Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision." A manufactured home park
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) are completed before the effective date
of this ordinance.
(k) "Expansion to Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision." The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
(l) "Flood or Flooding." A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source; or
(3) Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as
defined in paragraph (2) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud
on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water
and deposited along the path of the current.
(m) "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)." The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the City.
(n) "Flood Insurance Study." The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
(o) “Flood Protection System.” Those physical structural works for which funds have
been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 57
modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a “special
flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically
includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood
modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
(p) "Floodproofing." Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or
improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
(q) “Floodplain” or “Flood Prone Area.” Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flooding”).
(r) “Floodplain Management.” The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
(s) “Floodplain Management Regulations.” Any state law or city ordinance, including
Woods Cross City zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances such as this Floodplain Ordinance, etc., which provide standards for
the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
(t) "Floodway." The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing
the water surface elevation more than one foot.
(u) “Functionally Dependent Use.” A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking
facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers,
and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
(v) “Highest Adjacent Grade.” The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
(w) “Historic Structure.” Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or
(3) Individually listed on the State register as promulgated by the Utah
Division of State History.
(x) “Hydrodynamic Loads.” Forces imposed on structures by flood waters due to the
impact of moving water on the upstream side of the structure, drag along its sides, and eddies or
negative pressures on its downstream side.
(y) “Hydrostatic Loads.” Loads or pressures resulting from the static mass of water
at any point of floodwater contact with a structure. They are equal in all directions and always act
perpendicular to the surface on which they are applied.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 58
(z) “Levee.” A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow
of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
(aa) “Levee System.” A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees,
and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and
operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
(bb) "Lowest Floor." The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's
lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this ordinance.
(cc) "Manufactured Home." A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation
when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle.”
(dd) “Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision.” A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
(ee) “Mean Sea Level.” For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
(ff) "New Construction." For purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the City’s initial
FIRM, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of this ordinance, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
(gg) "New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision." A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of this ordinance.
(hh) "Recreational Vehicle." A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (c) designed to be a
self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use
as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(ii) "Special Flood Hazard Area." The land in the floodplain subject to a one percent
or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
(jj) "Start of Construction." Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading or filling; nor does it include the
installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 59
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(kk) "Structure." A walled and roofed building or manufactured home that is principally
above ground.
(ll) "Substantial Damage." Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty
percent (50%) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(mm) "Substantial Improvement." Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure.”
(ii) "Variance." A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this ordinance.
(jj) “Violation.” Failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of this
ordinance.
(kk) “Water Surface Elevation.” The height, in relation to the North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or ravine areas.
9-13-030. General Provisions.
(a) Lands to which this Ordinance Applies. This ordinance shall apply to all special
flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of Woods Cross City.
(b) Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas. The special flood hazard
areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering
report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Woods Cross, Utah, Davis County,"
dated June 18, 2007, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and any revision
thereto resulting from independent site-specific engineering analysis or, after resolution of any
post revision protest, from revisions generated by FEMA, is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this ordinance. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the Woods Cross
City Offices located at 1555 South 800 West in Woods Cross City, Utah.
(c) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted, or altered unless the modification fully complies with the terms of this
ordinance and other applicable regulations.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 60
(d) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This ordinance is not intended to repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(e) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all
provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the City; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
(f) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by
this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights
may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land
outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of Woods Cross
City or any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any
flood damages that result in reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
9-13-040. Designation of the Administrator.
The City Planner, or his or her designee, (hereafter Administrator) is hereby appointed to
administer and implement this Ordinance by granting or denying development permit applications
in accordance with its provisions and performing all other duties as provided herein.
9-13-050. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator.
Duties of the Administrator shall include, but are not limited to the following:
(a) Permit Review.
(1) Review and approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by the adoption of this ordinance.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
(3) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those Federal, State, or local governmental agencies from
which prior approval is required.
(4) Review all development permits to determine whether proposed building
sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
(b) Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been
provided in accordance with Section 9-13-030(b), “Basis for Establishing the Special Flood
Hazard Areas,” the Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation data available from a Federal, State, or other source as criteria for requiring that new
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 61
construction, substantial improvements, or other development in Zone A are administered in
accordance with this Chapter.
(c) Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and
whether or not the structure contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures
i. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which the structure has been floodproofed.
ii. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section 9-13-060,
“Permit Procedures.”
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this ordinance.
(d) Alteration of Watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities, the Utah State Division of Water Rights,
and the Utah State Division of Water Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit copies of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(2) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(e) Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in Section 9-13-070, “Appeal Procedure.”
(f) Construction when No Regulatory Floodway has been Designated. When a
regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Administrator must require that no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted
within Zones A1-30 and AE on the City’s FIRM, except that:
(1) the Administrator may grant such approval in Zones A1-30 and AE if it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community; or
(2) the Administrator may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE,
and AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the
base flood by more than one foot, provided the Administrator has applied for and been
granted a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA, under the provisions of 44 CFR
Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations.
9-13-060. Permit Procedures.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within
any area of special flood hazard established in Section 9-13-030(b), “Basis for Establishing the
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 62
Special Flood Hazard Areas.” Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the City and may include, but not be limited to; plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing,
including the placement of manufactured homes. Review of the development permit may be
combined with, and become a part of, the normal review and processing of conditional use, site
development, and/or subdivision applications if applicable. The Administrator may require
certification of any of these requirements by a professional engineer, surveyor, or architect, as he
or she deems necessary.
(a) Specific Requirements. The applicant must provide the following information:
(1) The elevation in relation to the mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including the basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
(2) The elevation in relation to the mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure has been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect or that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria of
this Chapter; and
(4) A description of the extent to which any watercourses will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development.
(b) Approval or Denial. Approval or denial of a development permit by the
Administrator shall be based on the provisions and intent of this ordinance and the following
relevant factors:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of
others;
(2) the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage
and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
(5) the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(6) the availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not
subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and flood
plain management program of that area;
(9) the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 63
(10) the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the
site; and
(11) the costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems.
9-13-070. Appeal Procedure.
(a) Any person adversely affected by a final decision of the Administrator made in
the administration or interpretation of this ordinance may, within the time provided herein, appeal
that decision to the City Council by alleging that there is error in any such final order requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Administrator in the administration or interpretation of this
ordinance. Appeals filed hereunder shall be in writing and shall be filed with the City Recorder
within thirty (30) days of the decision which is appealed. The appeal shall include any required
City appeal forms and shall set forth, at a minimum: the name, address and telephone number of
the appellant; the decision being appealed; the grounds for appeal; and a description of the
alleged error in the decision or determination of the Administrator. Only decisions of the
Administrator applying this Chapter 9-13 may be appealed to the City Council as provided herein.
Appeals may not be used to waive or modify the terms or requirements of this Chapter.
(b) After the appeal application is deemed complete, the City Recorder shall
schedule the matter to be heard by the City Council. Prior to the appeal hearing, the City
Recorder shall transmit all papers constituting the record of the decision or action being appealed
to the City Council and the appellant. The City Council shall review the record of the decision or
action of the Administrator and provide the appellant an opportunity to be heard regarding the
appeal. In reviewing the appeal, the City Council shall consider and review all relevant technical
evaluations and the specific factors set forth in Section 9-13-060(b), “Approval or Denial.” The
City Council shall decide the matter in accordance with the standard of review set forth in
Subsection (c).
(c) The City Council may affirm or reverse the decision of the Administrator, in whole
or in part, or may remand the administrative decision to the Administrator. The City Council is
also authorized to impose additional conditions as part of its determination of the appeal as
necessary to conform with the purposes and intent of this ordinance. The City Council shall
review the administrative decision of the Administrator for correctness in determining whether
there is substantial evidence in the record to support the order, decision, or determination. The
appellant shall have the burden of proving that an error has been made. The City Council shall
issue a written decision.
(d) A record of all appeals shall be maintained by the City in accordance with the
Utah Government Records Access and Management Act, as amended.
9-13-080. Variance Procedure.
(a) The Woods Cross City Board of Adjustment is hereby designated to hear and
decide whether to grant a variance upon request by an applicant.
(b) The applicant shall have the right to a hearing before the Board of Adjustment on
the question of whether or not the request for the variance fulfills the variance requirements of
this ordinance. Within thirty (30) days following conclusion of said hearing, the Board of
Adjustment shall render a decision denying the variance, granting the variance, or granting the
variance with conditions.
(c) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment may appeal such
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 64
decision to the Second District Court, Davis County, Utah, as provided by law.
(d) The City shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the
Administrator. The Administrator shall report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
(e) In passing upon applications for a variance, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluations, those specific factors established in Section 9-13-060(b),
“Approval or Denial,” the intent and purpose of this ordinance, and the following conditions:
(1) Due to the dangers caused by flooding to human life and property and
the costs and hardship caused thereby, only under limited circumstances may variances
be granted in Woods Cross City. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to human life and public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(2) In limited instances, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (2) acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood elevation, providing the factors of Section 9-13-060(b), “Approval or Denial,” have
been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (2) acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(3) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures
listed on the National Register of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this ordinance.
(4) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(5) Variances shall only be issued when a determination has been made
that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(6) Variances issued for new construction and substantial improvements and
for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use may
only be granted provided the structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety.
(7) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice
that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will
result in increased risk to life and property and an increase in premium rates for flood
insurance, which may be substantial and will be commensurate with the risk of
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 65
construction below the base flood level. Insurance rates may amount up to as high as
$25 for $100 of insurance coverage. This notice shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions as required in Subsection 9-13-080(d).
(8) All variances shall include a condition that the applicant sign an
assumption of risk and waiver of liability agreement, in a form acceptable to the City,
absolving Woods Cross City of any and all liability in the event flood damage occurs to
that portion of a structure for which the variance is granted. This agreement shall be
recorded in the office of the Davis County Recorder, shall run with the land, and shall be
binding upon all future owners thereof.
(f) The Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary and which fulfill the criteria of the variance provisions of
this ordinance.
9-13-090. General Standards.
In all special flood hazard areas the following standards are required:
(a) Construction Materials and Methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
(b) Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure and capable of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
(c) Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the
systems into flood waters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(d) Subdivision Proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals (including proposals for manufactured home
parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage in
accordance with the purposes and intent of this ordinance.
(2) All subdivision proposals (including proposals for manufactured home
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 66
parks and subdivisions) shall meet the permit requirements of Section 9-13-060, “Permit
Procedures,” and all applicable provisions of Sections 9-13-090, “General Standards” and
9-13-100, “Specific Standards.”
(3) All subdivision proposals (including proposals for manufactured home
parks and subdivisions) shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
(4) All subdivision proposals (including proposals for manufactured home
parks and subdivisions) shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(5) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and
other proposed development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and
subdivisions) which contain at least fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less) ), if
not otherwise provided by 9-13-030(b), “Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard
Areas” or 9-13-050(b), “Use of Other Base Flood Data.”
9-13-100. Specific Standards.
In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been provided as
set forth in this Chapter, the following provisions are required:
(a) Residential Construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base
flood elevation, with certification provided to the Administrator by a registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor.
(2) Require within any AO Zone on the City's FIRM that all new construction
and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the City's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is
specified).
(3) Within any AH and AO zones, there must be adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
(b) Nonresidential Construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(i) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood elevation the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
(ii) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 67
(iii) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this paragraph. Such
certifications shall be provided to the Administrator and include the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed.
(2) Within any AO Zone on the City’s FIRM, all new construction and
substantial improvements of nonresidential structures must: (a) have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the City’s FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth
number is specified); or (b) together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
completely floodproofed to that level to meet the floodproofing standard specified in
Subsection (b)(1)(i) and (ii), above.
(3) Within any AH and AO zones, there must be adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
(c) Openings in Enclosures Below the Lowest Floor. For all new construction and
substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement, and which are
subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than
one (1) square inch for every foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above
grade; and
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
(d) Manufactured Homes.
(1) All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A must be elevated
and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement and capable of resisting the
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
Specific requirements may be:
(i) Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the
manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations,
with manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one additional tie
per side;
(ii) Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five
additional ties per side at intermediate points, with manufactured homes less
than fifty (50) feet long requiring four additional ties per side;
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 68
(iii) All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds; and
(iv) Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.
(2) All manufactured homes or those to be substantially improved which are
proposed to be located on sites: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,
(b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (c) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the
result of a flood, shall meet the following requirements:
(i) Within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE, such manufactured homes
must be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement;
(ii) Within Zones A1-30, AH and AE, such manufactured homes to
be placed or substantially improved on sites in existing manufactured home
parks or subdivisions that are not subject to the provisions in Subsection (i)
above, must be elevated so that either:
(A) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or
above the base flood elevation; or
(B) The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade
and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(e) Recreational Vehicles.
(1) Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE
must either:
(a) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(b) be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(c) meet the permit requirements of Section 9-13-060, “Permit
Procedures,” and the elevation and anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces of Section 9-13-100(d)(2)(i).
(2) A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
9-13-110. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise,
violating or causing or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine, or by
imprisonment in the Davis County Jail, or by both as provided by law. Such person, firm, or
corporation shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which any
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 69
portion of any violation of this ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted by such person,
firm, or corporation, and shall be punishable as herein provided.
Woods Cross Municipal Code June 2007
Title 9, Page 70
TITLE 10
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 10-01: BUILDING OFFICIAL
CHAPTER 10-03: CONSTRUCTION CODES
CHAPTER 10-06: PERMITS
CHAPTER 10-09: INSPECTIONS
CHAPTER 10-12: CERTIFICATES
CHAPTER 10-15: UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
CHAPTER 10-18: BOARD OF APPEALS
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 10, Page 1
CHAPTER 10-01: BUILDING OFFICIAL
10-01-010. Building Official.
10-01-020. Powers and Duties.
10-01-030. Building Inspectors.
10-01-040. Conflicts of Interest.
10-01-010. Building Official.
The City may contract with or retain a licensed building inspector to act as the City Building
Official. Any person contracted or retained as the Building Official of Woods Cross City shall meet the
qualifications set forth in Utah Code Ann. ' 58-56-9, as amended, and any other requirements imposed
by the City.
10-01-020. Powers and Duties.
Subject to the direct supervision of the Community Development Director, the Building Official
shall perform all the duties set forth in the Construction Codes and any other duties as the City Council
may from time to time provide. The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this Title and the Construction Codes adopted herein.
10-01-030. Building Inspectors.
Any number of building inspectors may be contracted or retained by the City to assist the Building
Official in the performance of his or her duties. Any person contracted or retained as a building inspector
of Woods Cross City shall meet the qualifications set forth in Utah Code Ann. ' 58-56-9, as amended,
and any other requirements imposed by the City. Building Inspectors shall be under the direct supervision
and control of the Building Official and the Community Development Director and shall have the authority
to perform delegated duties and such other powers and duties as designated by the City Council.
10-01-040. Conflicts of Interest.
As employees or agents of the City, the Building Official and any building inspectors of the City
shall adhere to the requirements and restrictions of the Utah Municipal Officers= and Employees= Ethics
Act, as set forth in Utah Code Ann. '' 10-3-1301, et seq., as amended.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 10, Page 2
Woods Cross Municipal Code August 2010
Title 10, Page 2
Chapter 10-03: CONSTRUCTION CODES
10-03-010. Defined.
10-03-020. Building Code.
10-03-030. Residential Code.
10-03-040. Plumbing Code.
10-03-050. Mechanical Code.
10-03-060. National Electrical Code.
10-03-070. Utah Energy Conservation Code.
10-03-080. Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
10-03-090. Housing Code.
10-03-100. Fire Code.
10-03-110. Copies of Codes.
10-03-120. Violation.
10-03-130. Conformance with Other Ordinances.
10-03-010. Defined.
The Codes adopted in this Chapter shall be referred to collectively as the “Construction Codes” for
Woods Cross City. Unless otherwise expressly provided, the adoption of each code shall also include the
adoption of all appendices and standards.
10-03-020. Building Code.
The International Building Code (IBC), 2009 Edition, promulgated by the International Code Council,
as adopted and amended by the State of Utah, together with Appendix “C” entitled “Group U Agricultural
Buildings” are hereby adopted as the Building Code of Woods Cross City.
10-03-030. Residential Code.
The International Residential Code (IRC), 2009 Edition, promulgated by the International Code
Council, as adopted and amended by the State of Utah, is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of Woods
Cross City.
10-03-040. Plumbing Code.
The International Plumbing Code (IPC), 2009 Edition, promulgated by the International Code Council,
as adopted and amended by the State of Utah, is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of Woods Cross City.
10-03-050. Mechanical Code.
The International Mechanical Code (IMC), 2009 Edition, promulgated by the International Code
Council, as adopted and amended by the State of Utah, is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of Woods
Cross City.
10-03-060. National Electrical Code.
The National Electrical Code (NEC), 2008 Edition, promulgated by the National Fire Protection
Association, as amended and adopted by the State of Utah, is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of
Woods Cross City.
Woods Cross Municipal Code August 2010
Title 10, Page 3
10-03-070. Utah Energy Conservation Code.
The Energy Conservation Code (ECC), 2009 Edition as adopted and amended by the State of Utah in
accordance with Utah Code Ann, §63-9-46, as amended, is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code
of Woods Cross City.
10-03-080. Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 2009 Edition, promulgated by the
International Conference of Building Officials, is hereby adopted as the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
Code of Woods Cross City.
10-03-090. Housing Code.
The Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act (HUD Code), promulgated
by the Department of Housing and Urban Development and published in the Federal Register as set forth in
24 CFR parts 3280 and 3282, as revised and adopted by the State of Utah, and the standards for
Manufactured Home Installations, promulgated by the National Conference of States on Building Codes and
Standards, as revised and adopted by the State of Utah, are hereby adopted as the Housing Codes for Woods
Cross City.
10-03-100. Fire Code.
The International Fire Code (IFC), 2009 Edition, promulgated by the International Code Council, as
adopted and amended by the State of Utah, including all appendices thereto except as amended in Title 7,
Chapter 15 herein, is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of Woods Cross City.
10-03-100. Copies of Codes.
Two (2) copies of each of the above adopted Codes should be filed in the City Recorder's Office
and one (1) copy shall be filed in the office of the Community Development Director for use and
examination by the public during regular business hours.
10-03-110. Violation.
(a) Violation of Codes. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or
maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of any provision of
the Construction Codes or this Title.
(b) Failure to Comply with Order. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to fail
to comply with a lawful order of the Building Official or building inspector.
(c) Penalty. Any person violating the provisions contained herein shall be guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor and shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any violation occurs or continues.
Woods Cross Municipal Code August 2010
Title 10, Page 3a
10-03-120. Conformance with Other Ordinances.
Any construction, alteration or improvement of any building or structure within the City shall also
comply with other relevant City ordinances and regulations, including but not limited to subdivision, zoning
and fire provisions. The provisions of this Title are intended to be interpreted and administered in
conformance with such other ordinances and whenever a conflict exists between any of these provisions,
the more restrictive standard or provision shall prevail.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 10, Page 4
CHAPTER 10-06: PERMITS
10-06-010. Permit Required.
10-06-020. Application for Permit.
10-06-030. Issuance of Permit.
10-06-040. Approved Plans.
10-06-050. Retention of Plans.
10-06-060. Validity of Permit.
10-06-070. Expiration of Permit.
10-06-080. Extension of Permit.
10-06-090. Suspension or Revocation of Permit.
10-06-100. Fees and Bonds Required.
10-06-110. Investigation Fees.
10-06-120. Fee Refunds.
10-06-130. Public Improvements Required.
10-06-150. Maintenance of Construction Site.
10-06-010. Permit Required.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in the Construction Codes, no building or structure
regulated by the Construction Codes shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved,
improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate and appropriate permit for each building or
structure is first obtained from the City.
10-06-020. Application for Permit.
Application for a Building Permit shall be made by filing an "Application for Permit" and supporting
documents required by the Construction Codes and other applicable laws with the Community
Development Director.
10-06-030. Issuance of Permit.
The Application for Permit and supporting documents shall be reviewed by the Building Official, the
Community Development Director and any other appropriate officials or departments to verify compliance
with the Construction Codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances. If the Building Official and the
Community Development Director find that the work described in the Application for Permit and supporting
documents conform to the requirements of the Construction Codes and other pertinent laws and
ordinances, and that the fees and bonds required herein have been paid to the City, a permit shall be
issued to the applicant, signed by both the Building Official and the Community Development Director.
10-06-040. Approved Plans.
When the Building Official issues the permit where plans are required, the Building Official shall
endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications APPROVED. Such approved plans and
specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorizations from the Building Official,
and all work regulated by the Construction Codes shall be done in accordance with the approved plans.
10-06-050. Retention of Plans.
One (1) set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant and shall be
kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress.
One (1) set of approved plans and specifications shall be retained by the City for a period of not less than
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 10, Page 5
ninety (90) days from the date of completion of the work covered therein, and thereafter as may be required
by the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act, as adopted by the City.
10-06-060. Validity of Permit.
The issuance of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for violation of any of the provisions
of the Construction Codes or of any other pertinent law or ordinance. Permits presuming to give such
authority shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based upon plans, specifications, and other data
shall not prevent the Building Official or the City from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in such
documents, or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of the
Construction Codes or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
10-06-070. Expiration of Permit.
Every permit issued by the City shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building
or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date
of issuance of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. After
expiration of a permit, a new permit must be obtained prior to recommencing work. If no changes have
been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and the suspension or
abandonment has not exceeded one (1) year, the fee for a new permit shall be one-half the amount
required for a new permit for such work. If changes have been made or will be made in the original plans
and specifications for such work, or the suspension or abandonment has exceeded one (1) year, the fee
for a new permit shall be the full amount required for a new permit for such work.
10-06-080. Extension of Permit.
A permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply in writing for an extension of time within which
work may commence under that permit showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee
have prevented action from being taken within the time required by Section 10-06-070. Upon sufficient
showing, the City may extend the time for action by the permittee, provided that such extension shall not
exceed a period of one hundred eighty (180) days and shall only be permitted once.
10-06-090. Suspension or Revocation of Permit.
The City may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit when the permit is issued in error, or on the
basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of the provisions of the Construction Codes or other
pertinent law or ordinance.
10-06-100. Fees and Bonds Required.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 10, Page 6
Except as otherwise provided, all fees shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule
adopted by the City. In addition, applicants may be required to furnish a bond of sufficient security and
enter into a Bond Agreement to insure completion of the permitted work and the repair and/or installation of
public improvements. In the event the applicant fails to timely and fully complete the permitted work and/or
install or repair public improvements in accordance with Construction Code requirements and the
provisions of this Title, the City may thereafter use the funds comprising the bond to cause the work to be
completed. Any unexpended portion of the bond retained by the City, less fifteen percent (15%) of the total
cost to complete the work to cover overhead and administrative costs of the City, shall be refunded to the
applicant upon timely and satisfactory completion of the work required and compliance with all other
Construction Code requirements and applicable laws. If the funds received from the bond are not sufficient
to pay the total cost of completion and the fifteen percent (15%) overhead fee, the applicant shall be
obligated to pay to the City all deficiency amounts. The City may pursue all civil and criminal legal
remedies to ensure payment and/or reimbursement for deficiency amounts. Permit fees and any other fees
or bonds required herein shall be paid to the City before a permit may be issued.
10-06-110. Investigation Fees.
Whenever work for which a permit is required by the Construction Codes or the provisions of this
Title has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation may be made before a
permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, may be collected
whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued equal to the amount of the permit fee required.
10-06-120. Fee Refunds.
The City may authorize the refunding of a fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or
collected when written request for such refund is filed by the original permittee within one hundred eighty
(180) days after the date of fee payment. The City may authorize refunding of not more than eighty
percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under the permit. In addition, the City
may authorize refunding of not more than eighty percent (80%) of the plan review fee paid when
application for a permit is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.
10-06-130. Public Improvements Required.
(a) Duty to Install. Any person obtaining a permit hereunder to build or alter any structure
upon a lot which is not improved by public improvements, such as asphalt, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and
sewage, storm and flood control facilities, shall be required to install all such improvements along the
street frontage of said lot in accordance with all construction standards, regulations and applicable
ordinances of the City. No Certificate of Occupancy or Final Inspection shall be issued until all such
required improvements are complete and operable.
(b) Duty to Repair. Any person obtaining a permit hereunder to build or alter any structure
upon a lot which is improved by public improvements, such as asphalt, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and
sewage, storm and flood control facilities, shall be required to repair any damage to such improvements in
accordance with all construction standards, regulations and applicable ordinances of the City. No
Certificate of Occupancy or Final Inspection shall be issued until all such improvements are repaired.
(c) Security. Applicants shall be required to enter into a Bond Agreement acceptable to the
City providing sufficient security to insure installation, completion and/or repair of public improvements
required herein as more particularly set forth in Section 10-06-100.
(d) Deferral. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the City may defer or waive the installation of
any or all required public improvements as, in its judgment, are not requisite in the interest of public health,
safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because of the inadequacy or lack of connecting
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 10, Page 7
facilities. Whenever it is deemed appropriate to defer the construction of required improvements, the
applicant shall pay his or her share of the costs of such future improvements according to the reasonable
estimate of the City Engineer, or may enter into an Extension Agreement satisfactory to the City assuring
completion of said improvements upon the demand of the City. No permit shall be issued until the
appropriate costs required herein are deposited with the City or an Extension Agreement has been
executed between the parties assuring the completion of such improvements upon demand of the City.
No Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall be required when the appropriate costs required herein are
deposited with the City or an Extension Agreement has been executed between the parties.
10-06-150 Construction Site Cleanliness
(a) The general contractor, or owner-builder if there is no general contractor, of every
residential or commercial building construction site, shall:
(1) Maintain on the premises of each building lot, and not on a street, sidewalk or
other public property, from the first day through the last day of construction:
(i) a portable toilet facility meeting the health requirements of the law;
and
(ii) a commercial trash bin, which shall be used for refuse on the site, and
which shall be emptied when full.
(2) Keep the construction site in a condition of cleanliness and healthfulness by:
(i) preventing the accumulation of garbage or refuse,
including boards, bricks, stones, etc., into disorderly stacks and piles;
(ii) maintaining the premises in such a manner that
mice, rats, rodents, or other animals do not inhabit the premises;
(iii) preventing garbage, refuse, dirt, rocks or building materials from
encroaching into sidewalks, streets, public property, or the private
property of neighbors without the written consent of the owner; and
(iv) preventing the blowing of paper or other items onto neighboring
properties.
(b) Exceptions to the requirements of a portable toilet facility and a commercial trash bin may
be granted in writing by the Community Development Director upon a showing that such facilities are
otherwise reasonably accessible.
CHAPTER 10-09: INSPECTIONS
10-09-010. Inspections Required.
10-09-020. Inspection Requests.
10-09-030. Duty to Keep Work Accessible and Exposed.
10-09-040. Approval Required.
10-09-050. Reinspection.
10-09-060. Surveys.
10-09-070. Final Inspection.
10-09-080. Validity of Inspection.
10-09-010. Inspections Required.
All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspections by the
Building Official as specified in the Construction Codes. The Building Official may also make or require
other inspections of construction or work to ascertain compliance with the Construction Codes and other
pertinent laws or ordinances.
10-09-020. Inspection Requests.
The person doing the work authorized by a permit shall notify the Building Official in writing or by
telephone that such work is ready for inspection at least one (1) business day before inspection is
desired.
10-09-030. Duty to Keep Work Accessible and Exposed.
The permit holder shall cause the construction or work to remain accessible and exposed for
inspection purposes until approved by the Building Official. Neither the Building Official, building
inspectors, nor Woods Cross City shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of
any material required to allow inspection.
10-09-040. Approval Required.
The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspection within a reasonable
time and shall either indicate that the construction, or portion thereof, is satisfactory as completed, or
notify the permit holder or agent that the construction, or portion thereof, fails to comply with the
Construction Codes or pertinent laws. Any portions which do not comply shall be corrected and such
portions shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the Building Official. No construction or
work shall be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the
approval of the Building Official.
10-09-050. Reinspection.
If reinspection is required, the applicant must present a request for reinspection to the Building
Official and pay any reinspection fees assessed by the City.
10-09-060. Surveys.
A survey of any lot or parcel may be required by the Building Official to verify that the structure is
located in accordance with approved plans.
10-09-070. Final Inspection.
The Building Official or building inspector(s), upon notification, shall make a final inspection and
approval of all buildings and structures when completed and ready for occupancy and use.
10-09-080. Validity of Inspection.
An inspection approval shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of any of the
provisions of the Construction Codes or other pertinent law or ordinance. Inspections presuming to give
such authority shall not be valid.

CHAPTER 10-12: CERTIFICATES
10-12-010. Certificate Required.
10-12-020. Improvements and Repairs.
10-12-030. Issuance of Certificate.
10-12-040. Notice of Disapproval.
10-12-050. Temporary Certificates.
10-12-060. Posting of Certificate.
10-12-070. Revocation of Certificate.
10-12-080. Violation of Certificate Requirement.
10-12-090. Validity of Certificate.
10-12-010. Certificate Required.
No building or structure shall be used or occupied, in whole or in part, for any purpose, nor shall a
change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof be made until
the City has issued a Final Inspection Certificate, Certificate of Occupancy or Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy as provided herein.
10-12-020. Improvements and Repairs.
No Certificate of Occupancy or Final Inspection shall be issued for any building or structure until
all public improvements, such as asphalt, curbs, gutters, water meter boxes and sidewalks, and any other
required improvements, are completed and operable. If any public or other required improvements are
damaged during construction, no Certificate of Occupancy or Final Inspection Certificate shall be issued
until such improvements are repaired.
10-12-030. Issuance of Certificate.
After the Building Official performs the final inspection of a building or structure and finds that all
improvements have been completed or repaired as required herein, and finds no violations of the
Construction Codes or any other applicable laws or ordinances, the Building Official shall, with the
approval from the Community Development Director, issue a Certificate of Occupancy or Final Inspection
Certificate containing such information as required by the Construction Codes.
10-12-040. Notice of Disapproval.
After the Building Official performs the final inspection of a building or structure and finds that
such building or structure does not conform to the Construction Codes or other pertinent laws or
ordinances or that all improvements have not been completed or repaired as required herein, the Building
Official shall issue a written Notice of Disapproval to the applicant stating the reasons for such
disapproval.
10-12-050. Temporary Certificates.
(a) Generally. If the Building Official finds that no substantial hazard will result from
occupancy of any building or portion thereof before the same is completed, a Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy may be issued for the use of a portion or portions of the building or structure prior to
completion of the entire building or structure or prior to the completion, repair and/or replacement of any
public or other required improvements.
(b) Limitations. No Temporary Certificate shall be issued for any incomplete Code
requirements which would result in substantial hazard or be injurious to the health, safety or welfare of
any person.
(c) Procedure. In order to obtain a Temporary Certificate, the applicant must execute a
written agreement to fully complete, repair and/or replace improvements or work within the time
prescribed, not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of issuance of the Certificate and pay any
required fees and bonds.
(d) Extension. An applicant holding an unexpired Temporary Certificate may apply in writing
for an extension of time within which work may be completed showing that circumstances beyond the
control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken within the time required. Upon sufficient
showing, and payment by the applicant of an extension fee, the City may extend the time for completion.
Such extension shall only be permitted once and shall not exceed a period of ninety (90) days.
(e) Breach. In the event the applicant fails to timely and fully complete, repair and/or replace
said improvements in a satisfactory manner, the City may thereafter use the funds comprising any bond
retained to cause the improvement to be completed, repaired and/or replaced. If the funds received from
the bond are not sufficient to pay the total cost of completion, repair and/or replacement of the
improvements and the fifteen percent (15%) overhead fee, or if a bond was not retained, the applicant
shall be obligated to pay to the City all deficiency amounts. The City shall pursue all civil and criminal
legal remedies to ensure payment and/or reimbursement for deficiency amounts.
(f) Compliance. Upon timely and satisfactory completion, repair and/or replacement of said
improvements, and compliance with all other Construction Code provisions and applicable laws, the
Building Official shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy or Final Inspection Certificate and release any
unexpended portion of any bond retained by the City to the applicant less fifteen percent (15%) of the
total cost to complete, repair and/or replace the improvements to cover overhead and administrative costs
of the City.
10-12-060. Posting of Certificate.
The Certificate of Occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall
not be removed except by the Building Official.
10-12-070. Revocation of Certificate.
The City may, in writing, suspend or revoke any Certificate of Occupancy, Final Inspection
Certificate or Temporary Certificate whenever the Certificate is issued in error, on the basis of incorrect
information supplied, where conditions or requirements contained within the Certificate have not been
met, or when it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any provision
of the Construction Codes or any other applicable law or ordinance.
10-12-080. Violation of Certificate Requirement.
(a) Use or Occupation. Any person, firm or corporation using or occupying any building or
structure prior to obtaining a Certificate of Occupancy, Final Inspection Certificate or Temporary
Certificate shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day or portion thereof during which any violation occurs or continues.
(b) Permitting Use or Occupation. Any person, firm or corporation permitting any person to
use or occupy a building or structure prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, Final Inspection
Certificate or Temporary Certificate shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation occurs or continues.
10-12-090. Validity of Certificate.
Any Certificate of Occupancy, Final Inspection Certificate or Temporary Certificate issued
hereunder shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of any of the provisions of the
Construction Codes or other pertinent law or ordinance. Certificates presuming to give such authority
shall not be valid.

CHAPTER 10-15: UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
10-15-010. Unsafe Buildings or Structures.
10-15-020. Abatement of Unsafe Buildings or Structures.
10-15-010. Unsafe Buildings or Structures.
All buildings or structures regulated by the Construction Codes that are deemed
structurally unsafe or otherwise dangerous to human life pursuant to applicable provisions of the
Construction Codes are hereby declared to be public nuisances.
10-15-020. Abatement of Unsafe Buildings or Structures.
All such unsafe buildings, structures or appendages shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in the applicable
Construction Codes, including, but not limited to, the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code, as
adopted by the City.
CHAPTER 10-18: BOARD OF APPEALS
10-18-010. Board of Appeals Established.
10-18-020. Members.
10-18-030. Organization and Procedure.
10-18-040. Filing Appeal.
10-18-050. Notice and Hearing.
10-18-060. Decision.
10-18-070. Limitation.
10-18-010. Board of Appeals Established.
There is hereby created a Board of Appeals in Woods Cross City to hear and decide appeals of
orders, decisions and determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and
interpretation of the Construction Codes.
10-18-020. Members.
(a) Number and Qualification. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members who
may not be employees of Woods Cross City and who shall be licensed in the State of Utah as a Building
Official, Fire Official, architect, contractor, engineer, or otherwise qualified by technical experience and
training to act on matters regarding the application and interpretation of the Construction Codes.
(b) Alternates. At least two (2) alternate members shall be appointed to the Board of
Appeals. All alternate members shall meet the qualification requirements for regular Members.
(c) Appointment and Term. Members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council to staggered terms of three (3) years, provided that
members may be appointed to terms shorter than three (3) years when necessary to provide for
staggered terms.
(d) Compensation. Members of the Board of Appeals shall receive a per diem allowance for
each day or portion of a day spent performing Board duties, and all necessary travel and accommodation
expenses incurred in the discharge of such duties, as the City Council may approve.
(e) Removal. Members of the Board of Appeals shall serve at the pleasure of the City
Council and may be removed with or without cause upon recommendation of the Mayor by a majority
vote of the City Council.
10-18-030. Organization and Procedure.
(a) Chairperson. The Board of Appeals shall elect a chairperson who shall administer oaths,
compel the attendance of witnesses, and oversee the proceedings of the Board. In the event the
Chairperson is absent from any proceeding, a chairperson pro tempore may be appointed by a majority
vote of the members present.
(b) Building Official. The Building Official of Woods Cross City shall be an ex officio member
of the Board of Appeals. As such, the Building Official shall attend all proceedings of the Board and act
as secretary to the Board, but shall not vote upon any matter before the Board.
(c) Rules of Procedure. The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting
its business.
(d) Meetings. The Board of Appeals shall hold meetings at such times as the Board
determines is necessary and as called by the Chairperson or the City Administrator. Except as otherwise
provided by law, all meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public.
(e) Records. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, including the vote
of each member on each question, or the member's absence or failure to vote, and records of its
examinations or other official actions. Such records shall be filed with the City Recorder and shall be
open to the public pursuant to the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act, as adopted
by the City.
(f) Quorum. A majority of the Members of the Board of Appeals shall constitute a quorum
and may act in behalf of the Board.
10-18-040. Filing Appeal.
Unless otherwise provided in the applicable Construction Code, any order, decision or
determination of the Building Official relative to application and interpretation of the Construction Codes
may be appealed to the Board of Appeals by filing within fifteen (15) days from the date of said decision
an original and three (3) copies of a written statement of the grounds for the appeal and a request for a
hearing on said decision, if desired, with the City Recorder during regular business hours.
10-18-050. Notice and Hearing.
The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing of the appeal, give any required
public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest. The hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of the relevant Construction Code(s). Any party may appear in person or
by authorized agent at the hearing.
10-18-060. Decision.
After the hearing, the Board of Appeals shall make a decision on the matter. Except as provided
in Section 10-18-070, the Board of Appeals may, by majority vote, affirm, reverse, or modify the appealed
order, decision or determination of the Building Official, provided that any decision granting an appeal
shall require votes from at least (3) three Members of the Board in support of such decision. The Board
of Appeals shall render its decision and findings in writing to the appellant with duplicate copies to the City
Administrator.
10-18-070. Limitation.
The Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative
provisions of the Construction Codes, nor shall the Board of Appeals be empowered to waive any
requirements of the Construction Codes.
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 11-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 11-03: SKETCH PLAT
CHAPTER 11-06: PRELIMINARY PLAT
CHAPTER 11-09: FINAL PLAT
CHAPTER 11-12: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 11-15: REQUIREMENTS FOR PUD AND NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 11-18: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
CHAPTER 11-21: DEVELOPMENT FEES
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 1
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 11-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 11-03: SKETCH PLAT
CHAPTER 11-06: PRELIMINARY PLAT
CHAPTER 11-09: FINAL PLAT
CHAPTER 11-12: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 11-15: REQUIREMENTS FOR PUD AND NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 11-18: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
CHAPTER 11-21: DEVELOPMENT FEES
CHAPTER 11-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-01-010. Short Title.
11-01-020. Purpose.
11-01-030. Interpretation.
11-01-040. Severability.
11-01-050. Definitions.
11-01-060. General Considerations.
11-01-070. General Responsibilities.
11-01-080. Compliance Required.
11-01-090. Required Certificates, Permits and Reviews.
11-01-100. Penalties.
11-01-110. Amendments.
11-01-120. Variances.
11-01-130. Appeals.
11-01-010. Short Title.
This Title shall be known as the "Woods Cross City Subdivision Ordinance" or as the "Land
Development Code." This Title shall also be known as Title 11 of the Revised Ordinances of Woods
Cross, Utah, 1979. It may be cited and pleaded under any of the above-stated designations.
11-01-020. Purpose.
The purpose of this Title, and any rules, regulations, standards and specifications hereafter
adopted pursuant hereto or in conjunction herewith are:
(a) To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(b) To regulate future growth and development within the City in accordance with the
General Plan and to promote the efficient and orderly growth of the City.
(c) To provide procedures, specifications and standards for the physical development of
subdivisions of land and construction of buildings and improvements thereon within the City including, but
not limited to, the construction and installation of roads, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage
systems, water and sewer systems, design standards for public facilities and utilities, access to public
right-of-ways, dedication of land and streets, granting easements or right-of-ways and to establish fees
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 2
and other charges for the authorizing of a subdivision and for the development of land and improvements
thereon.
(d) To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood and other
dangers, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population.
(e) To provide for harmonious and coordinated development of the City, and to assure sites
suitable for building purposes and human habitation.
11-01-030. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Title shall be considered as minimum
requirements for the purposes set forth. Where the provisions of this Title impose greater restrictions than
any statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant, the provisions of this title shall prevail. Where the
provisions of any statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant impose greater restrictions than the
provisions of this Title, the provisions of such statute, other regulation, ordinance or covenant shall prevail.
11-01-040. Severability.
If any section, clause or provision of this Ordinance is declared invalid for any reason by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and
effect.
11-01-050. Definitions.
Unless a contrary intention clearly appears, words used in the present tense include the future,
the singular includes the plural, the term "shall" is mandatory and the term "may” is permissive. The
following terms as used in this Title shall have the respective meanings hereinafter set forth.
(a) ”Alley” means a public way which generally affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting properties and not intended for general traffic circulation.
(b) “Applicant” means the owner of land proposed to be subdivided or such owner's duly
authorized agent. Any agent must have written authorization from the owner.
(c) “Block” means the land surrounded by streets and other right-of-ways other than an
alley, or land which is designated or shown as a block on any recorded subdivision plat or official map or
plat adopted by the City Council.
(d) “Bond Agreement” means an agreement to install improvements secured by a stand-by
letter of credit, or an escrow agreement with funds on deposit in an acceptable financial institution, or a
cash bond with the City, in an amount corresponding to the City Engineer's estimate. All bonds shall be
on forms approved by the City Council wherever a bond is required pursuant to this Ordinance.
(e) “Building” means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or
intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property.
(f) “Capital Project” means an organized undertaking which provides, or is intended to
provide, the City with a capital asset. "Capital Asset" is defined according to generally accepted
accounting principles.
(g) “City” means Woods Cross City.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 3
(h) “City Council” means the City Council of Woods Cross City.
(i) “City Engineer” means a professional registered engineer designated by the City.
(j) “Collector Street” See Streets.
(k) “Community Development Department” means that department of the City authorized by
the City to oversee Planning, Zoning and Building Inspection within the City.
(l) “Community Development Director” means the person appointed by the City to perform
the duties and responsibilities of Community Development Director, as defined by City ordinances and
resolutions.
(m) “Construction Plans” means the maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and
showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance
with the requirements of the City as a condition of the approval of the final plat.
(n) “Condominium” means property conforming to the definition set forth in Sections 56-8-3 of
the Utah Code Ann. (1953) as amended. A condominium is also a "subdivision" subject to these
regulations and the Condominium Ownership Act of the State of Utah.
(o) “Condominium Subdivision” See Subdivision.
(p) “Cul-de-sac” See Streets.
(q) “Developer” means, as the case may be, (1) an applicant for subdivision approval, (2) an
applicant for a building permit or another permit issued, or (3) the owner of any right, title, or interest in
real property for which subdivision approval or site plan approval is sought.
(r) “Development Review Committee” means a committee comprised of members
representing the Community Development, Engineering, Public Works, and Fire Departments that provide
their respective department’s input regarding development applications subject to the development review
provisions of this Title and other city ordinances.
(s) “Development Standards” means the written specifications for improvements in a
subdivision that will be maintained by the City after their installation by the Developer.
(t) “Easement” means authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a
specified purpose, such as utilities and irrigation ditches, of any designated part of the owner's property.
An easement may be for use under, on the surface, or above the owner's property.
(u) “Family” means one (1) person living alone or two (2) or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption, according to the laws of the State of Utah; or a group not to exceed three (3)
unrelated persons living together in a dwelling. Each unrelated person owning or operating a motor
vehicle shall have a lawfully located off-street parking space; such group to be distinguished from a group
occupying a boarding house, club, fraternity or hotel.
(v) “Fee Schedule” means the schedule or any appendix of fees adopted periodically by
resolution of the City Council setting forth various fees charged by the City.
(w) “Final Plat” See Plat, Final.
(x) “Flag Lot” means a lot that has been approved by the City with access provided to the
bulk of the lot by means of a narrow corridor.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 4
(y) “Flood, One Hundred Year” means a flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
(z) “Flood, Ten Year” means a flood having a ten percent (10%) chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
(aa) “Flood Plain, One Hundred Year” means that area adjacent to a drainage channel which
may be inundated by a one hundred (100) year flood as designated on the most recent Flood Insurance
Rate Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(bb) “Freeway” See Streets.
(cc) “Frontage” means the length of any one property line of a lot or parcel, which property
line shall abut an improved public street, but shall not include that length of any property line of a lot or
parcel which abuts the end of a dead-end street or stubbed street right-of-way.
(dd) “General Plan” means the comprehensive, long-range General Plan for proposed future
development of land in the City, as provided in Chapter 9 of Title 10 of the Utah Code Ann., 1953, as
amended.
(ee ) “Geotechnical Report” means the compilation of information relating to; groundwater, soil,
geological features and other components that affect the design and construction of structures, streets,
and other infrastructure.
(ff) “Lot” means a parcel or tract of land within a subdivision and abutting a public street,
which is or may be occupied by one building and the accessory buildings or uses customarily incident
thereto, including such open spaces as are arranged and designed to be used in connection with the
building according to the zone within which the lot is located.
(gg) “Lot Right-of-Way” means an easement reserved by the lot owner as a private access to
serve interior lots not otherwise located on a street.
(hh) “Master Street Plan” means that portion of the General Plan which defines the future
alignments of streets and their rights-of-way, including maps or reports or both, which have been
approved by the Planning Commission and City Council as provided in Chapter 9a of
Title 10 of the Utah Code Ann., 1953, as amended.
(ii) “Minor Subdivision” See Subdivision, Minor.
(jj) “Monument” means a permanent survey marker shown on the final plat in accordance
with the City Engineer's specifications and referenced to Davis County survey monuments.
(kk) “Natural Drainage Course” means any natural watercourse which is open continuously
for flow of water in a definite direction or course.
(ll) “Owner” means the owner in fee simple of real property as shown in the records of the
Davis County Recorder's Office and includes the plural as well as the singular, and may mean a natural
person, firm, association, partnership, trust, private corporation, limited liability company, public or quasipublic
corporation, other entities authorized by the State of Utah, or any combination of any of the
foregoing.
(mm) “Parcel of Land” means a contiguous quantity of land, in the possession of, or owned by,
or recorded as the property of, the same owner.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 5
(nn) “Park Strip” means the strip of land located within the public right of way between the
sidewalk and the curb and gutter.
(oo) “Person” means individuals, bodies politic, corporations, partnerships, associations,
trusts, companies and other legal entities.
(pp) “Planned Unit Development” means development designed pursuant to Chapter 16 of
Title 12 of the Revised Ordinances of Woods Cross, Utah, 1979 and Chapter 11-15 of this title and means
an integrated design for development of residential, commercial, or industrial uses, or combination of
such uses, in which one or more of the regulations, other than use regulations, of the Zone in which the
development is to be situated, is waived or varied to allow flexibility and initiative in site design and building
design and location in accordance with an approved plan and the general requirements specified in this
Title. A planned unit development may be: (1) the development of compatible land uses arranged in such
a way as to provide desirable living environments that may include private and common open spaces for
recreation, circulation and/or aesthetic uses; (2) the conservation or development of desirable amenities
not otherwise possible under the otherwise applicable development standards; and (3) the creation of
areas for multiple use that are of benefit to the neighborhood.
(qq) “Planning Commission” means the Woods Cross City Planning Commission.
(rr) “Plat” means a map or depiction of a subdivision, showing thereon the division of a tract
or parcel of land into lots, blocks, streets, and alleys or other divisions and dedications.
(ss) “Plat, Final or Final Plat” means a map of a subdivision, required of all subdivisions,
except minor subdivisions, which is prepared so that streets, alleys, blocks, lots and other divisions thereof
can be identified; such plat being in conformity with the ordinances of the City and Title 10, Chapter 9a ,
Part 6 of the Utah Code Ann., 1953, as amended.
(tt) “Plat, Preliminary or Preliminary Plat” means the initial formal plat of a proposed land
division or subdivision showing information and features required by the provisions of this Title.
(uu) “Plat, Sketch or Sketch Plat” means a sketch or concept drawing prior to the preliminary
plat for subdivisions to enable the developer to reach general agreement with the Planning Commission
as to the form of the plat and the objectives of these regulations and to receive guidance as to the
requirements for subdivisions within the City.
(vv) “Protection Strip” means a strip of land bordering a subdivision, or a street within a
subdivision, which serves to bar access of adjacent property owners to required public improvements
installed within the subdivision until such time as the adjacent owners share in the cost of such
improvements. A protection strip is not permitted at the end of a dedicated public right-of-way.
(ww) “Public Improvements” means streets, curb, gutter, sidewalk, water and sewer lines,
storm sewers, subsurface drains, and other similar facilities which are required to be dedicated to the City
or other public entities in connection with subdivision, conditional use, or site plan approval.
(xx) “Public Way” means any road, street, alley, lane, court, place, viaduct, tunnel, culvert or
bridge laid out or erected as such by the public, or dedicated or abandoned to the public, or made such in
any action by the subdivision of real property, and includes the entire area within the right-of-way.
(yy) “Secondary Water System” means any system which is designed and intended to
provide, transport and store water used for watering of crops, lawns, shrubberies, flowers and other nonculinary
uses.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 6
(zz) “Sidewalk” means a passageway for pedestrians, excluding motor vehicles.
(aaa) “Sketch Plat” See Plat, Sketch
(bbb) “Street” means a thoroughfare which has been dedicated to the City and accepted by the
City Council, which the City has acquired by prescriptive right, deed or by dedication, or a thoroughfare
which has been abandoned or made public by use and which affords access to abutting property,
including highways, roads, lanes, avenues and boulevards.
(ccc) “Street, Freeway” means a street with a fully controlled access designed to link major
destination points. A freeway is designed for high speed traffic with a minimum of four travel lanes.
(ddd) “Street, Major Arterial” means a street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended
to serve as a major traffic way and is designated in the Master Street Plan as a controlled-access
highway, major street parkway, or other equivalent term to identify those streets comprising the basic
structure of the street plan.
(eee) “Street, Minor Arterial” means a similar street to major arterial, but considered to be of
slightly less significance because of lower anticipated volume, narrower width, or service to a smaller
geographic area.
(fff) “Street, Collector” means a street, existing or proposed, which is the main means of
access to the arterial street system.
(ggg) “Street, Local” means a minor street which provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
(hhh) “Street, Private” means a thoroughfare within a subdivision which has been reserved by
dedication unto the developer or lot owners to be used as a private access to serve the lots platted within
the subdivision and complying with the adopted street cross section standards of the City and maintained
by the developer or other private agency.
(iii) “Street, Cul-de-Sac” means a minor terminal street provided with a turnaround.
(jjj) “Subdivision” means any land that is divided, re-subdivided or proposed to be divided into
two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of offer, sale, lease, or development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans,
terms and conditions. "Subdivision" includes (a) the division or development of land whether by deed,
metes and bounds description, devise and testacy, lease, map, plat or other recorded instrument; and (b)
divisions of land for all residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to be used for
commercial, agricultural and industrial purposes. "Subdivision" does not include parcels which do not
meet the minimum area and/or frontage requirements of the City's Zoning Ordinance and are solely
acquired as additions to existing lots or parcels. No building permits for any main structure shall be issued
by the City on such "addition" parcels because of their non-compliance with the ordinances of the City.
(kkk) “Subdivision, Minor” means any division of land which : (1) consists of five (5) or fewer
lots; (2) the area to be subdivided is immediately adjacent to an existing street and does not require the
dedication of any land for new streets; (3) each of the lots complies with the width and area requirements
of the zone in which the property is located; and (4) the lots are not part of a minor subdivision approved
less than three (3) years earlier
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 7
(lll) “Utilities” means culinary water lines, pressure and gravity irrigation lines, sanitary and
storm sewer lines, sub-drains, electric power, natural gas, cable television and telephone transmission
lines, including underground conduits and junction boxes.
(mmm) “Water and Sewer Improvement Districts” means any water or sewer improvement
districts existing or hereinafter organized which have jurisdiction over the land proposed for a subdivision.
(nnn) “Zoning Ordinance” means the City Planning and Zoning Ordinance as presently adopted
and as amended hereafter by the City Council.
11-01-060. General Considerations.
(a) The General Plan shall guide the use and future development of all land within the
corporate boundaries of the City. The size and design of lots, the nature of utilities, the design and
improvement of streets, the type and intensity of land use, and the provisions for any facilities in any
subdivision shall conform to the land uses shown and the standards established in the General Plan, the
Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable ordinances.
(b) Trees, native land cover, natural watercourses, and topography shall be preserved where
possible. Subdivisions shall be so designed as to prevent excessive grading and scarring of the
landscape in conformance with the Zoning Ordinance. The design of new subdivisions shall consider,
and relate to, existing street widths, alignments and names.
(c) Community facilities, such as parks, recreation areas, and transportation facilities shall be
provided in the subdivision in accordance with General Plan standards, this Title, and other applicable
ordinances. This Title establishes procedures for the referral of information on proposed subdivisions to
interested boards, bureaus, and other governmental agencies and utility companies, both private and
public, so that the extension of community facilities and utilities may be accomplished in an orderly
manner, coordinated with the development of a subdivision. In order to facilitate the acquisition of land
areas required to implement this policy, the developer may be required to dedicate, grant easements
over, or otherwise reserve land for: schools, parks, playgrounds, public ways, utility easements, and other
public purposes.
11-01-070. General Responsibilities.
(a) The developer shall prepare sketch plans and plats consistent with the standards
contained herein and shall pay for the design, construction and inspection of the public improvements
required. The City shall process said plans and plats in accordance with the regulations set forth herein.
The developer shall not alter the terrain or remove any vegetation from the proposed subdivision site or
engage in any site development until developer has obtained the necessary approvals as outlined herein.
(b) The City Planner shall review the plans and plats for design; for conformity to the General
Plan and to the Zoning Ordinance; for the environmental quality of the subdivision design; and shall
process the subdivision plats and reports as provided for in this Title.
(c) Plats and/or plans of proposed subdivisions may be referred by the City Planner to any
City departments and special districts, governmental boards, bureaus, utility companies, and other
agencies which will provide public and private facilities and services to the subdivision for their information
and comment. The City Planner is responsible for coordinating any comments received from public and
private entities and shall decide to which agencies to refer proposed subdivision plats and plans.
(d) The City Engineer shall review for compliance the engineering plans and specifications
for the City required improvements for the subdivision and whether the proposed City required
improvements are consistent with this Title and other applicable ordinances and shall be responsible for
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 8
inspecting the City required improvements. Street layout and overall circulation shall be coordinated with
transportation planning by the City Planner.
(e) The City Public Works Department shall review and make comments on the engineering
plans and specifications for the City required improvements to the City Engineer and the City Planner. The
Public Works Director may assist the City Engineer in performing inspections.
(f) The Planning Commission shall act as an advisory agency to the City Council. It is
charged with making investigations, reports and recommendations on proposed subdivisions as to their
conformance to the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance, and other pertinent documents. After reviewing
the final plat and the applicable requirements, the Planning Commission may recommend approval,
approval with conditions, or disapproval of the final plat to the City Council.
(g) The City Attorney shall verify that the bond provided by the developer is acceptable, that
the developer dedicating land for use of the public is the owner of record, that the land is free and clear of
unacceptable encumbrances according to the title report submitted by the developer, and may review
matters of title such as easements and restrictive covenants.
(h) The City Council has final jurisdiction in the approval of subdivision plats, the
establishment of requirements and design standards for public improvements, and the acceptance of
lands and public improvements that may be proposed for dedication to the City.
11-01-080. Compliance Required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to subdivide any tract or parcel of land which is located
wholly or in part in the City except in compliance with this Title. No plat of any subdivision shall be
recorded until it has been submitted and approved as herein. A plat shall not be approved if such plat is in
conflict with any provision or portion of the General Plan, Master Street Plan, Zoning Ordinance, this Title,
or any other state law or City ordinance.
(b) Land shall not be transferred, sold, or offered for sale, nor shall a building permit be
issued for a structure thereon, until a final plat of a subdivision shall have been recorded in accordance
with this Title and any applicable provisions of state law, and until the improvements required in
connection with the subdivision have been guaranteed as provided herein set forth. Building permits shall
not be issued without written approval of all public agencies involved. No building depending on public
water, sewer, energy facilities, or fire protection shall be permitted to be occupied until such facilities are
fully provided and operational.
(c) All lots, plots or tracts of land located within a subdivision shall be subject to this Title
whether the tract is owned by the developer or a subsequent purchaser, transferee, devisee, or contract
purchaser of the land or any other person.
(d) A building permit shall not be issued for any lot in a subdivision until sufficient fire
protection is provided, including hard surfacing of all streets to provide access for fire protection
apparatus. Necessary water lines and hydrants must be installed and approved by the City in accordance
with Section 11-12-050 of this Title prior to the issuance of any building permits. No permits shall be
issued for any parcel which has not been properly subdivided.
11-01-090. Required Certificates, Permits and Reviews.
(a) Application. Applications for preliminary plat and final plat shall be made to the City's
Community Development Department. Applications shall be made on the respective forms provided and
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 9
shall be accompanied by the proper fee and by the documents and information required by this
Ordinance.
(b) Approval. Action on that application for a stage of a subdivision approval shall be
completed in a timely manner after the date of submittal of all required information and items to the
Community Development Department.
11-01-100. Penalties.
It shall be a Class "C" misdemeanor for any person to fail to comply with the provisions of this
Title. In addition to any criminal prosecution, the City may pursue any other legal remedy to ensure
compliance with this Title including, but not limited to, injunctive relief.
11-01-110. Amendments.
This Subdivision ordinance may be amended from time to time by the City Council after receiving
a recommendation from the Planning Commission. All proposed changes and amendments shall be
proposed by or submitted to the Planning Commission for it's recommendation; which, within thirty (30)
days shall be forwarded to the City Council for it's consideration. Prior to forwarding a recommendation to
the City Council, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment. At
least fourteen (14) days notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City. Failure of the Planning Commission to submit a recommendation within the
prescribed time shall be deemed approval by the Planning Commission of the proposed change or
amendment.
After receiving the Planning Commission's recommendation, the City Council shall hold a public
hearing on the proposed amendment. At least fourteen (14) days notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. After holding the hearing, the
City Council may uphold, overrule, or modify the recommendation of the Planning Commission by a
majority vote of it's members.
11-01-120. Variances.
Where the size of the tract to be subdivided, its topography, the condition or nature of adjoining areas
or the existence of other unusual physical conditions where strict compliance with the provisions of this
Ordinance would cause an unusual and unnecessary hardship on the developer, the City Council after
receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission may vary such requirements and require such
conditions as will secure, insofar as practicable, the objectives of the requirement varied. Any variance
authorized shall be entered in the minutes of the City Council.
11-01-130. Appeals.
(a) Appeal may be made to the City Council from any decision, determination or requirement
of the Planning Commission, City Planner or City Engineer hereunder by filing with the City Recorder a notice
thereof in writing within fifteen (15) days after such decision, determination or requirement is made. Such
notice shall set forth in detail the action and grounds upon which the developer or other person deems himself
or herself aggrieved.
(b) The City Recorder shall set the appeal for hearing before the City Council within a
reasonable time after receipt of the appeal. Such hearing may be continued by order of the City Council. The
appellant shall be notified of the appeal hearing date at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. After
hearing the appeal, the City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision, determination or requirement
appealed and enter any such orders as are in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this Title. The City
Council shall notify the appellant in writing of its ruling. The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings and
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 10
actions in furtherance of the matter appealed, pending a decision of the City Council. Decisions of the City
Council shall be final.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 11
CHAPTER 11-03: SKETCH PLAT
11-03-010. Sketch Plat.
11-03-020. Staff Authority.
11-03-030. Submission.
11-03-040. Review.
11-03-050. Expiration of Sketch Plat Approval.
11-03-010. Sketch Plat.
A sketch plat shall be required of all developers. This provides the developer with an opportunity to
consult with the City regarding the regulations and design requirements applicable to the subdivision of
property. The sketch plat should show boundaries, general topography, important physical features, adjacent
properties, and the sketch of the proposed subdivision.
11-03-020. Staff Authority.
The Community Development Director and all other officers and employees of the City act in advisory
capacity to the City Council and have no authority to make binding decisions or to make authoritative
representations, approvals or determinations other than in a purely advisory and recommending capacity.
11-03-030. Submission.
The developer shall submit three (3) copies of the proposed subdivision sketch plat to the Woods
Cross City Community Development Department. The proposed sketch plat shall include the following items:
(a) A vicinity plan showing significant natural and manmade features on the site and within five
hundred (500) feet of any portion of it; the property boundaries of the proposed subdivision; the names of
adjacent property owners; and north arrow.
(b) A proposed lot and street layout.
(c) Phasing and a breakdown of the number of lots in each Phase.
(d) A description of the type of culinary and irrigation water system(s) proposed; also,
documentation of water rights and secondary water shares.
(e) A description of the size and location of sanitary sewer and stormwater drain lines and
subsurface drainage.
(f) The total acreage of the entire tract proposed for subdivision.
(g) Proposed changes to existing zoning district boundaries or zoning classifications or
conditional use permits, if any.
11-03-040. Review.
(a) The Woods Cross City Community Development Director, upon receipt of the complete
submission, shall distribute copies of the sketch plat to members of the Development Review Committee for their
review.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 12
(b) The Development Review Committee shall review the submitted sketch plat with the
developer. The Development Review Committee shall make a determination as to whether or not the sketch
plat provides sufficient information to allow for the submittal of a preliminary plat , specifying any inadequacy
in the information submitted, non-compliance with City regulations, questionable or undesirable design and/or
engineering, and the need for any additional information which may assist them in evaluating the proposed
subdivision.
(c) The Development Review Committee may require additional information, data or studies to
be provided by the developer for the overall development prior to directing the developer that he may proceed
with submitting a preliminary plat.
Woods Cross Municipal Code February 5, 2019
Title 11, Page 13
CHAPTER 11-06: PRELIMINARY PLAT
11-06-010. Preliminary Plat - Purpose.
11-06-020. Application and Fees.
11-06-030. Plat Preparation and Required Information.
11-06-040. Review and Approval by the Planning Commission.
11-06-050. Effective Period of Preliminary Plat Approval.
11-06-060. Zoning Regulations.
11-06-070. Phasing.
11-06-080. Procedures for Minor Subdivisions.
11-06-010. Preliminary Plat - Purpose.
The purpose of the preliminary plat is to require formal preliminary approval of a subdivision as
provided herein in order to minimize changes and revisions which might otherwise be necessary on the final
plat. The preliminary plat and all information and procedures relating thereto, shall in all respects, be in
compliance with the provisions of this Title and any other applicable City Ordinances.
11-06-020. Application and Fees.
The developer of a subdivision, after fulfilling the sketch plat requirements in Chapter 3 of this
Title, shall file an application for preliminary plat approval with the City Community Development
Department on a form prescribed by the City;, together with one (1) copy of the preliminary plat 24” x 36”
in size, two(2) copies 11” x 17” in size, and a copy in an electronic format approved by the City. At the
same time, the developer shall pay an application fee as provided in the Fee Schedule.
11-06-030. Plat Preparation and Required Information.
Each sheet of the preliminary plat shall be drawn to scale not smaller than one hundred (100) feet
to the inch, and shall contain the name of the subdivision, sheet number, and north arrow. The preliminary
plat shall include the following:
(a) The location of the subdivision in relationship to an adjoining larger tract of property of
which it is a part. The submittal shall include a sketch of the prospective future street system of the
unplatted portion of the property, and the street system of the part submitted shall be considered in light of
adjustments and connections with the future street system of the surrounding area and in accordance with
the City's General Plan.
(b) A vicinity map of the proposed subdivision, drawn at a scale of five hundred (500) feet to
the inch, showing all lots and streets in the project, and all abutting streets, with names of the streets.
(c) The names and addresses of the developer, the engineer or surveyor of the subdivision,
and the owners of the land immediately adjoining the land to be subdivided.
(d) A contour map at intervals of at least two (2) feet, showing all unusual topographic
features with verification by a qualified engineer or land surveyor. All elevations shall be based on NAVD
88 datum.
(e) Certification of the accuracy of the preliminary plat of the subdivision and any traverse to
permanent survey monuments by a land surveyor, registered to practice in the State of Utah.
(f) The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, with all dimensions shown.
Woods Cross Municipal Code February 5, 2019
Title 11, Page 14
(g) Existing sanitary sewers, storm drains, subdrains, culinary and secondary water-supply
mains and culverts and other utilities within the tract or within one hundred (100) feet thereof.
(h) The location, widths, and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements,
parks, and other open spaces and lots with the size of each lot in square footage and proper labeling of
spaces to be dedicated to the public.
(i) The location, principal dimension, and names of all existing or recorded streets, alleys,
and easements, both within the proposed subdivision and within one hundred (100) feet of the boundary
thereof, showing whether recorded or claimed by usage; the location and dimensions to the nearest
existing bench mark or monument, and section line; the location and principal dimensions of all water
courses, public utilities, and other important features and existing structures within the land adjacent to the
tract to be subdivided, including railroads, power lines, and exceptional topography.
(j) The location of existing bridges, culverts, surface or subsurface drainage ways, utilities,
buildings or other structures, pumping stations, or appurtenances, within the subdivision or within two
hundred (200) feet thereof, and all known wells or springs (consult Utah State Engineer's Office), and
location of the one hundred (100) year flood plain as determined by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).
(k) Proposed off-site and on-site culinary and secondary water facilities, sanitary sewers,
storm drainage facilities, and fire hydrants.
(l) Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of unsubdivided land within one hundred (100) feet of
the tract proposed for subdivision, showing ownership and property monuments.
(m) Location of proposed street lighting in the subdivision.
(n) Location of landscaping and/or park strip tree planting.
(o) The developer shall provide the following documents with the application:
(1) Copies of any agreements with adjacent property owners relevant to the
proposed subdivision.
(2) A comprehensive geo-technical and soils report prepared by a qualified
geotechnical engineer. At a minimum the report shall include the following:
(i) Boring Plan.
(ii) Computer generated soil boring logs with soil classification in accordance
with the Unified Soil Classification System (USCS).
(iii) Exploration procedures.
(iv) Results of laboratory testing.
(v) Subsurface conditions encountered.
(vi) Depth to stabilized groundwater.
(vii) Regional and site geology.
(viii) Applicable geologic hazards including liquefaction an laterial spread
potential.
(ix) Mitigation of problematic soil conditions encountered.
(x) Seismic site classification and ground motions in accordance with the
current IBC.
(xi) Foundation type and depth.
(xii) Allowable bearing capacity and settlement of foundations.
(xiii) Fill placement and compaction.
Woods Cross Municipal Code February 5, 2019
Title 11, Page 15
(xiv) Earthwork and sub-grade preparation.
(3) A copy of a preliminary title report evidencing satisfactory proof of ownership.
(4) A statement that all utilities & services will be available for the subdivision.
(5) A traffic report prepared by a qualified traffic engineer for all subdivisions with
access to a collector or arterial street.
(6) A written narrative outlining how the developer proposes to accommodate
drainage for a 10 year, 1 hour storm event and overflow for a 100 year storm event.
(7) A written statement that the developer shall comply with all city ordinances and
regulations and other applicable federaland state laws and regulations and shall provide evidence
of such compliance if requested by the City.
11-06-040. Review and Approval by the Planning Commission.
(a) The Planning Commission shall review the submitted preliminary plat and determine
compliance with the standards and criteria set forth in this Ordinance and all other ordinances of Woods
Cross City, including but not limited to the Zoning Ordinance, General Plan, Development Standards ?,
and applicable building codes. The Planning Commission may approve, approve subject to modification
and/or conditions , or disapprove the submitted preliminary plat, and shall make findings specifying any
inadequacy in the application, noncompliance with City regulations, questionable or undesirable design
and/or engineering, and the need for any additional information which may assist the Planning
Commission to evaluate the preliminary plat. The Planning Commission may review all relevant
information pertaining to the proposed development including but not limited to the following: fire
protection; sufficient supply of culinary and secondary water to the proposed subdivision; sewer service;
traffic considerations; potential for flooding; burden on the school district; etc. The developer shall be
notified in writing, of the action taken by, and the findings of, the Planning Commission regarding the
submitted preliminary plat.
(b) If the Planning Commission denies preliminary plat approval, no further review of the
proposed subdivision shall be made by the Planning Commission, and a new preliminary plat shall be
required to re-initiate the subdivision process.
(c) Granting of a preliminary plat approval by the Planning Commission shall not constitute a
final acceptance of the subdivision by the Planning Commission. Nor shall approval of the preliminary
plat relieve the developer of the responsibility to comply with all required conditions and ordinances, and
to provide the improvements and easements necessary to meet all City standards
and requirements.
11-06-050. Effective Period of Preliminary Approval.
The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of six (6) months at the end of
which time final approval of the subdivision must have been obtained from the City Council, although the
plat need not yet be signed and filed with the Davis County Recorder. This time period may be extended
an additional six (6) months for good cause shown if the developer petitions the Planning Commission for
an extension prior to the expiration date. However, only one extension may be granted. Any plat not
receiving final approval within the period of time set forth herein shall be null and void, and the developer
shall be required to resubmit a new plat for preliminary approval subject to all then existing zoning and
subdivision regulations. Preliminary approval of any undeveloped phases of a phased subdivision shall
become null and void should more than two (2) years elapse between the date of conditional acceptance
by the City of the off-site improvements of the last completed phase by the City and the application for
final approval of a subsequent phase.
Woods Cross Municipal Code February 5, 2019
Title 11, Page 16
11-06-060. Zoning Regulations.
Every plat shall conform to existing zoning regulations and subdivision regulations applicable at
the time of preliminary plat approval.
11-06-070. Phasing.
Subdivisions containing more than thirty (30) lots shall be done in phases. Each phase shall
consist of that number of lots that can be completely developed with both off-site and on-site
improvements within the two (2) year period provided for improvements under Section 11-09-110 of this
Title. Off-site improvements are construed to be those improvements required by the Woods Cross City
Development Standards. On-site improvements shall be construed to mean the construction of the
dwelling and its appurtenant improvements on each lot. The development of the subdivision shall be in
an orderly manner and in such a way that the phases will be contiguous, the required improvements will
be continuous and all of the said off-site improvements will be made available for the full, effective, and
practical use and enjoyment thereof by leasee or grantees of any of the lands subdivided within the time
hereinafter specified. Phases shall be designed to minimize the dead-ending of streets and waterlines.
Phasing shall be done in such a manner as to provide sufficient traffic circulation in each of the phases.
The City Council shall not approve a final plat of a phase in a phased subdivision where one of two
previously approved phases has not been conditionally accepted by the City Council.
11-06-080. Procedures for Minor Subdivisions.
(a) Minor subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements listed in this Chapter, with
the exception that the effective period of preliminary approval mentioned in paragraph 11-06-050 is
lengthened to two (2) years and is measured up to the time of the issuing of a building permit for any of
the lots in the subdivision.
(b) A preliminary plat shall be required for all subdivisions, but under conditions listed below,
approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission and by the City Council shall be authorization
for the developer to sell lots within the subdivision covered by the preliminary plat by metes and bounds,
and the requirements of a final plat shall be waived. When final plats are not required, the developer or
landowner shall provide all the subdivision improvements required for standard subdivisions. All such
improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the Woods Cross City
Development Standards.
(c) Minor subdivision preliminary plats shall be first presented to the Planning Commission
for approval. In the case of a preliminary plat for a minor subdivision, review by the City Council will follow
the same procedure as outlined in Section 11-09-080 for final plats.
(d) All minor subdivisions are to provide a guarantee of improvements as required by Section
11-09-110 of this Title which amount is to be set according to the City Engineer’s estimate of probable
costs and approved by the City Council, as with all other subdivisions.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 17
CHAPTER 11-09: FINAL PLAT
11-09-010. Final Plat - Purpose.
11-09-020. Filing Deadline, Application and Fees.
11-09-030. Final Plat - Preparation and Required Information.
11-09-040. Construction Plans - Preparation and Required Information.
11-09-050. Review by the City Engineer.
11-09-060. Planning Commission Action.
11-09-070. Review by the City Attorney.
11-09-080. Review by the City Council.
11-09-090. Signing and Recording of Final Subdivision Plat.
11-09-100. Expiration of Final Approval.
11-09-110. Security for Public Improvements.
11-09-120. Acceptance of Off-Site Improvements.
11-09-130. Special Exception for Sidewalk.
11-09-140. Issuance of Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy.
11-09-010. Final Plat - Purpose.
The purpose of the final plat is to provide formal review and approval of the proposed subdivision
by the Planning Commission and City Council before a subdivision plat is recorded in the office of the
Davis County Recorder. The final plat and all information and procedures relating thereto shall in all
respects be in compliance with the provisions of this Title. The final plat and construction plans submitted
shall conform in all respects to those
regulations and requirements specified during the preliminary plat procedure.
11-09-020. Filing Deadline, Application and Fees.
Application for final plat approval shall be made within six (6) months after approval or conditional
approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission. This time period may be extended an
additional six (6) months for good cause shown if the developer petitions the Planning Commission for an
extension prior to the expiration date, however only one extension may be granted. The developer shall
file an application for final plat approval with the City Community Development Department on a form
prescribed by the City, together with six (6) copies of the proposed final plat; five(5) copies 24” x 36” in
size, one(1) 11"x 17" in size; and an electronic copy in a format approved by the City. In addition five (5)
copies of the construction drawings shall be submitted 24” x 36” in size. At the same time, the developer
shall pay to the City the application fee for the subdivision as set forth in the Consolidated Fee Schedule.
11-09-030. Final Plat - Preparation and Required Information.
(a) The final plat shall consist of a sheet of approved tracing linen with the outside or trim line
dimensions of 19 inches by 30 inches and the border line of the plat shall be drawn in heavy lines leaving
a space of at least one and one-half inches on the left side and at least one-half inch margin on the other
sides. The plat shall be so drawn in a manner following standard drafting protocol. All lines, dimensions,
and markings shall be made on the tracing linen, mylar, or comparable material, with approved waterproof
black ink. The plat shall be made to a scale large enough to clearly show all details, and in any case not
smaller than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, and workmanship on the finished drawing shall be neat,
clean cut and readable. The final plat shall include the following:
(1) The subdivision name and the general location of the subdivision in bold
letters at the top of the sheet, a north arrow, scale of the drawing, and date.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 18
(2) Signatures by all required and authorized parties with appropriate notary
acknowledgments.
(3) An accurate and complete survey. A traverse of the exterior boundaries
of the tract, and of each block, when computed from field measurements on the ground shall
close within a tolerance of one (1) foot in twenty thousand (20,000) feet.
(4) Accurately drawn boundaries, showing the proper bearings and
dimensions of all boundary lines of the subdivision, properly tied to public survey monuments.
These lines should be slightly heavier than street and lot lines.
(5) All survey, mathematical information and data necessary to locate all
monuments and to locate and retrace all interior and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon,
including bearing and distance of straight lines, and central angle, radius and arc length of curves,
and such information as may be necessary to determine the location of beginning and ending
points of curves. All property corners and monuments within the subdivision shall show the
calculated Davis County coordinates. Lot and boundary closure shall be calculated to the nearest
100th of a foot.
(6) Delineation of lots, blocks, and parcels offered for dedication for any
purpose with dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. The
square footage of each lot shall be shown. Parcels offered for dedication other than for streets or
easements shall be clearly designated on the plat. Sufficient linear, angular and curved data shall
be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of the boundary lines of every block, lot and
parcel which is a part thereof. No ditto marks shall be used for lot dimensions.
(7) Right-of-way lines of each street, and the width of any portion being
dedicated and widths of any existing dedications. The widths and locations of adjacent streets
and other public properties within fifty (50) feet of the subdivision shall be shown with dotted lines.
If any street in the subdivision is a continuation or an approximate continuation of an existing
street, the conformity or the amount of non-conformity of such existing streets shall be accurately
shown.
(8) Consecutively numbered lots and/or blocks under a definite system
approved by the Planning Commission. Numbering shall continue consecutively throughout the
subdivision with no omissions or duplications.
(9) Streets numbered in accordance with and in conformity with the adopted
street numbering system adopted by the City. Each lot shall show the street addresses assigned
thereto, and shall be according to the standard addressing methods approved by the City. In the
case of corner lots, an address will be assigned for each part of the lot having street frontage.
(10) Clearly labeled and identified easements. The side lines of all easements
shall be shown by fine dashed lines. The width of all easements and sufficient ties thereto to
definitely locate the same with respect to the subdivision shall be shown.
(11) All stakes, monuments and other evidence indicating the boundaries of
the subdivision as found on the site. Any monument or bench mark that is disturbed or destroyed
before acceptance of all improvements, shall be replaced by the developer under the direction of
the City Engineer. The following required monuments shall be shown on the final plat:
(i) The location of all monuments placed in making the survey,
including a statement as to what, if any, points were re-set by ties;
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 19
(ii) All right-of-way monuments at angle points and intersections as
approved by the City Engineer.
(12) The name of the surveyor, together with the date of the survey, the scale of
the map and number of sheets. The following certificates, acknowledgments, notes and
descriptions shall appear on the title sheet of the final plat, and such certificates may be combined
where appropriate:
(i) Registered land surveyor's "Certificate of Survey";
(ii) Owners dedication certificate;
(iii) Notary public's acknowledgment for each signature on the plat;
(iv) A correct metes and bounds description of all property included
within the subdivision;
(v) Blocks formatted with appropriate language for signature of the
Planning Commission, City Engineer, City Attorney, Mayor and an attestation by the City
Recorder) and a block for the Davis County Recorder shall be provided in the lower right
corner;
(vi) Blocks formatted with appropriate language for utility companies
if required.
(vii) A note stating “Many areas in Woods Cross have ground water
problems due to a seasonally high (fluctuating) water table. Approval of this plat does not
constitute representation by the City that building at any specified elevation will solve
ground water problems. Solution of these problems is the sole responsibility of the permit
applicant and property owner.”
(viii) Such other affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments,
endorsements and notary seals as are required by law, by this Title, or by the City
Attorney.
(b) The following documents shall be submitted with the final plat:
(1) A current title report to be reviewed by the City Attorney. A "current title report" is
considered to be one which correctly discloses all recorded matters of title regarding the property
and which is prepared and dated not more than thirty (30) days before the proposed recordation
of the final plat.
(2) When a subdivision contains lands which are reserved in private ownership for
community use, including common areas, the developer shall submit, with the final plat, the
name, proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws of the owner, or organization empowered to
own, maintain and pay taxes on such lands and common areas.
11-09-040. Construction Plans - Preparation and Required Information.
The developer shall prepare and submit construction plans in accordance with the requirements
and standards set forth in Chapter 8 of this Title.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 20
11-09-050. Review by the Development Review Committee.
The Development Review Committee shall review the final plat and construction plans and
determine compliance with all standards and criteria set forth in this Ordinance and all other applicable
ordinances of the City and the State of Utah. The City Engineer shall sign the final plat if the Design
Review Committee finds that the subdivision and the construction plans fully complies with this Ordinance
and the Development Standards, that the survey description is correct, and that all easements are
correctly described and located. The Design Review Committee shall complete review of the plat within
thirty(30) days after it is submitted for review. If the final plat complies, the City Engineer shall sign the
plat in the appropriate signature block and forward the plat to the Planning Commission. If the final plat or
the construction plans do not comply it shall be returned to the developer with comment.
11-09-060. Planning Commission Action.
Upon receipt of the final plat signed by the City Engineer, the Planning Commission shall review the
plat to determine whether the plat conforms with the preliminary plat, with all changes requested, and with
all requirements imposed as conditions of acceptance. If the submitted final plat is not acceptable, the
Planning Commission shall notify the developer and specify the respects in which it is deficient. If the
Planning Commission determines that the final plat is in conformity with all requirements and the ordinances of
the City it shall recommend approval of the final plat and the Chairman of the Planning Commission shall sign
the plat in the appropriate block and forward the plat to the City Attorney.
11-09-070. Review by the City Attorney.
The City Attorney shall review the final plat, the signed subdivision improvements agreement, the
current title report and the security for insuring completion of the improvements to verify compliance with
the City's dedication and bonding requirements. The City Attorney may also review public easements,
protective covenants and other documents where applicable. Upon approval of the items specified in this
Section, the City Attorney shall sign the plat in the appropriate signature block and forward the plat to the
City Administrator for presentation to the City Council.
11-09-080. Review by the City Council.
Within a reasonable time following the signing of the final plat by the Planning Commission and
the City staff, the final plat shall be submitted to the City Council for its review and consideration. The City
Council shall not be bound by the recommendations of the City staff, or the Planning Commission and
may set its own conditions and requirements consistent with this Title. If the City Council determines that
the final plat is in conformity with the requirements of this Title, other applicable ordinances, and any
reasonable conditions as recommended by the City's staff and Planning Commission or on the City
Council's own initiative, that all fees have been paid as required, and that the City Council is satisfied with
the final plat of the subdivision, it may approve the final plat. If the City Council determines that the final
plat is not in conformity with this Title or other applicable ordinances, or any reasonable conditions
imposed, it may disapprove the final plat specifying the reasons for such disapproval. Within one (1) year
after the City Council has disapproved any plat, the developer may file with the City's Community
Development Department a plat altered to meet the requirements of the City Council. No final plat shall
have any force or effect unless the same has been approved by the City Council and signed by the Mayor
and City Recorder.
11-09-090. Signing and Recording of Final Subdivision Plat.
(a) Signing of Plat. The Mayor shall endorse approval on the plat after the Bond Agreement
outlined in Section 11-09-110 has been approved by the City Council, and all the conditions of the
resolution pertaining to the plat have been satisfied.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 21
(b) Recording of Plat:
(1) The following fees in the amount established by the City Council by resolution as
shown in the Consolidated Fee Schedule shall be paid to the City prior to recording the plat.
(i) A fee for street identification signs and for each traffic control device.
(ii) A fee for recording the final plat.
(iii) Any other fees or bonds required by the City.
(2) The City shall record the final plat in the office of the Davis County Recorder
after the fees required in Subsection (1) above are received by the City and after the developer
has complied with all other City requirements for recording.
(3) Three (3) copies of the final plat and one (1) copy of all other legal documents
required to be recorded shall be submitted to the Community Development Director with all
recording data contained therein prior to the issuance of any building permits for lots in the
subdivision.
11-09-100. Expiration of Final Approval.
If the final plat is not recorded within six (6) months from the date of City Council approval, such
approval shall be null and void. This time period may be extended by the City Council for up to an
additional six (6) month period for good cause shown. The developer must petition in writing for an
extension prior to the expiration of the original six (6) months. No extension will be granted if it is
determined that it will be detrimental to the City. If any of the fees charged as a condition of subdivision
approval have increased, the City may require that the bond estimate be recalculated and that the
developer pay any applicable fee increases as a condition of granting an extension.
11-09-110. Security for Public Improvements.
(a) Prior to approval by the City Council and recordation of a final plat, the developer shall
enter into a Bond Agreement, acceptable to the City as security, to insure completion of all improvements
required to be installed in the subdivision. The Bond Agreement shall be in a form approved by the City
Council and may contain specific provisions approved by the City Attorney. The Agreement shall include,
but not be limited to:
(1) Developer's agreement to complete all improvements within a period of time, not
to exceed two (2) years from the date the Agreement is executed.
(2) The improvements shall be completed to the satisfaction of the City and in
accordance with the Woods Cross City Development Standards.
(3) The Bond shall be equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the City Engineer's
estimated cost of the improvements to be installed, plus an additional twenty percent (20%) of the
Engineer's estimated amount, which will be referred to herein as the "Warranty Amount." The
City Engineer will review the developer's estimated costs to determine if such estimates are
acceptable to the City.
(4) The City shall have immediate access to the Bond proceeds.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 22
(5) The Bond proceeds may be reduced at intervals determined by the City upon the
request of the developer as improvements are installed. The amount of reduction shall be
determined by the City. Such requests may be made only once every thirty (30) days and no
reduction shall be authorized until such time as the City Engineer or his designee has inspected
the improvements and found them to be in compliance with the City's standards and
specifications. All reductions shall be by written authorization of the City Engineer. Upon
authorization of the City Engineer, the City may release up to one hundred percent (100%) of the
City Engineer's estimated cost of the improvements. Upon conditional acceptance of the
subdivision by the City Council, the City may release up to fifty percent (50%) of the warranty
amount. The balance of the warranty amount shall not be released until after the one (1) year
warranty period and the subdivision is granted final acceptance by the City Council.
(6) If the Bond proceeds are inadequate to pay the cost of the completion of the
improvements according to the City’s standards of specifications for whatever reason, including
previous reductions, the developer shall be responsible for the deficiency and no further building
permits shall be issued in the subdivision until the improvements are completed or, with City
Council approval, a new satisfactory Bond has been executed and delivered to the City or other
satisfactory arrangements have been made to insure completion of the remaining improvements.
(7) The City's costs of administration, cost of obtaining the Bond proceeds, including
attorney's fees and court costs shall be deducted from any Bond proceeds.
(8) Upon receipts of the Bond proceeds, after expiration of the time period for
completion of the improvements, the cost of completion shall include reimbursement to the City
for the costs of administration to complete the improvements.
(9) The developer shall agree to hold the City harmless from any and all liability
which may arise as a result of the improvements which are installed until such time as the City
certifies the improvements are complete and accepts the improvements at the end of the
warranty period.
(b) The Bond Agreement shall be one of the following types as prescribed by the City.
(1) A cash bond agreement accompanied by a cashier’s check payable only to the
City.
(2) An escrow agreement and account with a federally insured bank.
(3) A letter of credit agreement and irrevocable stand-by letter of credit with a
federally insured bank.
11-09-120. Acceptance of Off-Site Improvements.
(a) Conditional Acceptance. After the completion of all off-site improvements, and upon
receiving a written statement from the City Engineer that all required improvements have been
satisfactorily completed and inspected by the City Engineer, the City Council shall conditionally accept the
improvements for a one (1) year guarantee period. Such approval shall not be given until the applicant's
engineer has certified to the City Engineer, through submission of detailed record drawings of the
subdivision, indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the City
Engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with the City
Development Standards and the construction plans filed with the final plat. Said records drawings shall be
submitted in ink on reproducible mylar, and shall also be submitted to the City in an electronic format
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 23
approved by the City. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the escrow funds, or
performance bond will be held during this one (1) year period.
(b) Guarantee Period. The developer shall warrant and guarantee that the improvements
provided for hereunder, and every part thereof, will remain in good condition for a period of one (1) year
after the date of conditional acceptance by the City Council, and agrees to make all repairs to and
maintain the improvements and every part thereof in good condition during that one (1) year period at no
cost to the City.
(c) Final Acceptance. Final inspection by the City Engineer shall be made after the city
receives a written request from the developer after the expiration of the one (1) year guarantee period..
All defects as noted in the final inspection report of the City Engineer shall be corrected to the satisfaction
of the City Engineer. Final acceptance shall be in writing by the City Council after written approval is
received from the City Engineer. After final acceptance by the City Council, the remaining balance in the
escrow fund or performance bond shall be released.
11-09-130. Special Exception for Sidewalk.
(a) Conditional Acceptance. The City Council, in its discretion, may allow the developer an
additional one (1) year from the date of conditional acceptance of the off-site improvements to install the
sidewalk in the subdivision provided that:
(1) The lots for which the extension is requested do not front on an arterial or
collector street, where installation of the sidewalks is necessary for the safety of the general
citizenry.
(2) All lots built on in the subdivision have sidewalk installed on the lot where shown
on the construction plans. Sidewalk must be installed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy for any dwelling in the subdivision.
(3) No more than seventy five percent (75%) of the lots are built on in the
subdivision. When the percentage of lots built on exceeds seventy five percent (75%), the
remaining sidewalk must be installed before any additional building permits are issued.
(4) The City shall not conditionally accept any of the sidewalk prior to the installation
of all the sidewalk required in the subdivision.
(5) The City retains the escrow funds or cash bond for the sidewalk until it receives
final acceptance by the City Council. The procedures of conditional acceptance of the sidewalk
shall be the same as outlined in Section 11-09-120(a) of this Title.
(b) Guarantee Period. The developer shall warrant and guarantee that the sidewalk will
remain in good condition for a period of one (1) year after the date of conditional acceptance by the City
Council, and agrees to make all repairs to and maintain in good condition during the one (1) year period or
until final acceptance at no cost to the City. It is further agreed and understood that the determination for
the necessity for repairs and maintenance of the work rests with the City Engineer.
(c) Final Acceptance. Final acceptance of the sidewalk will follow the same procedure as
outlined in Section 120 of this Chapter.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 24
11-09-140. Issuance of Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy.
(a) The extent of street improvements shall be adequate for vehicular access by the
perspective builder/occupant and by emergency equipment, prior to the issuance of a building permit. For
the purposes of this section, adequate shall mean "'hard surfaced." A building permit may be granted by
the Building Inspector prior to application of hard surface under the following conditions:
(1) The street improvements are being constructed during the months when cold
weather prohibits the laying of a hard surface on the street.
(2) The City receives a signed statement from the developer that the developer will
take the responsibility to insure that the road is accessible for emergency vehicles and the
dwelling owner.
(3) All streets shall be completed with all utilities, rough grading, road base and curb
and gutter.
(4) The developer enters into an agreement that the developer will hard surface the
road as soon as weather permits and if developer fails to do so, the City can declare the
developer in default of the bond agreement.
(b) No Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted by the building inspector until all street
improvements are hard surfaced.
(c) No building permits shall be issued for the final ten percent (10%) of lots in a subdivision,
or if ten percent (10%) is less than two (2), for the final two (2) lots of a subdivision, until all public
improvements required by the City Council for the plat have been fully completed and conditionally
accepted by the City Council.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 25
CHAPTER 11-12: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL SUBDIVISIONS
11-12-010. Subdivision Layout.
11-12-020. Lots.
11-12-030. Streets and Related Improvements.
11-12-040. Drainage.
11-12-050. Utilities.
11-12-060. Landscaping.
11-12-070. Orderly Development Required.
11-12-080. Irrigation Ditches.
11-12-090. Residential Subdivision Access.
11-12-100. Reimbursement or Payback Agreements.
11-12-010. Subdivision Layout.
(a) The subdivision layout shall conform to the City's General Plan.
(b) Where trees, groves, waterways, scenic points, historic spots or other City assets and
landmarks, as determined by the Planning Commission, are located within a proposed subdivision,
reasonable steps should be taken to preserve these features.
(c) Where a railroad right-of-way abuts a subdivision, the plat shall make provisions for
future grade separations whenever the City shall find such a requirement to be necessary.
(d) The width of each block shall be sufficient for an ultimate layout of two (2) tiers of lots
therein of a size required by the provisions of this Title, unless the general layout of the vicinity, line of
ownership, topographical conditions or locations of arterial streets or freeways justify or make necessary a
variation from this requirement. The minimum width of a block shall not be less than two hundred fifty
(250) feet measured from center line of street to center line of street.
(e) The maximum length of blocks shall be twelve hundred (1200) feet.
11-12-020. Lots.
(a) All subdivisions should result in the creation of lots which are developable and capable of
being built upon. A subdivision should not create lots which would make improvement impractical due to
size, shape, steepness of terrain, location of watercourses, problems of sewerage, driveway grades, or
other physical conditions.
(b) All lots or parcels created by the subdivision shall have frontage on a dedicated street,
improved to standards hereinafter required equal to at least fifty percent (50%) of its minimum required
width except for a flag lot which shall have a minimum frontage as specified in the Zoning Ordinance.
Land designated as public right-of-way shall be separate and distinct from lots adjoining such right-of-way
and not be included in the area of such lots.
(c) The minimum area and dimensions of all lots shall conform to the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is located.
(d) The side lines of all lots, so far as possible, shall be at right angles to the street which the
lot faces, or approximately radial to the center of curves, if such street is curved. Side lines of lots shall be
approximately radial to the center of a cul-de-sac on which the lots faces. The Planning Commission may
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 26
recommend to the City Council exceptions to this requirement. Upon a showing of good cause, the City
Council may allow exceptions to this requirement.
(e) Corner lots for residential use should be platted ten (10) feet wider than interior lots in
order to facilitate conformance with the required street setback requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
(f) A lot should not be divided by a City limit line. Each such boundary line should
be made a lot line.
(g) Remnants of property shall not be left in the subdivision which do not conform to lot
requirements or are not required or suitable for common open space, private utility, public purpose, or
other purpose approved by the City Council.
(h) Double frontage lots are not permitted unless approved by the City Council after receiving
a recommendation from the Planning Commission.
(1) Double frontage and reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where
necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials, collectors, or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
(2) The street frontage adjacent to the rear of approved double frontage lots shall be
improved by the developer in accordance with the standards set forth in the City's Subdivision
Standards.
(i) Debris and Waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish,
or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at
the time of final acceptance of the subdivision by the City Council, and removal of same shall be required
prior to final acceptance by the City Council.
(j) Fencing. Each developer shall be required to furnish and install fences wherever the
Planning Commission determines that a hazardous condition or incompatibilities in land use may exist.
Fences shall be constructed according to standards established by the Woods Cross City Development
Standards and shall be noted as to height and material on the final construction plans. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until said fence improvements have been duly installed.
(k) Staking of Lots. Survey stakes shall be placed at both front and back lot corners to
completely identify the lot boundaries on the ground. Back lot corners shall be marked with a metal pipe
or rod driven into the ground and shall be three (3) feet above the ground. Front lot corners shall be
identified with permanent plugs in the curb. All lot corners must be in place prior to the issuance of
building permits and after the completion of all subdivision improvements. It shall be the responsibility of
the lot owner to ensure that all lot corners are in place prior to the issuance of the building permit.
11-12-030. Streets and Related Improvements.
(a) Developers shall locate streets within the subdivision so that the streets connect with
existing streets. If the adjoining land is zoned for residential use, streets shall be located so that the
adjacent land may be most efficiently subdivided.
(b) Dedication of half streets is prohibited.
(c) Any street in the subdivision that has a width designated in the City's General Plan, shall
conform to the width designated in the General Plan. . For streets that do not have a width designated in
the General Plan, the width shall be the width recommended by the City Engineer upon review of the
submitted traffic study.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 27
(d) Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be installed on existing and proposed streets by the
developer in all subdivisions. The City Council may, for good cause, after receiving a recommendation
from the Planning Commission, modify or waive the requirement for sidewalks on streets.
(e) Local streets shall approach an arterial or collector street at an angle of at least seventy
five degrees (75°). Grades for streets shall be a minimum of one-half of one percent (0.5%) and a
maximum of ten percent (10%) for all streets except major and minor arterials which shall be eight
percent (8%) maximum.
(f) Cul-de-sacs shall serve no more than twenty (20) lots or units; shall be no longer than
four hundred (400) feet, measured from the center point of the turnaround to the center line of the
intersecting street; and must be terminated with a turnaround of not less than one hundred (100) feet in
diameter. Downhill cul-de-sacs are not permitted unless adequate drainage and one hundred (100) year
over flow is provided and in addition such cul-de-sacs are approved by the City Council after receiving a
recommendation from the Planning Commission and City Engineer.
(g) Where a street is designed to remain only temporarily as a dead-end street, a satisfactory
temporary turn around area and recordable easement shall be provided at the end thereof to remain and
be available for public use so long as the dead end exists. The City may require improvements to be
installed in temporary turn around areas.
(h) Where subdivision streets parallel contiguous property of other owners, the subdivision
may, with approval of the City Council, retain a protection strip of not less than one (1) foot in width
between said street and adjacent property, provided that an agreement approved by the City Attorney has
been made. Such agreement should be either with the owners of the property adjacent to the holding
strip, or with the City for the benefit of the owners, contracting to deed to the then owners of the adjacent
property the protection strip for consideration to be named in the agreement. Such consideration is to be
not more than the fair cost of the land held in the protection strip, the street and utility improvements
properly chargeable to the adjacent property, plus the value of one-half (2) the land in the street at the
time of agreement. One (1) copy of the agreement shall be submitted to the City Attorney and one (1) to
the Planning Commission prior to approval of the final plat. Protection strips shall not be submitted at the
end of or within the boundaries of a public street or proposed street within any area intended for future
public use.
(i) To assure conformity, the City shall furnish and install all required street signs and the
cost thereof shall be charged to and paid for by the developer prior to recording the plat. The cost to the
developer will be in accordance with the City's adopted fee schedule.
(j) Permanent monuments shall be furnished, accurately established, and set by the
developer's surveyor at such points as are necessary to definitely establish all lines of the plat except
those defining individual lots.
(k) City approved street lights shall be installed at all street intersections, school or
pedestrian crossings, or at bends or curves in the street by the developer upon recommendation of the
Development Review Committee .
(l) Railroads and Limited Access Highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access
highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows:
(1) In residential districts, a buffer strip at least twenty five (25) feet in depth in
addition to the normal setback required in the zoning district shall be provided adjacent to the
railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 28
shall be designated on the plat: “This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of dwellings
hereon is prohibited.”
(2) In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses, the nearest street
extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practicable, be at a
sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites.
(3) Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting a street which crosses the
railroad at grade shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least one hundred fifty
(150) feet from the railroad right-of-way.
(m) Intersections:
(1) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A
proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than seventy-five (75) degrees
shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and
should be approximately at right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet therefrom. Not more
than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the Planning
Commission.
(2) Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever
practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street
jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall not be permitted, except
where the intersected street has separated dual drives without median breaks at either
intersection. Where streets intersect arterials, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersection of
arterials shall be at least eight hundred (800) feet apart.
(n) Widening and Realignment of Existing Roads. Where a subdivision borders an existing
narrow road or when the General Plan, or zoning setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or
widening of a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision, the developer shall be
required to improve and dedicate at his expense such areas for widening or realignment of such roads.
Such frontage roads and streets shall be improved and dedicated by the developer at his own expense to
the full width as required by these subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any road purposes may not
be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance whether the land is to be dedicated to the City in fee simple or an easement is granted to the
City.
11-12-035. Subsurface Water.
(a) Subsurface drains shall be required where recommended in the Geotechnical Report and
where they have a positive gravity flow discharge without any mechanical means of discharging the water.
All subsurface water drains shall meet the minimum requirements for design and construction of such
drains, as specified in the Development Standards. In all subdivisions where subsurface drains are
installed, the developer shall enter into a written agreement with the City addressing the installation and
maintenance of the drains. All plans for such subsurface water drains proposed by the developer shall be
reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and City Council.
(b) Due to subsurface water concerns the lowest inhabitable elevation (finished floor
elevation) shall be six(6) inches above top back curb elevation on the lowest corner of the property unless:
(i) A subsurface drain system has been installed with adequate capacity to gravity
flow without mechanical means to a location above any historic flood elevations, or
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 29
(ii) A twelve(12) month study of subsurface water elevations along with consideration
of historic drought cycles in the area shows a lower elevation will remain above any subsurface
water seasonal fluctuations.
11-12-040. Drainage.
(a) The developer shall construct and install a storm water drainage system within the
subdivision which shall be constructed of materials and in accordance with the City subdivision
specifications and the requirements of the City's Master Storm Drainage Plan.
(b) The developer shall dedicate a right-of-way of fifteen (15) feet in width each side of facility
or greater as required by the City for storm drainage conforming substantially with the lines of any natural
watercourse or channel, stream, creek, irrigation ditch, or floodplain that enters or traverses the
subdivision as determined by Davis County Flood Control and/or the City Engineer. The developer shall
also dedicate right-of-ways for any pipe, conduit, channel, and retention or detention area as shown on the
final construction plans.
(c) The developer shall install the storm water drainage system for the subdivision and it
shall be connected to an approved off-site storm drain or facility acceptable to the City.
(d) Storm drain, cross gutters, dipstone inlets, and other appurtenant structures shall be
provided by the developer as required to adequately dispose of storm water. Adequately shall be defined
as disposing of flows calculated using the ten (10) year one(1) hour with the Farmer Fletcher Distribution
within the limits of the subdivision and the existing flows entering the proposed subdi vision from adjacent
properties. Adequately shall also be defined as providing for overflow for a 100 year storm.
(e) Detention Basins. Large multiple use detention basins serving multiple neighborhoods
will be located in Woods Cross City as designated on the Woods Cross Storm Drainage Master Plan Map.
Single lot detention basins located in individual subdivisions shall not be encouraged. Should onsite
water detention be desired or necessary for the feasibility of the subdivision, the detention basin must:
(1) Serve as a multiple use area such as an open area for park activities. Play areas
shall be located above the average storm event depth of 2 ½ feet.
(2) Be adequately landscaped with grass and shrubs. Such landscaping shall also
include a means to keep it irrigated.
(3) Be designed to hold water only during a storm and twelve (12) hours thereafter.
At all other times, it must remain dry.
Temporary detention basins may be authorized by the City Council in which the above
requirements may be relaxed. Under no circumstances shall a temporary detention basin be utilized for
more than two (2) years.
11-12-050. Utilities.
(a) All utilities, including cable TV conduits, shall be provided through underground service,
except where existing utilities are already in place. All underground utilities specified in this Section shall
be installed prior to the installation of road base, surfacing, curbs, gutters and sidewalks. Underground
utilities shall be installed only after streets have been rough graded to a line and grade approved by the
City Engineer. If underground utilities are not installed prior to street surfacing sleeves shall be required.
(b) Culinary water shall be provided to each lot in the subdivision in conformance with the
standards and rules and regulations of the City and requirements of the City Engineer. The developer
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 30
shall install water mains, valves, pressure reducing valves, and service laterals to each lot within the
subdivision.
(c) Fire hydrants shall be installed by the developer at locations determined by the City
Engineer and the Fire Department. Hydrants located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any building site
in the subdivision shall be charged with water and must be operable before a building permit may be
issued. Fire hydrant spacing shall not exceed four hundred (400) feet.
(d) The developer shall connect with a public sanitary sewer and provide sewer mains and
extend laterals from the sewer main to each lot in the subdivision. All requirements for sanitary sewer
shall meet the specifications for the sewer district.
(e) Water Supply Interconnections. There shall be no physical connection between a public
or private potable water supply system and a sewer or secondary water system which will permit the
passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply. Sewers shall be kept removed from
water supply wells or other water supply sources and structures.
(f) Secondary water for the purpose of irrigation shall be made available to each lot in all
residential subdivisions. The City Council may require non-residential subdivisions to acquire secondary
water. Construction of irrigation water facilities shall be subject to the approval of the appropriate
pressure irrigation district, as signified by its letter of approval. The lines shall meet or exceed City
culinary waterline standards and specifications. Record drawings are to be turned over to the City. Valves
shall be located sufficient for adequate control of service areas, as approved. The developer will be
required, at his own expense, to construct all required offsite facilities to connect to existing irrigation
district facilities. The size of service connections allowed will be determined by the irrigation district. Two
(2) lots may be served by a common service line, divided, where desirable. The applicable fees shall be
paid to the irrigation district prior to their approval of the final plat.
(g) Subsurface water drains shall be required where geological conditions warrant and shall be
installed upon the recommendation of a qualified soils engineer. All subsurface drains shall have a
positive gravity flow discharge without any mechanical means of discharging water, and shall meet the
minimum requirements for design and construction of such drains, as specified in the Development
Standards. In all subdivisions where subsurface drains are installed, the developer shall enter into a
written agreement with the City. All plans for such subsurface drains proposed by the developer shall be
reviewed by the Development Review Committee and approved by the Planning Commission and City
Council.
(h) Utility easements shall be provided within all subdivisions as required for public utility and
drainage purposes. All lots shall have a front yard easement of 10 feet and a rear yard easements of 5
feet. Additional easements, or increased width of easements, may be required as necessary to provide for
adequate utility service and/or drainage within a subdivision and adjoining parcels.
11-12-060 Street Trees and Landscaping.
(a) Landscaping. Whenever, in the opinion of the Planning Commission and/or the City
Council, there are areas which demand screening, buffering or of sufficient size or visibility to demand
special treatment, the developer may be required to provide a landscape plan for review and approval by
the City. The landscape plan shall indicate how maintenance of the landscaped area will be performed
and by whom. The landscape plan shall be prepared and stamped by a registered landscape architect.
(b) Street Trees. Street trees shall be provided for all residential subdivisions in order to reduce
heat, dust, glare and the need for cooling and heating; to help clean and oxygenate the air; reduce road noise;
prevent erosion and promote soil health; to mask undesirable views and enhance pleasing views; to develop
continuity between developments; and to generally enhance the appearance of the city streets and promote
a sense of civic pride and vitality.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 31
(1) Payment in lieu of Installation. At the developer’s option, a fee may be paid to the
City in lieu of the installation of street trees. Such fee shall be set by the City Council and shall be
set in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of providing trees for the subdivision.
(2) Street Tree Installation. All residential subdivisions shall have street trees installed
within the park strip between the sidewalk and curb. The Developer shall prepare a street tree plan for
each approved residential subdivision. Tree species selection shall vary by street to add variation in form,
texture, color, and general visual effect to the subdivision. In addition, by providing a diversity of species,
it will minimize the danger of losing an entire mono-specific planting to blight, insects, or some other
species-specific condition.
(3) The following requirements shall be met:
(i) All trees shall be a minimum size of 22-inch caliper and not less than 8 feet in height.
(ii) Trees shall be planted along each lot just prior to the time the new home-owner
installs the irrigation system.
(iii) Tree spacing shall be generally 2 per interior lots and 4 per corner lots dependent
upon the constraints listed below.
(iv) All trees shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from street corner intersections and 6
feet from driveways.
(v) Trees shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from streetlights.
(vi) Trees shall be located a minimum of 6 feet from appurtenant water structures
such as fire hydrants, water meters and secondary water connections.
(vii) Trees shall have a permanent root barrier provided to a depth of 6 inches below
the sidewalk running 6 feet parallel to the tree on both sides from the center of the tree.
(viii) Trees shall be installed as shown in the Development Standard drawings.
(ix) Trees planted in the park strip shall be selected from the following list. Any variation
from this list shall be approved by the Community Development Director and Public Works Director.
COMMON NAME BOTANICAL NAME
Hackberry Celtis occidentalis
Honeylocust, Shademaster Gleditsia triacanthos inermis
‘Shademaster’
Honeylocust, Skyline Gleditsia triacanthos inermis
‘Skyline’
Linden, Littleleaf Tilia cordata
Linden, Greenspire Tilia cordata 'Greenspire'
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 32
Linden, Redmond Tilia cordata 'Redmond'
Maple, Norway Acer platanoides
Maple, Norway, Columnar Acer platanoides ‘Columnars’
Zelkova Zelkova serrata
11-12-070. Orderly Development Required.
Whenever the developer shall develop a subdivision, such development shall be in an orderly
manner and in such a way that the required improvements will be continuous and available as necessary
during construction activities within the subdivision and that all of the improvements will be made available
for the full, effective, and practical use and enjoyment thereof by the purchaser, grantee, assignee,
transferee, or lessee of any of the lands subdivided within the time herein provided or in phases specified.
11-12-080. Irrigation Ditches.
No irrigation ditches shall be permitted within the boundary of a subdivision or minor subdivision.
All necessary irrigation ditches, whether used for the purpose of transporting irrigation or waste flow water,
must be replaced with a pipe culvert. This pipe culvert shall be at least fifteen (15) inch diameter concrete
pipe and shall meet the written standards of the ditch owner. The developer of a subdivision or minor
subdivision must provide for the rights of all irrigation users, both upstream and downstream of the
proposed development.
11-12-090. Residential Subdivision Access.
(a) Single Access. The number of lots for single access should be limited to not more than
twenty (20).
(b) Two Accesses to the Same Collector or Arterial Streets. In order for two streets from the
same development to be considered as separate accesses, their center lines must be a minimum of three
hundred (300) feet apart. Streets with intersections closer than three hundred (300) feet from center line
to center line will be considered as one access. The number of lots for two accesses to the same street
should be limited to not more than eighty (80).
(c) Two Separate Accesses to Two Collector or Arterial Streets. The number of lots
accessed by two separate collector or arterial streets may be limited by factors other than access alone.
A determination of the number of lots may be based on other limiting factors such as traffic flow, street
layout or public safety. Additional access to collector and arterial streets may be required in this instance
by the Planning Commission upon a recommendation by the City Engineer.
11-12-100. Reimbursement Agreements.
A Reimbursement Agreement between a developer and the City may be authorized where a
developer installs public improvements or facilities for water, sewer, storm drainage, roads, or parks and
such public improvements or facilities are intended to expand, extend or improve the City's public
improvements or facilities beyond the improvements required to service or benefit the subdivision or
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 33
development proposed by the developer. The Reimbursement Agreement is not mandatory, but may be
used upon recommendation of the City Engineer and Community Development Director, and upon
obtaining approval of the City Council. The reimbursement amount shall be determined by the City
Engineer after considering the improvements required or benefitting developer's development, and those
improvements that are specifically oversized or extended to provide for future development. A
Reimbursement Agreement may only be approved by the City Council upon a finding that:
(a) The amount to be paid to the developer as reimbursement for over-sizing shall be
determined by calculating the difference between the cost of the improvement required to service the
Developer’s project as required in the Development Standards and the cost of the improvement identified
in the capital facility plan for that improvement. The amount to be paid to the developer for the extension
of an improvement will be the cost of the improvement identified in the capital facility plan for that
improvement.
(b) Under the terms of the Reimbursement Agreement, the City's obligation to attempt to
collect any amounts from benefitted property owners or to reimburse the developer shall expire five (5)
years from the date of execution of said Agreement;
(c) Under the terms of the Reimbursement Agreement, the City is immune and not liable for
any payments to the developer if said Agreement is determined to be unenforceable, the Agreement does
not confer a benefit on any third party, the Agreement is in a form approved by the City Attorney's Office,
and the Agreement specifically limits the City's liability to the developer to amounts actually received from
neighboring, benefitted property owners;
(d) The developer has not received and is not entitled to a reduction in impact fees pursuant
to Section 11-21-020 or 11-21-030 of this Title for the improvement which is the subject of the
Reimbursement Agreement, or if the developer has received or is entitled to receive a reduction in any
applicable impact fees, that such reduction will not result in reimbursement to the developer which is
disproportionate to the benefits relating to the improvements.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 34
CHAPTER 11-15: REQUIREMENTS FOR PUD AND NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
11-15-010. Planned Unit Developments.
11-15-020. Non-Residential Subdivision Requirements.
11-15-010. Planned Unit Developments.
(a) Design Standards. The design of the preliminary and final plats of the project in relation
to streets, blocks, lots, common open spaces, and other design factors shall be in harmony with the intent
of the Woods Cross General Plan that has been adopted by the City Council, and design standards
recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council. Streets shall be so
designed as to take advantage of open space vistas and create drives with a rural or open space
character.
(b) Provisions for Common Open Space. The developer of a cluster subdivision or PUD
shall submit plans of landscaping and improvements for the common open space. The developer shall
also explain the intended use of the open space and provide detailed provisions of how the improvements
thereon are to be financed and the area maintained. A project must meet the requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance, must assure proper use, construction, and maintenance of open space facilities, and must
result in a development superior to conventional development in terms of its benefits to future residents of
the project, surrounding residents, and the general public.
The Planning Commission may place whatever additional conditions or restrictions it may deem
necessary to ensure development and maintenance of the desired residential character, including plans
for disposition or reuse of property if the open space used is not maintained in the manner agreed upon or
is abandoned by the owners.
(c) Guarantee of Common Open Space Improvements. As assurance of completion of
common open space improvements, the developer at the request of the City Council, shall be required to
file with the City Council an acceptable bond, or other agreement, in a form satisfactory to the City
Attorney guaranteeing such completion within two (2) years after such filing. Upon completion of the
improvements for which a bond or other agreement has been filed, the developer shall call for inspection
by the City Engineer, such inspection to be made within fourteen (14) days from the date of request. If
inspection shows that landscaping and construction have been completed in compliance with the
approved plan, the bonds or security therefor shall be released. If the bonds or security are not released,
refusal to release and reasons therefor shall be given the developer in writing.
(d) Continuation of Common Open Space. As assurance of continuation of common open
space use in accordance with the plans approved by the Planning Commission, the developer shall grant
to the City an "Open Space Easement" on and over the common open space prior to the recording to the
final plat, which easement will not give the general public the right of access, but will provide that the
common open space remains open.
(e) Maintenance of the Common Open Space. In order to ensure maintenance of the
common open space and other improvements where so required, the developer, prior to the recording of
the final plat, shall cause to be incorporated under the laws of the State of Utah, a home or property
owners' association. By proper covenants running with the land and through the articles of incorporation
and by-laws of the association it shall among other things, be provided:
(1) That the membership in the association shall be mandatory for each lot or
dwelling unit purchaser, their guarantees, successors, and assigns.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 35
(2) That the common open space restrictions shall be permanent and not just for a
period of years.
(3) That the association be responsible for maintaining liability insurance, paying
general property taxes, and maintaining recreational and other facilities.
(4) That all lot, unit, or home owners shall pay their pro rata share of the cost of
upkeep, maintenance, and operation.
(5) That any assessment levied by the association may become a lien on the real
property of any lot, unit, or homeowner which may be foreclosed and the property sold.
11-15-020. Non-Residential Subdivision Requirements.
(a) The street and lot layout of a non-residential subdivision shall be appropriate to the land
for which the subdivision is proposed, and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards
established in the Woods Cross City General Plan and the Zoning Ordinances of the City.
(b) In addition to the principles and standards in this Ordinance which are appropriate to the
planning of all subdivisions, the developer shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission that the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses
anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall
be observed:
(1) Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the
types of industrial development anticipated, and to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Street rights-of-way and pavements shall be adequate to accommodate the type
and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereon.
(3) Additional requirements may be imposed by the City with respect to street, curb,
gutter and sidewalk design and construction.
(4) Additional requirements may be imposed by the City with respect to the
installation of public utilities, including water, sewer and storm water drainage.
(5) Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally
be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential residential areas, or connected to
streets intended for predominantly residential traffic.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 36
CHAPTER 11-18: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
11-18-010. Design Standards.
11-18-020. Construction Plans.
11-18-030. Standards for Construction Plans.
11-18-040. Contractors.
11-18-050. Preconstruction Meetings.
11-18-060. Inspection.
11-18-070. Requests for Inspection.
11-18-080. Correcting Defective Work.
11-09-120 Acceptance of Improvements
11-18-010. Design Standards.
Standards for design, construction specifications, inspection of the street improvements, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks and standards for design, construction specifications and inspection of water
distribution systems, sewage disposal facilities, storm drainage and flood control facilities shall be
prepared by the City Engineer. Standards for all improvements shall meet the requirements of any
federal, state and local governmental entities having jurisdiction over the same. All subdivision standards
and specifications and amendments thereto which are under the control of the City shall be approved by
the City Council before becoming effective. The City Council shall by ordinance adopt Development
Standards for the City which may be amended from time to time. All public improvements shall be
installed in accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance, Development Standards, the subdivision
improvements agreement between the developer and the City, and all other applicable City Ordinances
and regulations.
11-18-020. Construction Plans.
Complete and detailed construction plans and drawings of all improvements shall be prepared in
conformance with the Development Standards. They shall be submitted to the Community Development
Director for review with the final plat application. Final approval of the project shall not be granted until the
plans have been reviewed and recommended for approval by the Development Review Committee. No
construction shall be started until the construction plans and final plat have been approved by the City.
Street profiles included in the construction plans shall include all public infrastructure located within that
street profile.
11-18-030. Standards for Construction Plans.
(a) Standards are set for the purpose of standardizing the drawings and to obtain uniformity
in appearance, clarity, size and reproduction.
(b) Three (3) copies of construction plans shall be submitted with one (1) set to be retained
by the City Engineer, one (1) set to be furnished to the City, and one (1) set returned to the developer for
corrections and revisions. After corrections and revisions by the developer, three (3) sets shall be
submitted for final review by the City Engineer.
(c) All drawings and/or prints shall be clear and legible and conform to good engineering and
drafting practice. Size of drawings shall be 22 x 34, with ½ inch margins on the top, bottom and right, and
a 1 ½ inch margin on the left.
(d) The plans shall include the following information:
(1) North arrow (plan).
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 37
(2) Elevations referenced to U.S. G. S. NAVD 88 datum.
(3) Stationing and elevations for profiles.
(4) Title block located in lower right corner of sheet to include:
(i) Project title (subdivision, etc.);
(ii) Specific type and location of work;
(iii) Revision number, date, and brief description of revision;
(iv) Name of engineer or firm preparing drawings with license number.
(5) Utah Engineers Stamp
(6) Scale 1" = 20' or 1" = 40' horizontally; 1" = 2' or 1" = 4' vertically.
(7) Both plan view and profiles for curb and gutter plans shall be shown for each side
of the street; street centerline profile may be eliminated. Top of curb elevations with curve data must be
shown for all curb returns.
(8) Size, type and location of culinary water lateral mains, meters, valves and
hydrants.
(9) Size, type and location of irrigation lateral mains, valves, fittings, etc.
(10) Size, type, and location of sewer, storm drains and subsurface drains and their
manhole cleanouts.
(11) Location of street lights
(e) As needed, each set of plans shall be accompanied by a separate sheet of details for
structures which are to be constructed. All structures shall be designed in accordance with minimum
requirements established by the Subdivision Standards of the City.
11-18-040. Contractors.
All work on subdivision improvements shall be performed by a contractor who holds a proper valid
Utah State Contractors license.
11-18-050. Preconstruction Meetings.
Prior to excavating or starting of the work, the developer shall call the Public Works Director to
meet together for a preconstruction meeting. The developer shall bring to the meeting all contractors
responsible to build the improvements associated with the project. The purpose of this meeting shall be
to:
(a) Verify approval of the final plat and construction plans.
(b) Determine schedule of construction.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 38
(c) Determine names, addresses and phone numbers of contractors, inspectors and all
persons involved.
(d) Review plans and special conditions or requirements.
(e) Review bond reduction requests.
(f) Coordinate inspection and testing.
(g) Discuss City Standards and Specifications.
11-18-060. Inspection.
Construction work involving the installation of public improvements in subdivisions shall be subject
to inspection by the City Engineer or designee.
Daily inspection shall be required on the following types of work:
(a) Laying of street surfacing.
(b) Placing of concrete for curb and gutter, sidewalks, and other structures.
(c) Laying of sewer pipe, drainage pipe, water pipe, valves, hydrants and testing.
Periodic inspections shall be required on the following:
(1) Street grading and gravel base.
(2) Excavations for curb and gutter and sidewalks.
(3) Excavations for structures.
(4) Forms for curb, gutter and sidewalks.
(5) Trenches for laying pipe.
11-18-070. Requests for Inspection.
Requests for inspections shall be made to the City by the developer. Requests for inspection on work
requiring continuous inspection shall be made two (2) working days prior to the commencing of the work.
Notice shall also be given one (1) day in advance of the starting of work requiring periodic inspection, unless
specific written approval is given otherwise.
11-18-080. Correcting Defective Work.
Inspections shall be made by the City Engineer after various phases of the construction work are
completed. Any faulty or defective work shall be corrected by the developer or developer's contractor
within a period of thirty (30) days from the date of City Engineer's inspection wherein the faulty or defective
work is noted and written notice is given to the developer and/or contractor. No additional work on any
improvements that are affected by the defective work shall be performed until the defective work is
corrected to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 39
CHAPTER 11-21: IMPACT FEES
11-21-010. General.
11-21-020. Water System.
11-21-030. Storm Drainage System.
11-21-040. Parks.
11-21-060. Periodic Review.
11-21-070. Accounting.
11-21-080. Challenges.
11-21-010. General.
In order to recover the cost to the City of the provision, extension, enlargement or replacement of
capital facilities to service proposed subdivisions, the City may impose an impact fee as defined in UCA
11-36a. Establishment of any impact fee outlined in this Chapter shall follow the procedures outlined in
UCA 11-36a. All impact fee charges will be adopted as part of the Consolidated Fee Schedule
11-21-020. Water System.
(a) Water Impact Fees. An impact fee may be imposed for the extension, enlargement or
replacement of water infrastructure to service all proposed subdivisions. Such payment shall be assessed
by water meter size for all subdivisions, and will be deposited with the City prior to approval of the final
plat. The City Council, at its discretion, may defer the payment of this fee until the issuance of the building
permit for each lot if it is found the proposed development subdivision is placing no immediate hardship on
the City's water system.
(b) Reimbursement of impact fees. If a developer is required by the City to install a water line
larger than eight (8) inches in diameter and if said water line will benefit other properties, the City shall
provide for the reimbursement of water impact fees to pay for the over sizing. The size of the line required
to be installed will be the size required in the Water Capital Facilities Plan. Such reimbursement will be
the material cost differential between installing a eight (8) inch line and installing the size required by the
City. The calculation of the differential shall be made by the developer, subject to review and approval by
the City Engineer. Should the differential be greater than the water impact fees assessed for the
proposed subdivision, the City Council, at its discretion, can either make up the balance by using existing
funds in the Water Impact Fee Fund or reimburse the developer from future water impact fees. Before
any funds are reimbursed to the developer the City and Developer shall enter into a written agreement
listing the reimbursement amount and outlining the reimbursement process.
11-21-030. Storm Water System.
(a) Storm Water Drainage Exactions. An impact fee may be imposed for the extension,
enlargement or replacement of storm water infrastructure to service all proposed subdivisions. Such
payment shall be assessed per lot for residential subdivisions and by acreage for all other subdivisions,
and will be deposited with the City prior to approval of the final plat. The City Council, at its discretion, may
defer the payment of this fee until the issuance of the building permit for each lot if it is found the proposed
development subdivision is placing no immediate hardship on the City's storm water system.
(b) Reimbursement of impact fees. If a developer is required by the City to install a storm
water line and/or detention basin sized in the City’s Storm Water Capital Facilities Plan to benefit other
properties, the City shall provide for the reimbursement of storm water impact fees to pay for the over
sizing. The size of the line and/or detention basin required to be installed will be the size required in the
Storm Water Capital Facilities Plan. Such reimbursement will be the cost differential between installing a
Woods Cross Municipal Code September 19, 2017
Title 11, Page 40
line and/or detention basin required to meet the needs of the subdivision and installing the size required by
the City. The calculation of the differential shall be made by the developer, subject to review and approval
by the City Engineer. Should the differential be greater than the storm water impact fees assessed for the
proposed subdivision, the City Council, at its discretion, can either make up the balance by using existing
funds in the Storm Water Impact Fee Fund or reimburse the developer from future storm water impact
fees. Before any funds are reimbursed to the developer the City and Developer shall enter into a written
agreement listing the reimbursement amount and outlining the reimbursement process.
11-21-040. Parks.
(a) Park Impact Fees. An impact fee may be imposed for parks and other recreation
purposes in locations designated in the Parks and Trails Master Plan. Such payment shall be assessed
per residential lot, and will be deposited with the City prior to approval of the final plat. The City Council, at
its discretion, may defer the payment of this fee until the issuance of the building permit for each lot.
a) Park Land Dedication. The City Council may require that land be reserved for parks
and/or other recreation purposes in a proposed subdivision if such use is designated in the Parks and
Trails Master Plan. Such reservations shall be of suitable size, dimension, topography, and general
character and shall have adequate road access, for the particular purposes delineated in the Parks and
Trails Master Plan. The area shall be shown and marked on the plat, "Reserved for Park and/or
Recreation Purposes." The developer shall dedicate all such areas to the City as a condition of final
subdivision plat approval. Reimbursement for land reserved for parks and/or other recreational purposes
shall be provided through reimbursement of park impact fees. Such reimbursement will be the cost
differential between the share of land cost attributed to the subdivision and the total cost of the land being
dedicated. The calculation of the differential shall be made by the developer, subject to review and
approval by the City Engineer. Should the differential be greater than the park impact fees assessed for
the proposed subdivision, the City Council, at its discretion, can either make up the balance by using
existing funds in the Park Impact Fee Fund or reimburse the developer from future park impact fees.
Before any funds are reimbursed to the developer the City and Developer shall enter into a written
agreement listing the reimbursement amount and outlining the reimbursement process.
11-21-060. Periodic Review.
(a) Periodically, the City Council, after following the procedures outlined in UCA 11-36A, may adjust
the impact fees as it deems justified and appropriate.
11-21-070. Accounting.
The impact fees received by the City under this chapter shall be held in and accounted for as
separate funds, one for each of the fees. These funds shall be segregated from the general fund of the
City and from each other. Expenses may be debited to one of the special funds only if the expense is
incurred for capital facilities serving the purpose(s) set forth in Section 11-21-010 for which the fees
deposited in that fund were originally collected.
11-21-080. Challenges
(a) Any person required by this Chapter to pay impact fees to the City, or any person who has
paid impact fees to the City in satisfaction of a requirement of this Chapter may challenge the calculation,
imposition or administration of the fee under the procedures outlined in UCA 11-36a.
WOODS CROSS CITY
ZONING ORDINANCE
Chapter 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-1-101 Short Title
12-1-102 Purpose and Objectives
12-1-103 Interpretation.
12-1-104 Conflict.
12-1-105 Effect on Previous Ordinances and Maps.
12-1-106 Licenses to Conform.
12-1-107 Territory Annexed to the City
12-1-108 Severability of Parts of Title
12-1-109 Administrative Delegations
12-1-110 Penalties
12-1-111 Time Computation
12-1-101 Short Title
This Title shall be known as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Woods Cross, and
may be so cited and pleaded. This Zoning Ordinance shall be referred to herein as "this
Title," and the chapters and sections hereinafter referred to shall be chapters and sections
of this Title, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
12-1-102 Purpose and Objectives
This Title and the regulations and restrictions contained therein are adopted and
enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, and general
welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City of Woods Cross. The objectives of
this Ordinance are:
A. To encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and development of the City.
(B) To provide adequate open space for light and air, to prevent overcrowding of
the land, and to lessen congestion in the streets.
(C) To increase the security of home life and preserve and create a more
favorable environment for the citizens of the City of Woods Cross.
(D) To stabilize and improve property values.
(E) To enhance the economic well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Woods
Cross.
(F) To promote the development of a wholesome, serviceable and attractive city
resulting from an orderly development and effective use of resources.
(G) To promote and expand economic development of the City in order to
expand the City's tax base.
(H) To foster the industries that will be conducive to the City's philosophy of
clean and attractive industry.
(I) To protect urban and non-urban development.
12-1-103 Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, the requirements
contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the purposes set forth.
12-1-104 Conflict.
This Title shall not nullify or affect the more restrictive provisions of covenants,
agreements, or other ordinances or laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding any such other
provisions which are less restrictive.
12-1-105 Effect on Previous Ordinances and Maps.
The existing ordinances of the City governing the zoning of areas and districts in
Woods Cross, in their entirety and including the maps heretofore adopted and made a part
of said ordinances, are hereby superseded and amended to read as set forth herein;
provided, however, that this Title, including the maps on file with the Planning Commission
and by this reference made a part hereof, shall be deemed a continuation of previous
ordinances, and not a new enactment, insofar as the substance of previous ordinances is
included in this Title, whether in the same or in different language; and this Title shall be so
interpreted upon all questions of construction, relating to tenure of officers and boards
established by previous ordinances and to questions of conforming or non-conforming
uses, buildings, or structures, and to questions as to the dates upon which such uses,
buildings, or structures became conforming or non-conforming.
12-1-106 Licenses to Conform.
Every permit or license of the City for use, building, occupancy, business, or
purpose which conflicts with the provisions of this Title shall be null and void.
12-1-107 Territory Annexed to the City
At the time of the annexation of new territory to the City, the City Council in
consideration of the prior recommendation of the Planning Commission may classify such
territory for zoning purposes according to the zones established by this Zoning Ordinance.
12-1-108 Severability of Parts of Title
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Title are severable and, if any phrase,
clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Title shall be declared unconstitutional or
invalid by judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction or deleted through
amendment or repeal, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or deletion shall not affect any of
the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Title.
12-1-109 Administrative Delegations
Whenever in this Title power is delegated to an administrative officer or agency,
including the City Council sitting as an administrative reviewing agency, such power shall
be exercised subject to any standard set forth in the specific delegation, and to a general
standard that such administrative officer or agency act reasonably and according to sound,
established principles of municipal planning, and with due regard for both the interests of
the developer or other applying property owner and those of the City.
12-1-110 Penalties
Any person, whether as principal, officer, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or
causing or knowingly permitting the violation of the provisions of this Title shall be guilty of
a Class B misdemeanor and punishable as provided by law. Each day of violation of this
section is a separate violation. Nothing in this section precludes a suit for injunctive or
other civil relief.
12-1-111 Time Computation
In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Ordinance, the day of
the act, event or decision after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to
be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included unless it is Saturday,
Sunday, or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day,
which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday. When the period time prescribed or
allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and holidays shall be
excluded in the computation. The date of a decision or recommendation of the Planning
Commission shall be the date of the hearing when such decision or recommendation is
made. If no hearing is held on the matter, the date of the decision or recommendation shall
be the date written notice of such decision or recommendation is mailed to the applicant.
Chapter 12-2. Definitions
12-2-101 Purpose
12-2-102 Accessory Building
12-2-103 Accessory Use
12-2-104 Agricultural or Agriculture
12-2-105 Agricultural Industry
12-2-106 Adult Establishment
12-2-107 Alley
12-2-108 Apartment
12-2-108.5 Apiaries
12-2-109 Area
12-2-110 Automotive Repair, Major
12-2-111 Automotive Repair, Minor
12-2-112 Basement
12-2-113 Block
12-2-114 Block, Decorative
12-2-115 Boarding and Rooming House
12-2-116 Building
12-2-117 Building Attached
12-2-118 Building Height
12-2-119 Building Lot
12-2-120 Building Line
12-2-121 Building, Main
12-2-122 Carport
12-2-123 Center Line of Street
12-2-124 Clear Vision Area
12-2-125 Commercial Outdoor Recreation
12-2-126 Commercial School
12-2-127 Commercial Services
12-2-128 Conditional Use
12-2-129 Condominium
12-2-130 Court
12-2-131 Day Care, Family
12-2-132 Day Care, Group
12-2-133 Density, Gross and Net
12-2-134 Driveway, Private
12-2-135 Dwelling
12-2-136 Dwelling, Single-Family
12-2-137 Dwelling, Two-Family
12-2-138 Dwelling, Multiple Family
12-2-139 Dwelling Unit
12-2-140 Educational Institutions
12-2-141 Elderly Persons
12-2-142 Family
12-2-143 Fast Food or Drive-In Restaurant
12-2-144 Flag Lot
12-2-145 Floor Area
12-2-146 Garage, Private
12-2-147 Garage, Public
12-2-148 General Retail Sales
12-2-149 Grade
12-2-150 Grazing and Pasturing
12-2-151 Guest
12-2-152 Handicapped Person
12-2-153 Handicraft Production
12-2-154 Health Care Facilities
12-2-155 Historic Buildings
12-2-156 Home Occupation
12-2-157 Horticulture
12-2-158 Hotel
12-2-159 Household Pets
12-2-159a HUD Code
12-2-159b Installation Standards
12-2-160 Junk Yard
12-2-161 Kennel
12-2-162 Kitchen
12-2-163 Landscaping
12-2-164 Landscaping Set Back
12-2-165 Liquor Store
12-2-166 Lot
12-2-167 Lot Area
12-2-168 Lot, Corner
12-2-169 Lot Coverage
12-2-170 Lot Depth
12-2-171 Lot, Flag
12-2-172 Lot Frontage
12-2-173 Lot, Interior
12-2-174 Lot Line, Front
12-2-175 Lot Line, Rear
12-2-176 Lot Line, Side
12-2-177 Lot Width
12-2-178 Manufactured Home
12-2-179 Repeal Ordinance 406
12-2-180 Mobile Home
12-2-181 Modular Home or Building
12-2-182 Motel
12-2-183 Natural Waterways
12-2-184 Nonconforming Building or Structure
12-2-185 Nonconforming Use
12-2-186 Office, Business
12-2-187 Office, Professional
12-2-188 Parking Lot
12-2-189 Parking Space
12-2-190 Parcel
12-2-191 Pawnshop
12-2-192 Permitted Use
12-2-193 Person
12-2-194 Planned Dwelling Group
12-2-195 Planned Unit Development
12-2-196 Planning and Zoning Commission
12-2-197 Principal Building
12-2-198 Private Club
12-2-199 Private Road or Lane
12-2-200 Public
12-2-201 Public Institution
12-2-202 Quasi-Public Institution
12-2-203 Residential Facility for Handicapped Persons
12-2-204 Residential Facility for Elderly Persons
12-2-205 Restaurant
12-2-206 Second Hand Dealer
12-2-207 Self Service Storage Facilities
12-2-208 Senior Citizen Center
12-2-209 Sign
12-2-210 Specified Anatomical Areas
12-2-211 Specified Sexual Activities
12-2-212 Square Footage of Dwellings
12-2-213 Stable, Private
12-2-214 Stable, Public
12-2-215 Story
12-2-216 Story, Half
12-2-217 Story, Multiple
12-2-218 Story, Two
12-2-219 Street
12-2-220 Structural Alterations
12-2-221 Structure
12-2-222 Subdivision
12-2-223 Travel Trailers
12-2-224 Twin House
12-2-224.5 Urban Chickens
12-2-225 Use
12-2-226 Use, Accessory
12-2-227 Use, Conditional
12-2-228 Veterinary Hospital
12-2-229 Yard
12-2-230 Yard, Front
12-2-231 Yard, Rear
12-2-232 Yard, Side
12-2-233 Zone
12-2-101 Purpose
For the purpose of this Title, certain words and terms are defined as follows:
(A) Words used in the present tense include the future.
(B) Words in the singular number include the plural and the plural will include the
singular.
(C) Words which are not included herein, but are defined in the Uniform Building
Code, shall have the meaning as defined within said Uniform Building Code.
(D) The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory.
(E) Chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern,
limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of any
chapter or section herein.
12-2-102 Accessory Building
A subordinate building, customarily incidental to and located upon the same lot occupied by
the main building. On any lot upon which is located a dwelling any building which is
incidental to the conducting of an agricultural use shall be deemed to be an accessory
building.
12-2-103 Accessory Use
The term "accessory use" shall mean a use which is incidental to and subordinate to the
prescribed permitted use within any respective zoning provisions.
12-2-104 Agricultural or Agriculture
The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture and gardening, but not including the
keeping or raising of domestic animals and fowl, except household pets, and not including
any agricultural industry or business, such as fruit packing plants, fur farms, animal
hospitals or similar uses.
12-2-105 Agricultural Industry
An industry established for the purpose of refining, processing, packaging, milling, or
otherwise preparing for market, agricultural products, including animal products. Such
industry includes grain storage, fruit and vegetable storage and packing, slaughtering and
dressing of farm animals, and production of dairy products.
12-2-106 Adult Establishment
An adult establishment is defined as either:
(A) Bookstores, magazine shops, newstands, arcades, and other commercial
establishments having as a substantial or significant portion of their stock in trade,
books, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual
Activities" or "Specified Anatomical Areas" (as defined herein) or an establishment
with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material, or:
(B) Motion picture theaters, arcades and other commercial establishments used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "Specified Sexual Activities" or "Specified
Anatomical Areas" (as defined herein) for observation by patrons therein, or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the showing of such material.
12-2-107 Alley
The term "alley" shall mean a public thoroughfare for the use of pedestrians and vehicles
which affords, or is designated or intended to afford, a secondary means of access to
abutting properties.
12-2-108 Apartment
A rented room, or a suite of two or more rented rooms designated, or intended for, or
occupied by, one family for living and sleeping purposes.
12-2-108.5 Apiaries
The term “apiaries” shall mean a place in which a colony or colonies of bees are kept, such
as stands, sheds, hives or bee houses.
12-2-109 Area
The aggregate of the maximum horizontal cross section within given boundaries.
12-2-110 Automotive Repair, Major
An establishment primarily engaged in the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers,
and similar large mechanical equipment, including paint, body and fender and major engine
and engine part overhaul, provided it is conducted within a completely enclosed building.
12-2-111 Automotive Repair, Minor
An establishment primarily engaged in the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers,
and similar large mechanical equipment, including brake, muffler, upholstery work, tire
repair and change, lubrication, tune-ups and transmission work provided it is conducted
within a completely enclosed building.
12-2-112 Basement
A story partly underground. A basement shall be counted as a story for height measurement
where more than one-half of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or
where more than three-fourths of any wall is above the level of the adjoining ground.
12-2-113 Block
All property fronting upon one side of a street between intersecting and intercepting streets,
or between the street and the railroad right-of-way, water way, terminus of a dead end street,
City boundary, public park or other natural boundary. An intercepting street shall determine
only the boundary of the block face of the side of the street which it intercepts.
12-2-114 Block, Decorative
A concrete architectural unit that is slump, scored, fluted, waffle, ribbed, or split-faced.
12-2-115 Boarding and Rooming House
The term "boarding and rooming house" shall mean a building or portion thereof which is
used to accommodate, for compensation, three or more boarders or roomers who do not
directly utilize kitchen facilities, not including members of the occupant's immediate family
who might be occupying said building. The word "compensation", in relation to boarding or
rooming house, shall include compensation in money, services, or other things of value. For
purposes of this Title, where the number of roomers or boarders are two persons or less,
such boarders shall be considered as part of a family.
12-2-116 Building
A permanently located structure for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any person, animal,
article or chattel. When any portion thereof is completely separate from every other portion
thereof by a division wall or fire wall, without openings, each such portion shall be a
separate building. The term "building" shall not include any form of vehicle, even though
immobilized except mobile homes as detailed in Section 12-2-178. Where this Chapter
requires, or where special authority granted pursuant to this Chapter requires, that a use shall
be entirely enclosed within a building, this definition shall be qualified by adding "and
enclosed on all sides."
12-2-117 Building Attached
A building or buildings connected by any two of the following: A common wall, a
continuous wall, a continuous foundation, or a continuous roof line. Walls or fences, patios,
porches, terraces or other roofed accessory uses open on at least two sides shall not
constitute an attached building.
12-2-118 Building Height
Building height is the vertical distance from the average finish grade surface to the highest
point of any building, roof, or coping.
12-2-119 Building Lot
A parcel of land which is of such dimensions as to comply with the minimum requirements
of this Ordinance for area and width and depth where applicable in the zone in which it is
located. Frontage used to meet these requirements shall not include any part of a temporary
end or dead end of a street.
(A) A parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel of land with a number or
similar designation on the final plat of a subdivision recorded in the office of the
County Recorder of Davis County.
(B) A parcel of land, the dimension or boundaries of which are defined by a record or
survey map recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Davis County in
accordance with the law regulating the division of said land.
(C) A parcel of real property not delineated as in (a) or (b) above and containing not less
than the prescribed minimum area required in the zone in which it is located and
which abuts at least one public street which is adequate for access purposes, and is
held under one or common ownership. Except for PUDs and condominiums,
specifically authorized by this Ordinance, not more than one dwelling structure shall
occupy any one lot.
12-2-120 Building Line
The term "building line" shall mean a line parallel to the front lot line and at a distance
therefrom equal to the required depth of the front yard and extending across the whole width
of the lot.
12-2-121 Building, Main
The principal building on a lot or building site designed or used to accommodate the
primary use to which the premises are devoted. Where a permissible use involves more than
one structure designed or used for the primary purpose, as in the case of apartment groups,
each such permitted building on one lot as defined by this Title shall be construed as
constituting a main building.
12-2-122 Carport
The term "carport" shall mean a covered automobile parking space with at least two (2)
sides open. A carport shall be subject to all of the regulations described in this Title for a
private garage.
12-2-123 Center Line of Street
The line designated as "center line" in any street in the City by the records of the City
Engineer. If such records do not clearly indicate a center line, then the center line shall be
designated by the City Engineer.
12-2-124 Clear Vision Area
The area on a corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street property lines and the
line connecting them at points 30 feet from the intersection of the street lines.
12-2-125 Commercial Outdoor Recreation
Privately owned recreation facilities, open to the public for a fee, or to persons holding
membership, which are conducted primarily outdoors, except for restrooms, dressing rooms,
or animal shelters, i.e., gun club, ice skating, golf, riding academy.
12-2-126 Commercial School
An establishment for the teaching of industrial, clerical, managerial, or fine arts skills. This
includes, but is not limited to, schools that are owned privately and do not offer a complete
educational curriculum.
12-2-127 Commercial Services
An establishment, normally associated with retail sales activities, which provides a service
for payment of money or other valuable consideration, e.g., banking, barber-beauty, dry
cleaner, laundromat, appliance or shoe repair, tool rental, or similar services.
12-2-128 Conditional Use
A use which would become harmonious or compatible through the application and
maintenance of qualifying circumstances, as provided in Chapter 21, of this Title, and for
which a conditional use permit is required.
12-2-129 Condominium
The ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit project or structure together with an undivided
interest in common areas and facilities of the property.
12-2-130 Court
An unoccupied space on the lot other than a required yard, designed to be completely or
partially surrounded by a building or group of buildings.
12-2-131 Day Care, Family
The keeping for care and/or instruction, whether or not for compensation, of 3 to 6 children
other than members of the family residing in the premises.
12-2-132 Day Care, Group
An establishment for the care and/or instruction, whether or not for compensation, of 7 or
more children. This definition includes child nursery and pre-school facilities.
12-2-133 Density, Gross and Net
The term "gross density" shall be used to describe an estimate of the number of dwelling
units per acre within an area in which public streets and nonresidential uses may be included
in the total acreage. Net density shall describe the number of dwelling units per acre of land
that are devoted exclusively to residential use.
12-2-134 Driveway, Private
A privately owned roadway providing vehicle access to a residential, commercial, or
industrial property, the use of which is limited to persons residing, employed, or otherwise
using or visiting the parcel on which it is located.
12-2-135 Dwelling
A building or portion thereof designed or used for residential occupancy, including onefamily,
two-family, multifamily, and apartment structures; but shall not include boarding
and rooming, tents, trailers, mobile homes, hotels, motels, motor courts, motor lodges,
cottage camps, or similar structures designed or used primarily for transient residential uses.
12-2-136 Dwelling, Single-Family
A detached building arranged, designed, or used for or intended to be occupied by not more
than one (1) family and which complies with the Supplementary Regulations set forth in
Chapter 21.
12-2-137 Dwelling, Two-Family
A dwelling designed for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other,
and containing two (2) dwelling units.
12-2-138 Dwelling, Multiple Family
A dwelling designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of
each other, and containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
12-2-139 Dwelling Unit
The term "dwelling unit" shall mean one or more rooms in a dwelling designed for
occupancy by one family for living or sleeping purposes, and having one kitchen or set of
cooking facilities.
12-2-140 Educational Institutions
Public schools which are supported wholly or in part by public funds and giving instruction
as provided by the Utah State Board of Education. Private schools which are supported
wholly or in part by private funds and giving instruction as provided by the State Board of
Education.
12-2-141 Elderly Persons
"Elderly person" means a person who is 60 years of age or older, who desires or needs to
live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable of living independently.
12-2-142 Family
An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a
group of not more than four (4) persons (excluding servants) who are not related, living in a
dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit and using common cooking facilities.
12-2-143 Fast Food or Drive-In Restaurant
An establishment providing ready-to-eat food for money, and distinguished from a
traditional restaurant in that food service is provided from a counter or window for
consumption either on or off the premises. Services may also be provided to customers in
automobiles. This also includes specialty food stores, such as an ice cream parlor or a
delicatessen having counter or window service.
12-2-144 Flag Lot
The same as "Lot, Flag."
12-2-145 Floor Area
The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a building excluding a cellar
and basement floor areas as defined by the Uniform Building Code, and not including the
area of carports, porches, attached garages, breeze-ways and patios.
12-2-146 Garage, Private
An accessory building designed or used for the storage of automobiles and other property
owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory, and not to be
associated with any commercial business, trade or enterprise.
12-2-147 Garage, Public
A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used for servicing,
repairing, equipping, hiring, selling, or storing motor-driven vehicles.
12-2-148 General Retail Sales
Stores or shops intended for retail sales of goods or merchandise, but not including liquor,
motor vehicles, campers, trailers, farm equipment, lumber or heavy machinery. This
definition shall include department and discount stores.
12-2-149 Grade
The average level of the ground (finished surface) adjacent to the exterior walls of a
building.
12-2-150 Grazing and Pasturing
The keeping and raising of animals and/or fowl for domestic or commercial use, except fur
farms, dairy farms, livestock and feed yards and pig farms.
12-2-151 Guest
Any person or persons staying temporarily within a dwelling unit without payment,
compensation, or remuneration to the owner, tenants, or full time inhabitants of said
dwelling unit.
12-2-152 Handicapped Person
A person who has severe, chronic disability attributable to a mental or physical impairment
or to a combination of mental or physical impairments, which is likely to continue
indefinitely, and which results in a substantial functional limitation in three or more of the
following areas of major life activity: self-care, receptive and expressive language, learning,
mobility, self-direction, capacity for independent living, or economic self-sufficiency; and
who requires a combination or sequence of special interdisciplinary or generic care,
treatment or other services that are individually planned and coordinated to allow the person
to function in, and contribute to, a residential neighborhood.
12-2-153 Handicraft Production
The production or assembly by hand of objects of art or clothing, e.g., pottery, jewelry,
sculpture, or leather goods, primarily for sale on the premises.
12-2-154 Health Care Facilities
A publicly or privately operated establishment intended for use in treating human illness or
infirmity, in treating dental patients, in counseling and/or therapy relating to the patient's
psychological condition, in providing information about or assistance in family planning or
birth control, and in the care of any other human ailments or in the maintenance of human
health.
12-2-155 Historic Buildings
Any building listed in the National Register of Historic Places, or on the Utah State Register
of Historic Sites.
12-2-156 Home Occupation
Any income-producing use conducted within a dwelling unit and carried on only by persons
residing in the dwelling unit, and which use is clearly incidental, secondary, and compatible
to the residential use of the building. In general, a home occupation is an accessory use so
located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal conditions, would not be
significantly affected by its existence and conforms to the conditions set forth in Chapter 27
of this Title.
12-2-157 Horticulture
The science of growing fruits, vegetables, flowers, trees, or ornamental plants.
12-2-158 Hotel
A building designed or used as the temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged,
with or without meals for compensation, and in which there are more than ten (10) sleeping
rooms in which no provision is made for cooking.
12-2-159 Household Pets
The term "household pets" shall mean animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the
house and/or kept for company or pleasure, such as dogs or cats, but not including
a sufficient number of dogs to constitute a need for a special animal permit as
required in any animal control ordinance of the City. "Household pets" shall not
include ducks, geese, other domestic farm-variety animals, or animals which are
capable of inflicting harm or discomfort or endangering the health, safety, or
welfare of any person or property. While not “household pets,” urban chickens
may be kept in designated zones as a conditional use, subject to the requirements
set forth in Chapter 21 of this Title. The number of household pets shall be
limited to that allowed by the provisions of each respective zone as set forth in
this Title.
12-2-159a HUD Code
The Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act.
12-2-159b Installation Standards
The standards adopted and published by the National Conference of States on Building
Codes and Standards (NCSBCS) for the installation of manufactured homes, titled the
ıStandard fro Manufactured Home Installations,ı or such equivalent standard as adopted
and amended by the state of Utah pursuant to Utah Code Ann.  58-56-3, as amended.
12-2-160 Junk Yard
The use of any lot, portion of lot or tract of land for the storage, keeping or abandonment of
junk, including scrap metals or other scrap material, or for the dismantling, demolition or
abandonments of automobiles, or other vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof; provided,
however, that this definition shall not be deemed to include such uses which are clearly
accessory and incidental to any agricultural use permitted in the zoning district.
12-2-161 Kennel
Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, at least four months old, are kept.
12-2-162 Kitchen
Any room and/or other place used, intended, or designed to be used for cooking or for the
preparation of food.
12-2-163 Landscaping
"Landscaping" is defined as any combination of living plants, such as trees, shrubs, vines,
ground covers, flowers or grass; natural features such as rock, stone, bark chips or shavings;
and structural features, including but not limited to, fountains, reflecting pools, outdoor art
work, screen walls, fences, or benches.
12-2-164 Landscaping Set Back
"Landscaped Setback" is defined as a minimum required landscaping space on a private
property which is adjacent to a property line common to a street right-of-way or another
property. Driveways and sidewalks to afford limited access may be allowed to interrupt this
required space.
12-2-165 Liquor Store
Any outlet authorized by the Utah Liquor Control Commission to sell original package
liquor or wine for consumption off the premises.
12-2-166 Lot
The term "Lot" shall mean any of the following, with respect to the particular factual
situation at hand:
(A) A parcel of real property shown as a delineated parcel of land with a number or
similar designation on the final plat of a subdivision recorded in the office of the
County Recorder of Davis County.
(B) A parcel of land, the dimension or boundaries of which are defined by a record or
survey map recorded in the office of the County recorder of Davis County in
accordance with the law regulating the division of said land.
(C) A parcel of real property not delineated as in (a) or (b) above and containing not less
than the prescribed minimum area required in the zone in which it is located and
which abuts at least one public street or easement which is adequate for access
purposes, and is held under one or common ownership. Except for PUDs and
condominiums, specifically authorized by this Ordinance, not more than one
dwelling structure shall occupy any one lot.
12-2-167 Lot Area
The total area measured on a horizontal plane and included within the lot lines of the lot or
parcel of land.
12-2-168 Lot, Corner
The term "corner lot" shall mean a lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets,
which street shall have angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five
degrees (135ı).
12-2-169 Lot Coverage
The total horizontal area of a lot, parcel or building site covered by any building or occupied
by a structure which extends above the surface of the ground, and including any covered
automobile parking spaces. Covered patios, covered walkways, and covered recreation
areas shall not be considered as lot coverage provided that said areas are not more than fifty
percent (50%) enclosed.
12-2-170 Lot Depth
The horizontal length of a straight line connecting the bisecting points of the front and the
rear lot lines.
12-2-171 Lot, Flag
An L-shaped lot which conforms with the requirements and provisions of Section 12-21-114
of this ordinance.
12-2-172 Lot Frontage
The distance a lot extends along a street as measured at a point 30' back from the street line.
12-2-173 Lot, Interior
"Interior Lot" shall mean a lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot.
12-2-174 Lot Line, Front
A line separating an interior lot from a street. In the case of a corner lot, the side bordering
on the street which has the smallest dimension shall be the front lot line, unless otherwise
approved by the Planning and Zoning Department.
12-2-175 Lot Line, Rear
The recorded lot line or lines most distant from and generally parallel to the front lot line,
except that in the case of an interior triangular or gore shaped lot, it shall mean a straight line
ten (10) feet in length which:
(A) Is parallel to the front lot line or its chord.
(B) Intersects the two other lot lines at points most distant from the front lot line.
12-2-176 Lot Line, Side
"Side Lot Line" shall mean any lot boundary line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
12-2-177 Lot Width
The distance across a lot or parcel of property measured at the front setback line.
12-2-178 Manufactured Home
A transportable factory built single-family dwelling constructed on or after June 15, 1976,
according to the Federal Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (HUD
Code) and further defined by the State of Utah Code Ann.  58-56-3, as amended.
12-2-179 Repeal
Ordinance NO. 406
12-2-97
12-2-180 Mobile Home
A transportable factory built housing unit built prior to June 15, 1976, in accordance with
State mobile home regulations which existed prior to the Federal Manufactured Housing and
Safety Standards Act (HUD Code) and further defined by the State Of Utah at Utah Code
Ann.  58-56-3, as amended.
12-2-181 Modular Home or Building
A structure built from sections which are manufactured in accordance with the Uniform
Building Code Standards adopted by the City pursuant to Utah Code Ann.  58-56-4 and
transported to a building site, the purpose of which is for human habitation, occupancy, or
use.
12-2-182 Motel
Any building or group of buildings containing sleeping rooms designed for temporary use
by automobile tourists or transients, with garages attached or parking space conveniently
located to each unit.
12-2-183 Natural Waterways
Those areas, varying in width along streams, creeks, springs, gullies, or washes which are
natural drainage channels as determined by the City Engineer, and in which areas no
buildings shall be constructed.
12-2-184 Nonconforming Building or Structure
A building or structure or portion thereof, lawfully existing at the time this Ordinance
becomes effective, which does not conform to all the height, area, and yard regulations
herein prescribed in the zone district in which it is located.
12-2-185 Nonconforming Use
A use which lawfully existed on the land at the time this Title or a similar ordinance became
effective, and which does not conform with the current use regulations of the zone in which
it is located.
12-2-186 Office, Business
A place intended for the conduct of a business enterprise but in which no goods or
merchandise are stored or sold.
12-2-187 Office, Professional
A place intended for the conduct of a recognized learned profession, e.g., physician, dentist,
chiropractor, lawyer, engineer, architect, accountant.
12-2-188 Parking Lot
An open area, other than a street, used for parking of more than four (4) automobiles and
available for public use, whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation to clients
or customers.
12-2-189 Parking Space
A permanently surfaced area of not less than nine by twenty (9X20) feet, exclusive of access
or maneuvering area, ramps, or columns, to be used exclusively as temporary storage space
for one motor vehicle.
12-2-190 Parcel
The same as a "lot".
12-2-191 Pawnshop
Any business that loans money against security in the form of a pledge or deposit of
personal property or deals in the purchase, exchange or possession of tangible personal
property, or which loans or advances money by taking chattel mortgage as security of such
personal property and who sells unredeemed pledges, possibly together with new or
unpledged merchandise.
12-2-192 Permitted Use
A use of land for which no conditional use permit is required.
12-2-193 Person
The term "person" shall refer to an individual, an association, a firm, a partnership, a
corporation, a joint venture or any similar legal entity.
12-2-194 Planned Dwelling Group
A group of residential buildings which contain not more than a total of 14 family dwelling
units.
12-2-195 Planned Unit Development
An integrated design for development of residential, commercial, or industrial uses, or
combination of such uses, in which one or more of the regulations, other than use
regulations, of the Zone in which the development is to be situated, is waived or varied to
allow flexibility and initiative in site design and building design and location in accordance
with an approved plan and the general requirements specified in this Title. A planned unit
development may be: (1) the development of compatible land uses arranged in such a way
as to provide desirable living environments that may include private and common open
spaces for recreation, circulation and/or aesthetic uses; (2) the conservation or development
of desirable amenities not otherwise possible under the otherwise applicable development
standards; and (3) the creation of areas for multiple use that are of benefit to the
neighborhood.
12-2-196 Planning and Zoning Commission
The term "Planning and Zoning Commission" shall mean the Planning and Zoning
Commission of the City of Woods Cross as duly appointed under the law.
12-2-197 Principal Building
The same as "Building, Main".
12-2-198 Private Club
A social club, recreational, athletic or group incorporated under the provisions of the Utah
Nonprofit Corporation and Cooperation Association Act, which maintains or intends to
maintain premises upon which liquor is to be stored, consumed or sold.
12-2-199 Private Road or Lane
A roadway located on private property which serves two or more properties.
12-2-200 Public
The term "public" shall mean that which is under the ownership or control of the United
States Government, the State of Utah or any subdivision thereof, Davis County, or the City
of Woods Cross (or any department or agency thereof).
12-2-201 Public Institution
A use operated exclusively by a public body or quasi-public body for the purpose of serving
the public health, safety, or general welfare, and including uses such as public schools,
parks, playgrounds and other recreation facilities or administrative and service facilities, or
public utilities.
12-2-202 Quasi-Public Institution
A use operated by a private non-profit, educational, religious, recreational, charitable or
philanthropic institution, such use having the purpose primarily of serving the general
public, such as churches, private schools and universities and similar uses.
12-2-203 Residential Facility for Handicapped Persons
A single-family or multiple-family dwelling unit consistent with existing zoning of the
desired location, that is occupied on a 24-hour per day basis by eight or fewer handicapped
persons in a family-type arrangement under the supervision of a house family or manager,
and that conforms to all applicable standards and requirements of the Utah Department of
Social Services, and is operated by, or under contract with, that Department.
12-2-204 Residential Facility for Elderly Persons
"Residential Facility for elderly persons" means a single-family or multiple-family dwelling
unit, consistent with existing zoning of the desired location, occupied on a 24-hour per day
basis by eight or fewer elderly persons in a family-type arrangement, that conforms with
applicable standards of the State Department of Social Services, and is licensed by that
Department. "Residential facility for the elderly" does not include a health facility as
defined by state law.
12-2-205 Restaurant
An establishment in which a variety of food is prepared and cooked and completed meals
are served to the public for consumption on the premises primarily in indoor dining
accommodations.
12-2-206 Second Hand Dealer
Any business where a person keeps a store, office or place of business for the purchase,
barter or exchange, or sale of any second-hand merchandise of value or who is engaged in
the business of dealing in second-hand goods. A second-hand dealer shall not include any
person who deals in the purchase, barter, exchange or sale of used motor vehicles or trailers,
but shall include any person who buys or sells five (5) or more firearms per year whether
new or used.
12-2-207 Self Service Storage Facilities
A facility consisting of a building or group of buildings in a controlled access compound
that contains vrying sizes of individual compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or
lockers for the dead storage of customer's goods and wares.
12-2-208 Senior Citizen Center
A building with centralized facilities for dining, recreation, cleaning, laundry and
transportation for persons residing therein. Individual dwelling units may or may not have
such facilities separately.
12-2-209 Sign
Any device providing identification, advertising, or directional information for a specific
business, service, product, person, organization, place, or building. Included in this
definition are graphic devices such as logos, attention-attracting media such as banners or
logo sculpture, and obtrusive, colored fascia or architectural elements.
12-2-210 Specified Anatomical Areas
Specific anatomical areas means:
(A) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock,
and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
(B) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
12-2-211 Specified Sexual Activities
Specified sexual activities means:
(A) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(B) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
(C) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or female breast.
12-2-212 Square Footage of Dwellings
The required square footage of a dwelling shall be that part of a dwelling that is complete
above the finished grade.
12-2-213 Stable, Private
A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the
premises for their own use and recreation.
12-2-214 Stable, Public
A stable other than a private stable.
12-2-215 Story
That portion of a building, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
ceiling next above.
12-2-216 Story, Half
A story with at least two of its opposite sides situated in a sloping roof, the floor area of
which does not exceed two-thirds of the floor immediately below it.
12-2-217 Story, Multiple
A residential building with a main floor completely above grade and two or more upper
stories.
12-2-218 Story, Two
A residential building with a main floor completely above grade level and one upper story.
12-2-219 Street
A thoroughfare or right of way which has been dedicated, conveyed, or abandoned to the
public and accepted by proper public authority; or a thorough fare, not less than twenty-five
feet wide, which has been made public by continued use, has been duly accepted as a public
street by the City, and which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
12-2-220 Structural Alterations
Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams
or girders.
12-2-221 Structure
The word "structure" shall mean anything constructed or erected which is either located on
the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground.
12-2-222 Subdivision
The division of a tract, lot, or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites or other
divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building
development, provided that this definition shall not include a bona fide division of
agricultural land into units of five or more acres for agricultural purposes.
12-2-223 Travel Trailers
A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, which is designed or used for human habitation, and
for travel or recreational purposes, which does not at any time exceed eight (8) feet in width
and forty (40) feet in length and which may be moved upon a public highway without a
special permit or chauffeur's license or both, without violating any statutes relating to
vehicles.
12-2-224 Twin House
Two dwelling units along a common lot line under separate ownership with not more than
one common wall.
12-2-224.5 Urban Chickens
Chickens kept for non-commercial food production or for recreational
purposes. This definition does not include roosters. Urban chickens may be kept
in designated zones as a conditional use as set forth in Chapter 21 of this Title.
12-2-225 Use
The purpose for which premises or a building therein is designed, arranged or intended, or
the manner in which it is occupied or maintained, or an activity carried out on real property
on a continuous or repetitive basis.
12-2-226 Use, Accessory
(See the definition for "Accessory Use")
12-2-227 Use, Conditional
A use or occupancy of a building, or use of land, permitted only when authorized upon
issuance of a conditional Use Permit and subject to the limitations and conditions specified
therein as provided in Chapter 21 of this Ordinance, which is intended to allow compatible
integration of uses which may be suitable only in certain locations within a particular zone,
or only upon certain conditions and/or design criteria being achieved.
12-2-228 Veterinary Hospital
An establishment for the care and treatment of animals including household pets, livestock,
and commercial poultry, with all facilities within a completely enclosed building, except for
exercising runs and the parking of automobiles.
12-2-229 Yard
The word "yard" shall mean a space on a lot or parcel other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upwards by buildings, except as otherwise provided in this
Title.
12-2-230 Yard, Front
An area extending across the full width of a lot or parcel, having at no point a depth of less
than the minimum required horizontal distance between the front lot line, or its tangent, and
the closest permissible location of the main building. Said distance shall be measured by a
line at right angles to the front
lot line, or its tangent.
12-2-231 Yard, Rear
"Rear Yard" shall mean a space extending across the full width of a lot or parcel, having at
no point a depth of less than the minimum required horizontal distance as measured from the
part of the main building nearest the rear lot line towards the rear lot line, and such
measurement shall be along a line representing the shortest distance between said part of the
main building and rear lot line. The required rear yard shall be that portion of the rear yard
contiguous to the rear lot line having at no point a depth less than that required for the rear
yard. The area to the rear of the rear lot line of an interior triangular or gore-shaped lot shall
be considered a part of the required rear yard.
12-2-232 Yard, Side
A space on the same lot with a building between the side line of the building and the side lot
line and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. The "width" of the side yard shall be
the minimum distance between the side lot line and the side line of the building.
12-2-233 Zone
An area of the incorporated territory of the City of Woods Cross, exclusive of streets, alleys,
and other public ways, to which the requirements of this Title apply governing the
regulations and restriction of the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or
use of buildings or structures, or the use of land.

Chapter 12-3. Master Plan
12-3-101 Recital of Adoption
12-3-102 Conformity Required
12-3-103 Amendment
12-3-101 Recital of Adoption
The Planning Commission has recommended and the City Council
has adopted by resolution a master plan for the City in the manner
required by applicable law.
12-3-102 Conformity Required
No street or other public way, and no park, ground, place, or
space, no public building or structure, and no public utility,
whether publicly or privately owned, shall be constructed or
authorized until and unless the location and extent thereof shall
conform to the master plan, and shall have been submitted to and
approved by both the Planning Commission and City Council in the
manner provided in this Title, including the provisions relating
to Site Plan Review. In the event the Planning Commission
disapproves such a submission, the disapproval may be appealed to
the City Council, which has power to overrule the Planning
Commission's disapproval pursuant to Utah Code Annotated 10-9-21.
12-3-103 Amendment
The master plan may be amended from time to time by
resolution of the City Council in consideration of one or more
public hearings and recommendations of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
Chapter 12-4 Zoning Administration
12-4-101 Planning and Zoning Commission
12-4-102 Board of Adjustment
12-4-103 City Planner
12-4-104 Zoning Enforcement
Section 12-4-101 Planning and Zoning Commission
There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Woods Cross (the
"Planning Commission") which shall consist of seven (7) members. Members of the Planning
Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council of the
City of Woods Cross. No compensation shall be paid to the members of the Planning Commission
except for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as members of the
Planning Commission. Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed for staggered
terms with each member's term to run for 4 years. Any vacancy occurring on said Commission by
reason of death, resignation, removal or disqualification shall promptly be filled by the Mayor and
City Council for the unexpired term of such member. The City Council may remove any member
of the Planning Commission for cause, upon written notice of such removal to the person or persons
being removed.
(A) Commission Organization and Meetings. At the first regular Planning Commission
meeting held in each calendar year, the members shall select from their number a
Chairman and such other officers as they deem necessary in carrying out the
functions of the Planning Commission and shall adopt such rules and regulations for
the conduct of business before the Commission as they deem appropriate which
rules and regulations may be modified and/or amended at any time by the Planning
Commission at any of its regular meetings. Meetings of the Commission shall be
held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Commission may
determine in accordance with the law. Meetings of the Planning Commission shall
be open to the public, unless closed in accordance with law. Four members of the
Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Minutes shall be taken at the Planning Commission meetings and minutes
containing the official acts and recommendations of the Planning Commission shall
constitute public records and shall be available for inspection upon reasonable notice
at reasonable times at City Hall. Reports of official acts of the Planning
Commission shall be made in writing and shall indicate how each member of the
Commission voted with respect to such acts or recommendations as the Commission
may from time to time make.
(B) Functions and Duties. It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Commission,
after holding public hearings, to make and certify to the governing body a master
plan for the physical development of the City, including the areas outside of its
boundaries which, in the Commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of
the City. Where the plan involves territory outside the boundaries of the City, action
shall be taken with the concurrence of the county or other municipal legislative body
concerned. The master plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and
descriptive and explanatory matter, shall show the Planning Commission's
recommendations for the said physical development, and may include, among other
things, the general location and extent of streets. The Planning Commission may
from time to time amend, extend or add to the plan or carry any part or subject
matter into greater detail. It shall be the function and the duty of the Planning
Commission and it shall have the power to make, adopt and certify to the City
Council a zoning plan including the text of the zoning ordinances and maps
representing the Planning Commission's recommendations for the regulations by
district or zones the location, height, bulk, number of stories, size of building, and
other structures, the percentage of the lot which may be occupied, the size of the
yard, courts and other spaces, the density and distribution of population and the use
of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residential, recreation,
commercial business, or other purposes from and after the time when a zoning
ordinance has been enacted by the City Council and the official map has been
recorded in the office of the City Recorder. No permit shall be issued by the
building inspector for any building or structure or part thereof on any land located
within the boundaries of the zoning map which would be in violation of the
recommendations of the Planning Commission as shown on such official map. Any
person aggrieved by his or her inability to obtain a building permit may appeal to the
Board of Adjustment. The foregoing list of functions and duties of the Commission
shall not be construed as all inclusive and the Planning Commission shall have such
additional powers and duties as are duly authorized under the laws of the State of
Utah for Planning Commissions.
(C) Changes and Amendments. The zoning ordinances, including the maps, may from
time to time be amended by the City Council after giving fifteen (15) days notice of
a public hearing, but all such proposed changes and amendments shall first be
proposed by the Planning Commission or shall be submitted to that Commission for
its consideration prior to action by the City Council. With respect to any proposed
amendments, the Planning Commission shall within thirty (30) days time after
which the proposed amendment is referred to such Commission report its approval
or disapproval or recommendations with regard to such proposed amendment to the
City Council. The Planning Commission may request that the City Council grant an
extension of time for an in-depth study of the proposed amendment but must show
cause why such additional study is necessary on making such request. Failure of the
Planning Commission to submit a report or to request an extension of time within
the prescribed time shall be deemed approval by the Planning Commission of such
proposed change or amendment. The City Council may adopt, reject or accept in
part the recommendations of the Planning Commission by a majority vote of the
members of the City Council.
(D) Street Plan. From and after the time when the Planning Commission shall have
adopted a major street plan, the City Council may establish an official map of the
whole or part of the municipality theretofore existing and established by law as
public streets. Such official map may also show the location of the lines of streets
from plats of subdivisions which shall have been approved by the Planning
Commission. The City Council may make, from time to time, other additions to or
modifications of the official street extensions, widenings, narrowings, or vacations
which have been accurately surveyed and definitely located. Before taking any such
action, the City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon and provided further,
that such proposed addition to or modification of the official map shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission for its approval. In the event the Planning Commission
disapproves such additions or modifications shall require a favorable vote of not less
than a majority of the membership of the City Council. The placing of any street or
street lines upon the official map shall not in and of itself constitute or be deemed to
constitute the opening or establishment of any street or taking or accepting of any
land for street purposes. In order to preserve the integrity of the official map, no
permit shall be issued for any kind of building or structure or part thereof on any
land located between the mapped lines of any street as shown on the official map.
Any person aggrieved by his inability to obtain such permit may appeal to the Board
of Adjustment.
(E) Subdivision Control. From and after the time when the Planning Commission shall
have adopted a major street plan and shall have certified the same to the City
Council, no plat of a subdivision of land lying within the City shall be filed or
recorded in the County Recorder's office until it shall have been submitted to and
approved by the Planning Commission and the City Council, and such approval
entered in writing on the plat by the representative of the Planning Commission and
the City Council. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without such
approval shall be void. The Planning Commission shall prepare regulations
covering the subdivision of land within the City. The City Council shall hold a
public hearing on the subdivision regulations and thereafter may adopt said
regulations for the City. Whoever being the owner of or authorized agent of the
owner of land located in the subdivision within any area of Woods Cross City for
which a major street plan has been adopted by the Planning Commission and the
City Council, except for land located in a recorded subdivision, transfers and sells
such land without first preparing a subdivision plat and having such plat approved
by the Planning Commission and City Council and recorded in the office of the
Davis County Recorder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each lot so transferred
or sold; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or
other documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the
transaction from such penalties, except that in subdivisions of less than ten (10) lots,
land may be sold by metes and bounds, without the necessity of recording of a plat if
all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The subdivision lay-out shall have been first approved in writing by
the Planning Commission;
(2) The subdivision is not traversed by the mapped lines of a proposed
street as shown on any official map or maps of the City, and does not
require the dedication of any land for street for other public purposes,
and
(3) If the subdivision is located in a zoned area, each lot in the
subdivision meets the frontage, width, density and area requirements
of the zoning ordinance or has been granted a variance from such
requirements by the Board of Adjustments. The City may enjoin
such transfer or sale by action for injunction and may pursue criminal
sanctions.
(F) Inspections. The Planning Commission, its members and designees and staff, in the
performance of its functions, may enter upon any land at reasonable times to make
examinations, survey, place and maintain necessary monuments and markers
thereon.
(G) Governmental Immunity. The members of the commission shall be deemed
included in the definition of "Employee" found in Utah Code Annotated Section 63-
30-2.
(H) Variances to Official Map. In order to preserve the integrity of the official map,
no building permit shall be issued for any building or structure or part thereof on
any land located between the mapped lines of any street as shown on the official
map. Any person aggrieved by his or her inability to obtain such a permit may
make application to the Commission for approval of a permit. Before taking any
action on the application, the Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon.
(1) The Commission shall have the power to authorize the grant of a
permit for a building or structure or part thereof within any mapped
street location in any case in which the Commission finds:
(a) That the property of which such mapped street location forms a
part, will not yield a reasonable return to the owner unless such
permit be granted, and
(b) That, in balancing the interest of the City in preserving the
integrity of the official map and maintaining safe travel on the
streets of the City, the interests of the owner in the use and
benefits of the property, as well as the interests of adjacent
property owners, the grant of such permit is required by
consideration of justice and equity.
(2) In the event the Commission decides to authorize the grant of a
building permit (subject to compliance with applicable building
codes), it shall have the power to specify the exact location, ground
area, height, and other details and conditions of extent and character
and also the duration of the building, structure or part thereof to be
permitted.
(3) Anyone aggrieved by a decision of the Commission under this
subsection may appeal said decision to the Hearing Officer described
in Section 12-4-102(2).
(I) Special Permits. The Commission may, in appropriate cases, after public notice
and hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, determine and
vary the application of the use of district and zone regulations established in this
Title in harmony with their general purpose and intent as follows:
(1) Permit the extension of a use into a more restricted use, district or zone
immediately adjacent thereto where the boundary line divides a lot in
single ownership as shown of record at the time of passage in this
Title; such use may extend to the entire lot, provided that in no case
shall the use be extended to more than fifty (50) feet beyond the
boundary line of such district or zone in which such use is authorized.
(2) Permit in a residential district a temporary building for commerce or
industry which is incidental to the residential development, such
permit to be issued for a period of not to exceed one (1) year.
(3) Anyone aggrieved by a decision of the Commission under this
subsection may appeal said decision to the Hearing Officer described
in Section 12-4-102(2).
12-4-102 Appeal Authority Created – Rules, Regulations and Procedures
(1) Legal Authority. Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-9a-701, the City is required to
establish one or more appeal authorities to hear and decide requests for variances from the terms
of the land use ordinances of the City, appeals from decisions applying the land use ordinances
of the City, and appeals from a fee charged in accordance with U.C.A. §10-9a-510. The timely
and specific appeal to the appeal authority described in this chapter, and the exhaustion of
administrative remedies, shall be conditions precedent to judicial review of any decision.
(2) Creation of Appeal Authority, Qualification, Selection. The City creates the position of land
use hearing officer (the “Hearing Officer”) as an appeal authority for the City. The City may
appoint one or more Hearing Officers to ensure availability as required for the efficient
disposition of appeals brought under this title. The City Council shall continue to act as an
appeal authority where expressly required by this Title; all other matters shall be heard by the
Hearing Officer.
(a) The Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of
the City Council.
(b) The Hearing Officer shall be or have been a professional in law, land use, or public
administration, and shall have the knowledge, training and experience necessary to effectively
conduct administrative hearings regarding variances and appeals of land use decisions, including
knowledge and familiarity with the requirements of constitutional due process.
(c) The Hearing Officer shall not be a member of the City Council, Planning
Commission, City staff or any other elected or appointed official of the City.
(d) The Hearing Officer shall serve for a term of one year, or as defined in a written
agreement with the City. The initial term may be extended from time to time by the Mayor. The
Hearing Officer serves at the pleasure of the City; and with the advice and consent of the City
Council may be dismissed by the Mayor with or without cause.
(3) Powers and Duties. The Hearing Officer shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by
law and by this title, including to hear and decide appeals from decisions applying the City’s
land use ordinance, requests for variances from the terms of the land use ordinance, and appeals
from any fee imposed by the City under this title. The Hearing Officer shall act in a quasijudicial
matter, and consistent with the requirements of this Chapter, shall serve as the City’s
final arbiter of issues involving land use ordinances as described in this title.
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, the Hearing Officer is authorized to hear and
decide appeals from any final order, requirement, determination or decision of the Community
Development Director or the Planning Commission related to the application of the zoning
ordinance.
(b) The hearing officer is not authorized to hear appeals of conditional use,
nonconforming use, or site plan decisions made by the Planning Commission or the Community
Development Director. Appeals of such conditional use, nonconforming use or site plan
decisions shall be taken to the City Council; the time requirements, evidentiary requirements and
procedures of such an appeal shall follow the rules established in this Chapter.
(c) The Hearing Officer may not hear or decide an appeal of any legislative act of the
City Council, including without limitation, zoning ordinance amendments. Except as expressly
provided in the sections below on variances, the Hearing Officer may not waive or modify the
terms or requirements of the zoning ordinance.
(4) Hearings, Rules and Decisions. Hearings before the Hearing Officer are convened on a case
by case basis when the City Recorder has received an application for a variance or a notice of
appeal of a land use decision. Upon the filing of an appeal, the Director of Community
Development shall forthwith transmit to the Hearing Officer all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(a) The Hearing Officer may adopt rules for the regulation of his/her procedures and the
conduct of his/her duties. Such rules shall be consistent with state law and with the provisions of
this code, and shall be approved by the City Council.
(b) The Hearing Officer may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
(c) All meetings of the Hearing Officer shall comply with the requirements of the Utah
Open and Public Meetings Act, U.C.A. § 52-4-101, et seq.
(d) Decisions of the Hearing Officer become effective on the date the hearing officer
issues a written decision, unless a different time is designated at the time the decision is made.
(e) Any decision of the Hearing Officer shall be served on all parties to the proceeding,
and may be posted as required for public notice.
(5) Appeals Process, Notice of Appeal. The applicant, a board or officer of the City, or any
person adversely affected by a decision administering or interpreting a land use ordinance may,
within ten days of the date of the final decision, appeal that decision to the Appeal Authority by
alleging that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the land
use authority in the administration or interpretation of the land use ordinance. The appeal shall
be filed, in writing, with the office of the City Recorder, and shall state with specificity the
reasons for the appeal.
(a) An appellant or adversely affected party must first present to the land use authority
any and all information pertinent to its land use application or request. On appeal, the appellant
may not bring new information for consideration by the Hearing Officer that has not first been
presented to the land use authority during its consideration of the matter.
(b) An appellant or adversely affected party shall present to the Hearing Officer every
theory for relief that it can raise in district court.
(c) An appellant or adversely affected party bears the burden to prove, by substantial
evidence, that there is error in in any order, requirement, decision, or determination in the
administration or interpretation of the land use ordinance.
(d) The Hearing Officer shall presume that the decision that is being appealed is correct,
and shall only modify the decision if there is substantial evidence presented to the Hearing
Officer that the Community Development Director or Planning Commission erred in its
application or interpretation of the land use ordinances.
(i) When presented with legal issues, the Hearing Officer shall apply a
correctness standard to its review. Inasmuch as no specialized knowledge is
necessary to make such a determination, no deference is given to the land use
authority.
(ii) When presented with factual issues, the Hearing Officer shall apply an
arbitrary and capricious standard to its review, and the decision of a land use
authority shall not be disturbed if there is substantial evidence in the record that
discloses a reasonable basis for its decision. Inasmuch as land use authorities and
administrative officials have specialized knowledge in the field of planning and
land use and are expected to implement the goals and policies of the City, they
should be allowed a comparatively wide latitude of discretion. Their decisions
should be disturbed only if the Hearing Officer determines that the decision is
arbitrary, capricious or illegal.
(e) An appeal stays all proceedings in the action that is the subject of the appeal. In the
event a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, the party seeking protection from
imminent peril may seek an expedited ruling from the Hearing Officer or may seek immediate
relief from the district court.
(f) Proceedings and hearings before the Hearing Officer shall be in conformance with the
general principles of due process.
(g) The person or entity filing the appeal may appear at such hearing in person, by agent,
or by an attorney of his/her choice and may present to the Hearing Officer any evidence or
argument to support the contentions on appeal.
(h) The land use authority that rendered the decision that is being appealed shall appear
and present any evidence or argument it finds necessary to justify its decision.
(i) The Hearing Officer shall cause a record of its proceedings to be kept, including a
recording of all evidentiary proceedings and all oral arguments of the parties, and shall make
written findings and conclusions of all of its decisions.
(6) Review of the Land Use Authority’s Record. The Hearing Officer’s review of any decision
of a land use authority shall be confined to the administrative record developed by the land use
authority, unless the Hearing Officer determines that the record is incomplete or deficient. If the
Hearing Officer determines that the record is incomplete or deficient, the Hearing Officer may
review the matter de novo.
(6) Variances. Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the requirements of this
title as applied to a parcel of property that such person owns, leases or in which such person
holds some other beneficial interest may apply to the Hearing Officer for a variance from the
terms of this title.
(a) The appeal authority may grant a variance only if:
(i) literal enforcement of the ordinance would cause an unreasonable hardship for
the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general purpose of the land use
ordinances;
(ii) there are special circumstances attached to the property that do not generally
apply to other properties in the same zone;
(iii) granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial property
right possessed by other property in the same zone;
(iv) the variance will not substantially affect the general plan and will not be
contrary to the public interest; and
(v) the spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial justice done.
(b)
(i) In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance would
cause unreasonable hardship under Subsection (2)(a), the appeal authority may
not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship:
(A) is located on or associated with the property for which the variance is
sought; and
(B) comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from
conditions that are general to the neighborhood.
(ii) In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance would
cause unreasonable hardship under Subsection (2)(a), the appeal authority may
not find an unreasonable hardship if the hardship is self-imposed or economic.
(c) In determining whether or not there are special circumstances attached to the property
under Subsection (2)(a), the appeal authority may find that special circumstances exist only if the
special circumstances:
(i) relate to the hardship complained of; and
(ii) deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in the same zone.
(d) The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all conditions justifying a variance
have been met.
(e) Variances run with the land.
(f) The appeal authority may not grant a use variance.
(g) In granting a variance, the appeal authority may impose additional requirements on
the applicant that will:
(i) mitigate any harmful effects of the variance; or
(ii) serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived or modified.
(7) Effective Date – Final Decision – Appeal to District Court. The decision of the Hearing
Officer shall take effect on the date when it issues a written decision, or at a different time as
may be designated in the written decision. A written decision of the Hearing Officer constitutes
a final decision under U.C.A. §§ 10-9a-801(2)(a) and 10-9a-801(4). A person adversely affected
by a final decision of the Hearing Officer shall file a petition for review with the District court
within 30 days after the date of the decision.
(8) Ex Parte Communications – Penalty. It shall be unlawful for any individual, including the
party bringing the appeal or requesting a variance, to discuss substantive matters pertaining to a
pending appeal or variance with the Hearing Officer. Violation of this section shall be a Class C
Misdemeanor. The requirements of this section shall not apply to proceedings and
communications during a properly scheduled public meeting or hearing for consideration of the
appeal or variance, communications where all parties are present and given an opportunity to
speak, or to a discussion limited to procedural matters not related to the substance of the
proceedings, such as the date, time or place of the hearing.
(9) Governmental Immunity. The Hearing Officer shall be considered an appointed official and
shall be entitled to all of the protections of the Utah Governmental Immunity Act.
(10) Compensation – Contract. Terms for compensation and reimbursement shall be
memorialized by written contract with the administrative hearing officer. The written contract
required by this section shall be approved and adopted by the City Council.
(11) District Court Review of Appeal Authority Decisions. Any person adversely affected by
any decision of the Hearing Officer may petition the district court for a review of the decision.
(a) No person may file a petition for review of the Hearing Officer’s decision unless he
has first exhausted his administrative remedies.
(b) The petition to the district court may allege only that the Hearing Officer’s decision
was arbitrary, capricious, or illegal.
(c) The petition shall be filed within thirty days after the Hearing Officer’s decision.
However, the time for filing an appeal to the district court is stayed by the filing of a request for
arbitration of a constitutional taking issue with the Utah Property Rights Ombudsman under
U.C.A. § 13-43-204; in which event, a petition shall be filed within thirty days after completion
of proceedings before the Ombudsman.
(d) The Hearing Officer shall transmit to the district court the record of its proceedings
including a transcript of all proceedings, all documentary evidence received at the hearing, and a
copy of the Hearing Officer’s rulings, findings, and orders. The transcript shall be made by a
person authorized to make certified transcripts of recorded proceedings, and shall bear a
certification that the transcript is a true and correct copy of the proceedings before the Hearing
Officer.
(i) If a transcript is made of the proceedings before the Hearing Officer, the
district court’s review is limited to the record. The district court shall affirm the
decision of the Hearing Officer if the decision is supported by substantial
evidence in the record and is not arbitrary, capricious, or illegal.
(ii) If there is no record of the proceedings before the Hearing Officer, the appeal
to the district court shall be a de novo appeal.
(e) The district court may hear only those issues and theories for relief that are raised in
the proceedings before the Hearing Officer.
(f) The filing of a petition with the district does not stay the decision of the Hearing
Officer unless the Hearing Officer determines, in writing, that a stay is in the best interests of the
City or that enforcement of the ruling would cause imminent peril to life or property. This
section shall not preclude a party from seeking a stay from the district court.
(g) The court shall affirm the decision of the Hearing Officer if the decision is supported
by substantial evidence in the record and is not arbitrary, capricious, or illegal.
(12) The Community Development Director may, with the advice and consent of the Planning
Commission and the City Council, develop a graphical matrix to show the powers and duties of
each land use authority within the City, the appeal authority for decisions of the land use
authority, and the time for appeal of any decision.
12-4-103 City Planner
The position of "City Planner" is hereby created. The City Planner shall be appointed by the
City Council with the approval of the Planning Commission and is hereby charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Title.
(A) Zoning Ordinance Interpretation. The City Planner is authorized to interpret the
Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map.
(B) Comprehensive Plan. The City Planner shall assist the Planning Commission in all
matters requiring interpretation of the goals and policies of the Master Plan. The
City Planner shall assure that the Master Plan, including any maps, overlays, and
other illustrative graphic material, remain current and accurate.
(C) Planning Commission Administration. The City Planner shall provide
administrative services to the Planning Commission. It shall be the duty of the City
Planner to prepare the agenda for all regular meetings of the Planning Commission
and assure that it is published, mailed, and displayed in compliance with applicable
law and Planning Commission procedures. The City Planner shall attend all regular
meetings of the Commission and any special meetings as may be required by the
Commission.
(D) Certificates, Permits, and Reviews. Application for all certificates, permits, and
reviews shall be made at the Office of the City Planner. Applications shall be made
on the respective forms provided and shall be accompanied by the proper fee and
required documents. Issuance of certificates, permits, and reviews shall proceed as
provided in these Ordinances.
(E) Zoning Review. The City Planner shall review all applications for a building permit
and other permits, licenses, or certificates to assure compliance with zoning
regulations.
(F) Site Plan Review. The City Planner shall receive all submittals for site plan review.
The City Planner shall assure that submittals are complete and placed upon the
Planning Commission's agenda for timely review.
(G) Conditional Use Permit. The City Planner shall receive applications for a
conditional use permit. He shall assure that applications are complete and placed
upon the Planning Commission's agenda for timely review. The City Planner shall
issue a conditional use permit after review and approval by the Planning
Commission in consideration of the prior recommendation of the Planning
Commission. He shall assure that all conditions imposed by the Planning
Commission appear on the permit form.
(H) Industrial Performance Standards. The City Planner shall inform the Environmental
Health Services Section of the State Division of Health of all applicants for
conditional use permits in Industrial Districts. The City Planner may initiate an
investigation of any suspected violation of the industrial performance standards.
The City Planner shall initiate enforcement of a violation of these standards.
(I) As used herein and elsewhere in the City Code, the terms “City Planner” and
“Community Development Director” shall be synonymous.
12-4-104 Zoning Enforcement.
(A) Enforcement. The City Planner or his designee shall enforce all of the provisions of
this Zoning Ordinance. He shall inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings in
course of construction, alteration or repair, and any change in the use of land. If, in
the course of such inspection or otherwise, it shall come to his attention that any
such construction, alteration or repair, or that any use or contemplated use of land is
in violation of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, he shall issue a written stop
order to the person responsible therefor, ordering and directing such person to cease
and desist such construction, alteration, repair or use. He shall report violation of
this Zoning Ordinance to the City Attorney for prosecution and make complaint
thereof before the court or courts having jurisdiction of such violation. He shall
further have power to issue written citations on behalf of the City.
(B) Assistance. The City Planner may call for the assistance of law enforcement
personnel whenever in his opinion such assistance is necessary or advisable in the
investigation of a suspected violation of this Zoning Ordinance.
Chapter 12-5 ZONE ESTABLISHMENT
12-5-101 Declaration of Purpose
12-5-102 Establishment of Zone Districts
12-5-103 Location on Map
12-5-101 Declaration of Purpose
In order to accomplish the purposes of this Title, zones are
established in the City of Woods Cross in accordance with the
Master Plan. Due and careful consideration was given, among other
things, to the relative quantities of land needed for particular
uses and to the suitability of such land for such uses, to
existing and probable future conditions within the City, and to
the character of each of the several zones, the desires of the
affected residents and land owners, all with a view to conserving
the value of the land and encouraging the most appropriate use of
land throughout the City.
12-5-102 Establishment of Zone Districts
To implement the purposes of this Title, the City of Woods
Cross is divided into the following zone districts:
Residential Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . R-1-8
Residential Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . R-l-10
Residential Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . R-2
Residential Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . R-4
Agricultural Zone . . . . . . . . . . . A-l
Restricted Commercial Zone . . . . . . . C-l
General Commercial Zone. . . . . . . . . C-2
Special Use Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . S-1
Airport Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . AP
Light Industrial/Business Park Zone. . . I-l
Light Industrial . . . . . . . . . . . . I-1A
Industrial Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . I-2
12-5-103 Location on Map
The location and boundaries of each of the zones as contained
herein are shown on the map entitled Woods Cross City Zoning Map
and all boundaries, notations, and other data shown thereon, are
hereby incorporated in this Title as if fully set forth herein.
A. Determining Zone Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists
with respect to the precise location of the boundaries of various
zones the following rules shall apply:
(1) Where the boundaries indicated on the Zone Map are
approximately street or alley lines, the center line of
said street or alley shall be construed to be the zone
boundary.
(2) Where the indicated boundaries are approximately
lot lines, said lot lines shall be construed to be the
zone boundary unless otherwise indicated to the contrary
in writing.
(3) Where the indicated boundaries are approximately
canals, water courses, or other clearly defined natural
features, the center lines of such canals or water
boundaries unless otherwise expressly indicated to the
contrary in writing.
(4) In the absence of any street, land survey, lot,
canal water course, or other natural feature or
measurement, the zone boundary shall be determined by
the use of the scale of measurement shown upon the map.
(5) If uncertainty exists after application of the
above rules, the City Planner shall finally determine
the precise location of zone boundaries, in
consideration of the lines shown on the Zoning Map and
the policies and intent of the Master Plan. His
decision may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment.
Amended November 6, 2018
CHAPTER 12-6 RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-1-8
12-6-101 Purpose
12-6-102 Permitted Uses
12-6-103 Conditional Uses
12-6-104 Minimum Lot Standards
12-6-105 Maximum Building Height
12-6-106 Off-Street Parking, Loading and Access
12-6-107 Signs
12-6-108 Site Plan Review
12-6-109 Fencing
12-6-101 Purpose
This zone is established to provide areas within the City of Woods Cross for single-family
dwellings. The regulations of this zone are designed to promote, stabilize and protect an environment
suitable for family life. This zone is characterized by attractively landscaped lots and open spaces with
lawns, shrubs and trees, a minimum of vehicular traffic and quiet neighborhoods.
12-6-102 Permitted Uses
(A) Agriculture
(B) Single-Family Dwelling
(C) Accessory Uses: Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the R-1-8 Zone,
provided they are incident to, and do not substantially alter the
character of, the permitted principal use or structure. Such permitted
accessory uses and structures include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Accessory buildings such as garages, carports, bathhouses, greenhouses,
gardening sheds, recreation rooms, and similar structures which are customarily
used in conjunction with, and incidental to, the principal use or structure.
(2) Swimming Pools
(3) Non-commercial Vegetable and Flower Gardens.
(4) Home Occupations subject to the regulations of Chapter 27 of this Title.
(5) Household Pets
(6) Storage of materials used for construction of a building, including contractor's
temporary office, provided that such use is on the building site or immediately
Amended November 6, 2018
adjacent thereto, and provided further that such use will be permitted only while
construction is actually in progress and 30 days thereafter.
12-6-103 Conditional Uses
(A) Apiaries
(B) Flag Lot
(C) Planned Unit Development
(D) Public Uses
(E) Quasi-Public Uses
(F) Residential Facility for Handicapped or Elderly Persons
(G) Urban Chickens
12-6-104 Minimum Lot Standards
(A) Lot Size: 8,000 square feet.
(B) Lot Frontage: 70 feet.
(C) Front Yard: 25 feet.
(D) Rear Yard: 25 feet.
(E) Side Yard: 8 feet one side and total of 18 feet for both sides; main
buildings only.
(F) Side Yard Corner: 20 feet for all buildings on the side adjacent to the street.
(G) Accessory Building: Accessory Buildings shall be 3 feet or more in the rear
of the main building and at least 1foot form all property
lines; and shall be 15 feet from dwellings on adjacent
lots. Accessory buildings shall not be built over utility
easements that may run along side and rear property
lines. In no case may accessory buildings or structures
cover more than thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard.
12-6-105 Maximum Building Height
(A) Main Buildings shall not exceed two stories with a maximum height of 35 feet.
Amended November 6, 2018
(B) Accessory Buildings shall not exceed the height of the main building and in no event
shall accessory buildings exceed the height of 25 feet.
12-6-106 Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Access
The requirements of Chapter 20 of this Title shall apply to this zone.
12-6-107 Signs
The requirements of the Sign Ordinance of the City shall apply to this zone.
12-6-108 Site Plan Review
The requirements of Chapter 19 of this Title shall be enforced for any uses requiring site plan
review.
12-6-109 Fencing
The requirements of Chapter 21 of this Title shall apply to all fences in this zone.
Amended November 6, 2018
CHAPTER 12-7 RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-1-10
12-7-101 Purpose
12-7-102 Permitted Uses
12-7-103 Conditional Uses
12-7-104 Minimum Lot Standards
12-7-105 Maximum Building Height
12-7-106 Off-Street Parking, Loading and Access
12-7-107 Signs
12-7-108 Site Plan Review
12-7-109 Fencing
12-7-101 Purpose
This zone is established to provide areas within the City of Woods Cross for singlefamily
dwellings. The regulations of this zone are designed to promote, stabilize and protect an
environment suitable for family life. This zone is characterized by attractively landscaped lots
and open spaces with lawns, shrubs and trees, a minimum of vehicular traffic and quiet
neighborhoods.
12-7-102 Permitted Uses
I. Agriculture
(A) Single-Family Dwelling
(B) Accessory Uses: Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the R-1-10
Zone, provided they are incident to, and do not
substantially alter the character of, the permitted principal
use or structure. Such permitted accessory uses and
structures include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Accessory buildings such as garages, carports, bathhouses, greenhouses,
gardening sheds, recreation rooms, and similar structures which are
customarily used in conjunction with, and incidental to, the principal use
or structure.
(2) Swimming Pools
(3) Non-commercial Vegetable and Flower Gardens.
(4) Home Occupations subject to the regulations of Chapter 27 of this Title.
Amended November 6, 2018
(5) Household Pets
(6) Storage of materials used for construction of a building, including
contractor's temporary office, provided that such use is on the building site
or immediately adjacent thereto, and provided further that such use will be
permitted only while construction is actually in progress and 30 days
thereafter.
12-7-103 Conditional Uses
(A) Apiaries
(B) Flag Lot
(C) Planned Unit Development
(D) Public Uses
(E) Quasi-Public Uses
(F) Residential Facility for Handicapped or Elderly Persons
(G) Urban Chickens
12-7-104 Minimum Lot Standards
(A) Lot Size: 10,000 square feet.
(B) Lot Frontage: 85 feet.
(C) Front & Rear Yard: 30 feet.
(D) Side Yard: 8 feet one side and total of 18 feet for both sides; main buildings
only
(E) Side Yard Corner: 20 feet for all buildings on the side adjacent to the street
(F) Accessory Building: Accessory Buildings shall be 3 feet or more in the rear of the
main building and at least 1 foot from all property lines; and
shall be 15 feet from dwellings on adjacent lots. Accessory
buildings shall not be built over utility easements that may run
along side and rear property lines. In no case may accessory
buildings or structures cover more than thirty percent (30%) of
the rear yard.
Amended November 6, 2018
12-7-105 Maximum Building Height
(A) Main Buildings shall not exceed two stories with a maximum height of 35 feet.
(B) Accessory Buildings shall not exceed the height of the main building and in no
event shall accessory buildings exceed the height of 25 feet.
12-7-106 Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Access
The requirements of Chapter 20 of this Title shall apply to this zone.
12-7-107 Signs
The requirements of the Sign Ordinance of the City shall apply to this zone.
12-7-108 Site Plan Review
The requirements of Chapter 19 of this Title shall be enforced for any uses requiring site
plan review.
12-7-109 Fencing
The requirements of Chapter 21 of this Title shall apply to all fences in this zone.
Amended November 6, 2018
CHAPTER 12-8 RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-2
12-8-101 Purpose
12-8-102 Permitted Uses
12-8-103 Conditional Uses
12-8-104 Minimum Lot Standards
12-8-105 Maximum Building Height
12-8-106 Off-Street Parking, Loading and Access
12-8-107 Signs
12-8-108 Site Plan Review
12-8-109 Fencing
12-8-101 Purpose
This zone is established to provide areas within the City of Woods Cross for one and twofamily
dwellings. This zone is intended to have residential densities slightly higher than the R-1
Zones, but to maintain a residential character comparable to that of a single-family residential
area with large landscaped front yards. The regulations of this zone are designed to promote,
stabilize and protect an environment suitable for family life.
12-8-102 Permitted Uses
(A) Agriculture
(B) Single-Family Dwelling
(C) Two-Family Dwelling
(D) Residential Facility for Handicapped or Elderly Persons
(E) Accessory Uses: Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the R-2
Zone, provided they are incident to, and do not
substantially alter the character of, the permitted principal
use or structure. Such permitted accessory uses and
structures include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Accessory buildings such as garages, carports, bathhouses, greenhouses,
gardening sheds, recreation rooms, and similar structures which are
customarily used in conjunction with, and incidental, to the principal use
or structure.
(2) Swimming Pools
Amended November 6, 2018
(3) Non-commercial vegetable and flower gardens.
(4) Household Pets
(5) Storage of materials used for construction of a building, including
contractor's temporary office, provided that such use is on the building site
or immediately adjacent thereto, and provided further that such use will be
permitted only while construction is actually in progress and 30 days
thereafter.
(6) Home Occupations subject to the regulations of Chapter 27 of this Title.
12-8-103 Conditional Uses
(A) Public Uses
(B) Quasi-Public Uses
(C) Condominiums
(D) Urban Chickens
12-8-104 Minimum Lot Standards
All lots shall be developed and all structures and uses shall be placed in accordance with
the following minimum standards.
(A) Lot Size: Single-Family Dwelling: 8,000 sq. ft.
Two-Family Dwelling: 10,000 sq. ft.
(B) Lot Frontage: Single-Family Dwelling: 70 feet
Two-Family Dwelling: 90 feet
(C) Front & Rear Yard 30 feet
(D) Side Yard: 8 feet one side and total of 18 feet for both sides; main buildings
only
(E) Side Yard Corner: 20 feet for all buildings on the side adjacent to the street
(F) Accessory Building: Accessory Buildings shall be 3 feet or more in the rear of the
main building and at least 1 foot from all property lines; and
shall be 15 feet from dwellings on adjacent lots. Accessory
buildings shall not be built over utility easements that may run
Amended November 6, 2018
along side and rear property lines. In no case may accessory
buildings or structures cover more than thirty percent (30% of
the rear yard.
12-8-105 Maximum Building Height
(A) Main Buildings shall not exceed two stories with a maximum height of 35 feet.
(B) Accessory Buildings shall not exceed the height of the main building and in no
event shall accessory buildings exceed the height of 25 feet.
12-8-106 Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Access
The requirements of Chapter 20 of this Title shall apply to this zone.
12-8-107 Signs
The requirements of the Sign Ordinance of the City shall apply to this zone.
12-8-108 Site Plan Review
The requirements of Chapter 19 of this Title shall be enforced for any uses requiring site
plan review.
12-8-109 Fencing
The requirements of Chapter 21 of this Title shall apply to all fences in this zone.
Amended November 6, 2018
CHAPTER 12-9 RESIDENTIAL ZONE R-4
12-9-101 Purpose
12-9-102 Permitted Uses
12-9-103 Conditional Uses
12-9-104 Minimum Lot Standards
12-9-105 Maximum Building Height
12-9-106 Off-Street Parking, Loading and Access
12-9-107 Signs
12-9-108 Site Plan Review
12-9-109 Fencing
12-9-110 Other Requirements
12-9-111 Exception to Minimum Lot Standards for Off-street Parking
12-9-101 Purpose
This zone is established to provide areas within the City of Woods Cross for multiplefamily
dwellings up to 4 units per structure. This zone is intended to provide an attractive setting
for multi-family apartments and one and two family dwellings, which may be harmoniously
blended with existing and new single and two family structures. The regulations of this zone are
designed to promote, stabilize and protect an environment suitable for family life.
12-9-102 Permitted Uses
(A) Agriculture
(B) Dwellings: Single Family, Duplex, Triplex, Fourplex
(C) Residential Facility for Handicapped or Elderly Persons
(D) Accessory Uses: Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the R-4
Zone, provided they are incident to, and do not
substantially alter the character of, the permitted principal
use or structure. Such permitted accessory uses and
structures include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Accessory buildings such as garages, carports, bathhouses, greenhouses,
gardening sheds, recreation rooms, and similar structures which are
customarily used in conjunction with, and incidental to, the principal use
or structure.
(2) Swimming Pools
Amended November 6, 2018
(3) Non-commercial vegetable and flower gardens.
(4) Storage of materials used for construction of a building, including
contractor's temporary office, provided that such use is on the building site
or immediately adjacent thereto, and provided further that such use will be
permitted only while construction is actually in progress and 30 days
thereafter.
(5) Household Pets
(6) Home Occupations subject to the regulations of Chapter 27 of this Title.
12-9-103 Conditional Uses
(A) Planned Dwelling Group
(B) Public Uses
(C) Quasi-Public Uses
(D) Condominiums
12-9-104 Minimum Lot Standards
All lots shall be developed and all structures and uses shall be placed in accordance with the
following minimum standards.
(A) Lot Size 8,000 sq. ft. for the first unit and 2,500 sq. ft. for each
additional unit
(B) Lot Frontage: 80 feet
(C) Front & Rear Yard 30 feet
(D) Side Yard: 8 feet one side and total of 20 feet for both sides; main
buildings only
(E) Side Yard Corner: 20 feet for all buildings on the side adjacent to the street
(F) Accessory Building: Accessory Building: Accessory Buildings shall be 3
feet or more in the rear of the main building and at least
1 foot from all property lines; and shall be 15 feet from
dwellings on adjacent lots. Accessory buildings shall
not be built over utility easements that may run along
Amended November 6, 2018
side and rear property lines. In no case may accessory
buildings or structures cover more than thirty percent
(30%) of the rear yard.
12-9-105 Maximum Building Height
(A) Main Buildings shall not exceed 2 stories with a maximum height of 35 feet.
(B) Accessory Buildings shall not exceed the height of the main building and in no
event shall accessory buildings exceed the height of 25 feet.
12-9-106 Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Access
The requirements of Chapter 20 of this Title shall apply to this zone.
12-9-107 Signs
The requirements of the Sign Ordinance of the City shall apply to this zone.
12-9-108 Site Plan Review
The requirements of Chapter 19 of this Title shall be enforced for any uses requiring site
plan review.
12-9-109 Fencing
The requirements of Chapter 21 of this Title shall apply to all fences in this zone.
12-9-110 Other Requirements
Planned Dwelling Groups. Planned Dwelling Groups are allowed as conditional uses in
the R-4 zone and shall require a conditional use permit and site plan review. In addition to the
requirements of Chapters 18 and 19 of this Title, the following requirements shall also apply to
Planned Dwelling Groups.
(A) The requirements for an individual building lot for each main structure shall be
waived, however, the Planned Dwelling Group must have a minimum yard space
as required in this chapter. A line drawn around the perimeter of the main
buildings and the dwelling groups shall constitute the footprint of the "building"
which must conform to the required set-backs. On corner lots or in Planned
Dwelling Groups that have frontage on more than one public street, the front yard
shall be designated by the developer; EXCEPT that a public street frontage that is
Amended November 6, 2018
less than the required lot width shall not be declared the front yard for the Planned
Dwelling Group.
(B) The development shall cover an area of not less than 1/2 acre and not more than 3
acres.
(1) No residential building shall face the rear of another building on the same
development site.
(2) An open space of at least 15 feet shall be maintained between buildings.
(3) The minimum distance between 2 buildings facing each other shall be 30
feet.
(4) No building shall contain more units than specifically allowed in the zone.
(5) All off-street parking spaces, walkways, and driveways shall be hardsurfaced.
(6) Private garages attached or detached or other off-street parking spaces
may not be construed in any required open space.
(7) All buildings shall be served by public sewer and water supply.
(8) The planned dwelling group shall be owned by one person, partnership or
legal entity and shall not be divided and sold as individual buildings.
(9) The minimum usable open space shall be 600 square feet per unit. This is
open space outside of the required front yard that is accessible to all units
and of such dimension to be adequate for general recreational activity
(playgrounds, picnicking, playing outside games, etc.)
(10) The Planning Commission may impose other reasonable conditions as
may be necessary to carry out the intent of these provisions in providing
harmonious grouping of attractive buildings situated on spacious
surroundings.
12-9-111 Exception to Minimum Lot Standards for Off-street Parking
Upon approval by the Planning Commission, and subject to the Parking Design Standards
of this title, the Minimum Lot Standards set forth in Section 12-9-104, above, may be
modified to provide for adequate off street parking, including the construction of carport-style
covered parking structures; provided, however, the plans and drawings shall demonstrate that
Amended November 6, 2018
the construction of all parking structures and related improvements will provide setbacks and
sight lines that will ensure the safe and efficient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
In addition to other requirements, the site plan shall show the location of all parking structures
and all fencing and landscape improvements. Exterior walls shall be prohibited on any
carport parking structure approved under this section. Where required to provide adequate
parking space for a development, the Planning Commission may waive the requirements of
Section 12-20-107 that parking facilities for residential structures must be on the same lot as
the dwelling they serve.
Amended November 6, 2018
CHAPTER 12-10 AGRICULTURE ZONE A-1
12-10-101 Purpose
12-10-102 Permitted Uses
12-10-103 Conditional Uses
12-10-104 Minimum Lot Standards
12-10-105 Maximum Building Height
12-10-106 Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Access
12-10-107 Signs
12-10-108 Site Plan Review
12-10-109 Fencing
12-10-101 Purpose
The Agriculture Zone A-1 is established to provide areas in which agricultural pursuits can
be encouraged and supported within Woods Cross. The A-1 Zone is designed and intended to
protect agriculture uses from encroachment of urban development until such time as residential,
commercial, or industrial uses in such areas become necessary and desirable. Conversion of the
agriculture zone to zones allowing urban uses should be accomplished in an orderly and progressive
manner with no "leap frog" encroachments of such uses or development into agriculture areas.
12-10-102 Permitted Uses
A. Agriculture
(B) Single Family Dwelling
(C) Horticulture
(D) Accessory Uses:
Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the A-1 Zone, provided they are
incidental to, and do not substantially alter the character of, the permitted principal
use or structure. Such permitted accessory uses include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Accessory buildings such as garages, carports, bathhouses, greenhouses,
gardening sheds, barns, recreation rooms, and similar structures, which are
customarily used in conjunction with, and incidental to, the principal use or
structure.
(2) Swimming Pools
Amended November 6, 2018
(3) Home Occupations subject to the regulations of Chapter 27 of this Title.
(4) Household Pets
(5) Storage of Material used for construction of a building, including contractor's
temporary office, provided that such use is on the building site or
immediately adjacent thereto, and provided further that such use will be
permitted only while construction is actually in progress and 30 days
thereafter.
12-10-103 Conditional Uses
(A) Agriculture Industry
(B) Apiaries
(C) Grazing and Pasturing
(D) Public Uses
(E) Quasi-Public Uses.
12-10-104 Minimum Lot Standards
All lots shall be developed and all structures and uses shall be placed in accordance
with the following minimum standards:
(A) Lot Size: 1 acre
(B) Lot Frontage: 100 feet
(C) Front & Rear Yard: 30 feet
(D) Side Yard: 8 feet and a total width of the two required side yards of
18 feet; main buildings only.
(E) Side Yard Corner: 20 feet for all buildings on the side adjacent to the street.
(F) Accessory Buildings: Accessory Building shall be 3 feet or more in the rear of
the main building and at least 1 foot from all property
lines; and shall be 15 feet from dwellings on adjacent lots.
(Accessory buildings shall not be built over utility
easements that may run along side and rear property lines.)
Amended November 6, 2018
12-10-105 Maximum Building Height
(A) Main Buildings shall not exceed two stories with a maximum height of 35 feet.
(B) Accessory Buildings shall not exceed 25 feet.
12-10-106 Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Access
The requirements of Chapter 20 of this Title shall apply to this zone.
12-10-107 Signs
The requirements of the Sign Ordinance of the City shall apply to this zone.
12-10-108 Site Plan Review
The requirements of Chapter 19 of this Title shall be enforced for any uses requiring site
plan review.
12-10-109 Fencing
The requirements of Chapter 21 of this Title shall apply to all fences in this zone.
CHAPTER 12-11 RESTRICTED COMMERCIAL ZONE C-1
12-11-101 Purpose
12-11-102 Permitted Uses
12-11-103 Conditional Uses
12-11-104 Area Density Requirements
12-11-105 Lots Frontage
12-11-106 Lot Coverage
12-11-107 Minimum Lot Standards
12-11-108 Building Height
12-11-109 Off-Street Parking, Loading and Access
12-11-110 Signs
12-11-111 Site Plan Review
12-11-112 Fencing
12-11-113 Storage/Displays
12-11-114 Storage/Trash
12-11-115 Landscaping
12-11-116 Development Standards
12-11-101 Purpose
The Restricted Commercial Zone is established to provide areas in which the primary use
of land is for commercial and service uses to serve the daily convenience needs of the adjacent
residential neighborhoods. The zone will create a minimum of detriment, hazard or
inconvenience to surrounding residential development.
Each Restricted Commercial Zone shall be small (containing from 1 to 5 acres and will
be located within convenient walking distance from the edge of the surrounding residential areas
it is designed to serve.) It is intended that the C-1 Zone shall be characterized by harmonious
grouping of commercial stores and shops which will be architecturally designed for, and will
function as, an integrated unit. Clean parking lots and attractive well-maintained shops with
appropriate landscaping will also be characteristic of this zone. Lighting will be of relatively low
intensity and low profile with adequate shielding to protect the surrounding residential areas.
The architectural design and character will be compatible with that of the surrounding residential
environment. Uses permitted in the C-1 Zone will be those which will create no detriment to the
surrounding residential areas, and will generally serve only the daily convenience needs of the
residential neighborhood. Dwelling, industry, recreational uses, or other heavy commercial uses,
which tend to thwart and discourage the use of land within the zone for its primary purpose have
been excluded. Typical uses allowed in this zone are small convenience grocery stores, variety
shops, shoe shops, dry cleaning pickup stations, self-service laundries, barber or beauty shops.
This zone may be located in areas deemed appropriate for service by residential neighborhoods.
12-11-102 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-1 Zone:
(A) Bakery, donut shops
(B) Banks, Financial, Real Estate and Insurance Services
(C) Beauty and Barber Shops
(D) Cosmetics
(E) Grocery Stores, Convenience (not supermarkets)
(F) Laundry
(G) Miscellaneous and Professional Services
(H) Retail Trade
(I) Accessory Uses: Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the C-1
Zone, provided they are incidental to, and do not
substantially alter the character of the permitted use or
structure. Such permitted accessory use and structures
include, but are not limited to the following:
(1) Accessory buildings, such as garages, carports, equipment storage
buildings and supply storage which are customarily used in conjunction
with and incidental to a principal use or structure permitted in the C-1
Zone.
(2) Storage of materials used for construction of a building, including the
contractor's temporary office, provided that such use is on the building site
or immediately adjacent thereto and provided further that such shall be
permitted only during construction period and 30 days thereafter.
12-11-103 Conditional Uses
The following uses may be allowed in the Restricted Commercial Zone (C-1) as a
Conditional Use:
(A) Businesses which are determined by the City to be similar and compatible with
the foregoing.
(B) Coin Operated Amusement Center
(C) Condominiums (limited to non-residential only)
(D) Dry Cleaning Pickup/drop off for off-premise cleaning
(E) Fast Food Establishments
(F) Gasoline Services
(G) Miscellaneous Repair Services
(H) Motion Picture Theater
(I) Veterinary
12-11-104 Area Density Requirements
Each single lot or parcel of land in the C-1 Zone shall contain a minimum of 1/2 acre.
12-11-105 Lot Frontage
Each parcel or lot of land in the C-1 Zone shall abut a public street for a minimum
distance of 100 feet.
12-11-106 Lot Coverage
No building, structure or group of buildings with their accessory buildings shall cover
more than 60% of the lot or parcel.
12-11-107 Minimum Lot Standards
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply to the C-1 Zone:
(A) Front Yard: Each yard or parcel in the C-1 Zone
shall have a front yard of not less than 20 feet.
(B) Side Yard: Each yard or parcel of land in the C-1
Zone shall have a side yard of not less than 15 feet
when located adjacent to a residential zone. There
shall be no requirement in those instances where the
side property line abuts a commercial or industrial
zone.
(C) Side Yard- Corner Lots: On corner lots the side
yard contiguous to the street shall not be less than
20 feet in width and shall not be used for vehicular
parking. Said area shall be appropriately landscaped
except those portions devoted to access or
driveway.
(D) Rear Yard: Each lot or parcel land in the C-1 Zone
shall have a rear yard of not less than 15 ft.
12-11-108 Building Height
No lot or parcel of land in the C-1 Zone shall have a building or structure which exceeds
the height of 2 stories with a maximum height of 35 feet.
12-11-109 Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Access
The requirements of Chapter 20 of this Title shall apply to this zone.
12-11-110 Signs
The requirements of the Sign Ordinance of the City shall apply to this zone.
12-11-111 Site Plan Review
The requirements of Chapter 19 of this Title shall be enforced for any uses requiring site
plan review.
12-11-112 Fencing
The requirements of Chapter 21 of this Title shall be apply to all fences in this zone.
12-11-113 Storage/Displays
All materials, supplies, merchandise or other similar matter not on display for direct sale,
rental or leased to the ultimate consumer or user shall be stored within a completely
enclosed building with the C-1 zone, or within the confines of 100% opaque wall or fence
not less than 6 feet high.
12-11-114 Storage/Trash
No trash, garbage, used materials or wrecked, inoperable or abandoned vehicles or
equipment shall be stored in an open area. All such materials shall be kept in fully
enclosed buildings. All structures built to accommodate the storage of trash and garbage
shall be constructed using a design compatible with the primary structure and meeting all
of the architectural design standards outlined in Section 12-11-116.
12-11-115 Landscaping
The requirements of Chapter 24 of this Title shall apply to this zone.
12-11-116 Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply within the C-1 Zone:
(A) Architectural Design.
(1) All buildings within this zone shall be designed by a licensed, professional
architect and all drawings submitted for approvals and/or permits shall
bear the architect's stamp for the State of Utah.
(2) All sides of a building shall receive equal design consideration with
particular attention given to areas exposed to public view.
(3) Building exterior materials visible from the public road shall be 85 percent
brick, stone, stucco, glass, colored decorative block, or stone aggregate.
Decorative aluminum composite metal siding may be used if approved by
the Planning Commission. Corrugated metal siding is prohibited unless
used as a decorative element to accent a particular architectural style if
approved by the Planning Commission. Building exterior materials not
visible from the public street shall in the least case be painted or covered
with a brick veneer or stone aggregate. All buildings within a development
shall possess a similar architectural theme. Building styles and colors
shall be compatible with existing buildings in the area.
(4) Design of building facade facing any public street must be at least equal to
the quality of the front or main entrance to the building.
(5) Buildings shall be designed to relate to grade conditions with a minimum
of grading and exposed foundation walls.
(6) Exterior building materials shall be composed of colors that will be
consistent with the environment.
(7) Mechanical equipment shall be located or screened so as not to be visible
from public and private streets. Screens shall be aesthetically incorporated
into the design of the building whether located on the ground or on the
roof. Rooftops of buildings shall be free of any mechanical equipment
unless completely screened from all points of view along all public streets
by an architectural parapet. Screening materials shall be compatible with
those of the building.
(B) Grading and Drainage. All drainage of water from any lot must follow
applicable City requirements. Drainage shall not be allowed to flow upon
adjacent lots unless an easement for such purpose has been granted by the owner
of the lot upon which the water flows.
A site plan with grading and drainage plans and showing the relationship of all
proposed improvements on the site must be approved by the Planning
Commission and City Council before such activities may begin. Lot grading shall
be kept to a minimum. Roads and development shall be designed for preservation
of natural grade.
(C) Ditches and Canals. Open ditches or canals shall not be allowed within the
project site. The developer shall work with the property owners and irrigation
companies to:
(1) Determine methods of covering, realigning, or eliminating ditches or
canals within or adjoining the development.
(2) Determine the sizes of pipe and culverts required.
(3) Determine responsibility of periodic inspection, cleaning and maintenance
of such ditches, pipes and culverts.
(D) Utilities. All future utility distribution lines shall be underground in the
designated easements. No pipe, conduit, cable, line for water, gas, sewer,
drainage, steam, electricity or any other energy or service shall be installed or
maintained upon any lot (outside of any building) above the surface of the ground
except hoses, movable pipes used for irrigation or other purpose during
construction. Transformers shall be grouped with other utility meters where
possible and screened with vegetation and other appropriate methods.
(E) Lighting. Electrical reflectors, spotlights, floodlights and other sources of
illumination may be used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, signs, parking and
loading areas, provided they are equipped with proper lenses or other devices
concentrating the illumination upon the building, landscaping, signs, parking and
loading areas, on any property, and preventing any bright, direct illumination
upon adjacent property or any public right-of-way. No unshielded lights,
reflectors, or spotlights shall be so located that they are shining towards or are
directly visible from frequently traveled public right-of-way.
CHAPTER 12-12 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE C-2
12-12-101 Purpose
12-12-102 Permitted Uses
12-12-103 Conditional Uses
12-12-104 Area Density Requirements
12-12-105 Lots Frontage
12-12-106 Lot Coverage
12-12-107 Minimum Lot Standards
12-12-108 Building Height
12-12-109 Off-Street Parking, Loading and Access
12-12-110 Signs
12-12-111 Site Plan Review
12-12-112 Fencing
12-12-113 Storage/Displays
12-12-114 Storage/Trash
12-12-115 Landscaping
12-12-116 Development Standards
12-12-117 Approval Standards for Mulit-lot Masterplanned Commercial Developments
12-12-101 Purpose
The General Commercial Zone is established to provide areas in which the primary use of
land is for commercial, service and entertainment uses to serve the daily needs of the
community and surrounding shopping region. These general commercial uses will
consist of either individual structures, or be clustered in neighborhood or regional
shopping centers. It is the intent that the C-2 Zone shall be characterized by harmonious
grouping of commercial stores, shops and centers grouped into an integrated architectural
unit. Clean, well lighted parking lots and attractively well maintained shops with
appropriate landscaping also will be characteristic of this zone.
12-12-102 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted in the C-2 Zone:
I. Athletic & Tennis Club
(A) Automotive Repair - Minor
(B) Auto, Truck, Recreational Vehicle & Equipment Sales & Dealer Service
(C) Banks
(D) Books, Stationary, Art & Hobby Supplies
(E) Drug & Propriety Stores
(F) Fast Foods and Restaurants
(G) Garden Supplies (entirely within a building only)
(H) General Merchandise: Variety Stores and Department Stores
(I) Glass
(J) Hardware
(K) Insurance
(L) Miscellaneous Retail Stores (Including Florist, Donuts, Photo Supplies,
Pet Stores & Similar Retail Stores)
(M) Motion Picture Theaters
(N) Paint
(O) Personal Services (Including Laundry, Photography, Beauty & Barber
Services, Clothing Repair, Shoe Repair, etc.)
(P) Public and public quasi public uses
(Q) Real Estate
(R) Research and Development Activities
(S) Retail Trade
(T) Sporting Goods - Bicycles & Toys
(U) Wallpaper
(V) Any use determined by the Planning Commission to be similar to or
compatible with the description of the C-2 Zone as set forth above or any
of the uses mentioned above.
(W) Accessory Uses: Accessory uses and structures are permitted in the
C-2 Zone, provided they are incidental to, and do
not substantially alter the character of the permitted
use or structure. Such permitted accessory use and
structures include, but are not limited to the
following:
(1) Accessory buildings, such as garages, carports, equipment
storage buildings and supply storage which are customarily
used in conjunction with and incidental to a principal use or
structure permitted in the C-2 Zone.
(2) Storage of materials used for construction of a building,
including the contractor's temporary office, provided that
such use is on the building site or immediately adjacent
thereto and provided further that such shall be permitted
only during construction period and 30 days thereafter.
12-12-103 Conditional Uses
The following uses may be allowed in the General Commercial Zone (C-2) as a
Conditional Use:
(A) Car Washes
(B) Condominiums (limited to non-residential only)
(C) Day Nurseries and Child Care Facilitates
(D) Electric Appliance Repair & Furniture Repair
(E) Gasoline Services
(F) Hotel, Motel
(G) Miniature Golf
(H) Video Games & Coin-Operated Amusements
(I) Outcall Services as defined and conducted in accordance with City Business
Regulations and Zoning Ordinances regarding sexually-oriented businesses
12-12-104 Area Density Requirements
There shall be no minimum lot area requirements in the C-2 Zone except as may be
dictated by off-street parking requirements, adequate circulation, landscaping and
property site utilization.
12-12-105 Lot Frontage
Each parcel or lot of land in the C-2 Zone shall abut a public street for a minimum
distance of 100 ft.
12-12-106 Lot Coverage
No building, structure or group of buildings with their accessory buildings shall cover
more than 60% of the lot or parcel.
12-12-107 Minimum Lot Standards
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply to the C-2 Zone:
(A) Front Yard: Each yard or parcel in the C-2 Zone shall have a front
yard of not less than 20 ft.
(B) Side Yard: None except that each yard or parcel of land in the
C-2 Zone shall have a side yard of not less than 15
ft. when located adjacent to a residential zone.
(C) Side Yard-Corner Lots: On corner lots the side yard contiguous to the street
shall not be less than 20 ft. in width and shall not be
used for vehicular parking. Said area shall be
appropriately landscaped except those portions
devoted to access or driveway.
(D) Rear Yard: Each lot or parcel land in the C-2 Zone shall have a
rear yard of not less than 15 ft.
12-12-108 Building Height
No lot or parcel of land in the C-2 Zone shall have a building or structure which exceeds
the height of 2 stories with a maximum of 35 ft. except as otherwise allowed as a
conditional use by the Planning Commission.
12-12-109 Off-Street Parking, Loading, and Access
The requirements of Chapter 20 of this Title shall apply to this zone.
12-12-110 Signs
The requirements of the Sign Ordinance of the City shall apply to this zone.
12-12-111 Site Plan Review
The requirements of Chapter 19 of this Title shall be enforced for any uses requiring site
plan review.
12-12-112 Fencing
The requirements of Chapter 21 of this Title shall apply to all fences in this zone.
12-12-113 Storage/Displays
All materials, supplies, merchandise or other similar matter not on display for direct sale,
rental or leased to the ultimate consumer or user shall be stored within a completely
enclosed building within the C-2 zone, or within the confines of 100% opaque wall or
fence not less than 6 feet high. Merchandise which is offered for sale as described above
may be displayed beyond the confines of a building in the C-2 Commercial Zone, but the
area occupied by such outdoor display shall not constitute a greater number of square feet
than 10% of the ground floor area of the building housing the principal use, unless such
merchandise is of a type customarily displayed outdoors, such as garden supplies,
automobiles, etc.
12-12-114 Storage/Trash
No trash, garbage, used materials or wrecked, inoperable or abandoned vehicles or
equipment shall be stored in an open area. All such materials shall be kept in fully
enclosed buildings. All structures built to accommodate the storage of trash and garbage
shall be constructed using a design compatible with the primary structure and meeting all
of the architectural design standards outlined in Section 12-12-116.
12-12-115 Landscaping
The requirements of Chapter 24 of this Title shall apply to this zone.
12-12-116 Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply within the C-2 Zone:
I. Architectural Design.
(1) All buildings within this zone shall be designed by a licensed, professional
architect and all drawings submitted for approvals and/or permits shall
bear the architect's stamp for the State of Utah.
(2) All sides of a building shall receive equal design consideration with
particular attention given to areas exposed to public view.
(3) Building exterior materials visible from the public road shall be 85 percent
brick, stone, stucco, glass, colored decorative block, or stone aggregate.
Decorative aluminum composite metal siding may be used if approved by
the Planning Commission. Corrugated metal siding is prohibited unless
used as a decorative element to accent a particular architectural style if
approved by the Planning Commission. Building exterior materials no
visible from the public street shall in the least case be painted or covered
with a brick veneer or stone aggregate. All buildings within a
development shall possess a similar architectural theme. Building styles
and colors shall be compatible with existing buildings in the area.
(4) Design of building facade facing any public street must be at least equal to
the quality of the front or main entrance to the building.
(5) Buildings shall be designed to relate to grade conditions with a minimum
of grading and exposed foundation walls.
(6) Exterior building materials shall be composed of colors that will be
consistent with the environment.
(7) Mechanical equipment shall be located or screened so as not to be visible
from public and private streets. Screens shall be aesthetically incorporated
into the design of the building whether located on the ground or on the
roof. Roof tops of buildings shall be free of any mechanical equipment
unless completely screened from all points of view along all public streets
by an architectural parapet. Screening materials shall be compatible with
those of the building.
(A) Grading and Drainage. All drainage of water from any lot must follow
applicable City requirements. Drainage shall not be allowed to flow upon
adjacent lots unless an easement for such purpose has been granted by the owner
of the lot upon which the water flows.
A site plan with grading and drainage plans and showing the relationship of all
proposed improvements on the site must be approved by the Planning
Commission and City Council before such activities may begin. Lot grading shall
be kept to a minimum. Roads and development shall be designed for preservation
of natural grade.
(B) Ditches and Canals. Open ditches or canals shall not be allowed within the
project site. The developer shall work with the property owners and irrigation
companies to:
(1) Determine methods of covering, realigning, or eliminating ditches or
canals within or adjoining the development.
(2) Determine the sizes of pipe and culverts required.
(3) Determine responsibility of periodic inspection, cleaning and maintenance
of such ditches, pipes and culverts.
(C) Utilities. All future utility distribution lines shall be underground in the
designated easements. No pipe, conduit, cable, line for water, gas, sewer,
drainage, steam, electricity or any other energy or service shall be installed or
maintained upon any lot (outside of any building) above the surface of the ground
except hoses, movable pipes used for irrigation or other purpose during
construction. Transformers shall be grouped with other utility meters where
possible and screened with vegetation and other appropriate methods.
(D) Lighting. Electrical reflectors, spotlights, floodlights and other sources of
illumination may be used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, signs, parking and
loading areas, provided they are equipped with proper lenses or other devices
concentrating the illumination upon the building, landscaping, signs, parking and
loading areas, on any property, and preventing any bright, direct illumination
upon adjacent property or any public right-of-way. No unshielded lights,
reflectors, or spotlights shall be so located that they are shining towards or are
directly visible from frequently traveled public right-of-way.
12-12-117. Approval Standards for Multi-lot Masterplanned Commercial
Developments.
Where a commercial development is comprised of multiple lots or parcels that, individually, do
not meet the requirements of the C-2 Zone, but the project, as a whole, meets the requirements of
this Chapter, the City Council may approve the development under the following circumstances:
(A.) The developer submits to the City a detailed analysis that demonstrates
compliance of the entire project with the standards for the C-2 Zone; including
written descriptions and calculations of the project-wide frontage, lot coverage,
lot standards, loading and access, distances, parking, signs, etc.
(B.) All owners and developers shall submit to the City for its approval a subdivision
plat that demonstrates and guarantees: safe ingress to and egress from the project;
vehicular and pedestrian traffic flow throughout the project on the roadways,
sidewalks and other ways shown on the plat; and vehicular parking throughout the
project as shown on the plat.
(C.) All owners and developers shall present to the City written evidence that all
proposed entry ways and roadways within the development meet the standards of
and have been approved by the South Davis Metro Fire Agency.
(D.) The City may require that all owners and the developers provide other written
instruments, in recordable form, as may be appropriate to demonstrate and
guarantee compliance with the requirements of this Title, and to demonstrate and
guarantee perpetual project-wide compliance with the purposes and requirements
of the C-2 Zone. The instruments that may be required of owners and developers
include, without limitation, development agreements, cross-access agreements,
easements, conditions covenants and restrictions, and other documents deemed
appropriate by the City. These instruments shall be presented to the City for its
approval prior to or contemporaneous with the submission to the City of the
subdivision plat.
Amended November 6, 2018
CHAPTER 12-13 SPECIAL USE ZONE S-1
12-13-101 Purpose
12-13-102 Permitted Uses
12-13-103 Conditional Uses
12-13-104 Single Family and Two-Family Dwellings
12-13-105 Minimum Standards for Other Conditional Uses
12-13-106 Coverage Regulations
12-13-107 Off-Street Parking, Loading and Access
12-13-108 Signs
12-13-109 Site Plan Review
12-13-110 Fencing
12-13-111 Storage/Displays
12-13-112 Storage/Trash
12-13-113 Development Standards
12-13-101 Purpose
This zone is established for areas with characteristics unique from any other area in the
City. These areas are unique because of there proximity to prime access, high visibility,
special development problems, or a strong relationship to existing sensitive land uses. To
define the land uses in these areas within the existing structure of commercial, industrial,
residential and recreation could prove to be too limiting to future development
opportunities as they are currently not well defined, have changed and may continue to
change with current economic and social growth.
To assure safe and pleasing development within the Special Use Zone, and to assure the
close interaction of activities, some uses are excluded or allowed only upon conditional
use review. Public need, safety, circulation, compatibility with surrounding existing and
proposed land uses, architectural character, and impact on existing services and tax base
are critical factors in the review process, and each should be weighed in the decision.
Additional consideration must be given to the impact of nuisances, such as, noise, odor or
lighting on existing and surrounding uses.
It is intended that the creation of the Special Use Zone will curb irrational and sporadic
land uses in the area, and increase the control of the Planning Commission in using the
land for the most appropriate of land uses as development pressure increases.
12-13-102 Permitted Uses
(A) Agriculture
(B) Park
Amended November 6, 2018
12-13-103 Conditional Uses
(A) Apiaries
(B) Athletic or tennis club
(C) Auto, truck recreational vehicle, and equipment sales and dealer service
(D) Business Service
(E) Condominiums
(F) Day Care
(G) Hotel or motel
(H) Office, business and profession
(I) Public and quasi-public uses
(J) Research and development activities
(K) Residential care facility
(L) Restaurants that provide traditional sit down services (as opposed to fast food)
(M) Retirement Living Center
(N) Single family dwelling
(O) Two-family dwelling
(P) Any use determined by the Planning Commission to be similar to the other uses of
12-16-103 and/or compatible with the description of the Special Use Zone as set
forth in 12-16-101.
12-13-104 Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings
The following minimum standards shall apply to single-family and two-family dwellings:
(A) Lot Standards. All lots shall be developed with the following minimum standards:
1. Lot Size: 8,000 square feet single- family, 10,000
square feet two-family
2. Lot Frontage: 70 feet
Amended November 6, 2018
3. Front and Rear Setback: 30 feet
4. Side Yard Setback: 8 feet, one side and total of 18 feet for both
sides, main buildings only; except must have
15 foot set back on any side abutting a
residential zone.
5. Side Yard Corner: 20 feet, on the side adjacent to the street.
6. Accessory Buildings: Shall be 6 feet or more in the rear of the
main building and at least 1 foot from all
property lines; and shall be 15 feet from
dwellings on adjacent lots. Accessory
buildings shall not be built over utility
easements that may run along side and rear
property lines. In no case may accessory
buildings or structures cover more than
thirty percent (30%) of the rear yard.
7. Height Regulations: Main Buildings shall not exceed two stories
with a maximum height of 35 feet.
Accessory Buildings shall not exceed the
height of the main building and in no event
shall accessory buildings exceed the height
of 25 feet. No structure shall have a height
of less than 8 feet 6 inches above grade.
12-13-105 Minimum Standards For Conditional Uses
The lot size, width and yard requirements, setbacks and other standards and maximum
building heights will be determined by the Planning Commission for all conditional uses
in the Special Use Zone. The Planning Commission shall use the provisions of Chapter
18, Conditional Uses to review conditional uses permits. A public hearing before the
Planning Commission shall be required, and the Planning Commission shall use the
regulations of Chapters 11, Restricted Commercial C-1 and Chapter 12, General
Commercial Zone C-2 for all conditional uses similar to those provided in Chapters 11
and 12.
A landscaped berm or sufficient vegetation to act as a screen and buffer, and satisfactory
to the Planning Commission, must be placed between a residential property line and any
use determined to be of a commercial or industrial nature.
12-13-106 Coverage Regulations
Amended November 6, 2018
No building, structure with group of buildings with their accessory buildings, shall cover
more than 60 percent of the area of a lot.
12-13-107 Off-Street Parking, Loading and Access
The requirements of Chapter 20 of this Title shall apply to this zone.
12-13-108 Signs
The requirements of the Sign Ordinance of the City shall apply to this zone.
12-13-109 Site Plan Review
The requirements of Chapter 19 of this Title shall apply to this zone.
12-13-110 Fencing
The requirements of Chapter 21 of this Title shall apply to this zone.
12-13-111 Storage\Displays
All materials, supplies, merchandise or other similar matter not on display for direct sale,
rental or leased to the ultimate consumer or user shall be stored within a completely
enclosed building with the S-1 zone, or within the confines of 100% opaque wall or fence
not less than 6 feet high. Merchandise which is offered for sale as described above may
be displayed beyond the confines of a building in the S-1 Zone, but the area occupied by
such outdoor display shall not constitute a greater number of square feet than 10% of the
ground floor area of the building housing the principal use, unless such merchandise is of
a type customarily displayed outdoors, such as garden supplies, automobiles, etc.
12-13-112 Storage\Trash
No trash, garbage, used materials or wrecked, inoperable or abandoned vehicles or
equipment shall be stored in an open area. All such materials shall be kept in fully
enclosed buildings. All structures built to accommodate the storage of trash and garbage
shall be constructed using a design compatible with the primary structure and meeting all
of the architectural design standards outlined in Section 12-13-113.
12-13-113 Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply within the S-1 Zone:
Amended November 6, 2018
Architectural Design.
(1) All buildings within this zone shall be designed by a licensed, professional
architect and all drawings submitted for approvals and/or permits shall
bear the architect's stamp for the State of Utah.
(2) All sides of a building shall receive equal design consideration with
particular attention given to areas exposed to public view.
(3) Building exterior materials visible from the public road shall be 85 percent
brick, stone, stucco, glass, colored decorative block, or stone aggregate.
Decorative aluminum composite metal siding may be used if approved by
the Planning Commission. Corrugated metal siding is prohibited unless
used as a decorative element to accent a particular architectural style if
approved by the Planning Commission. Building exterior materials not
visible from the public street shall in the least case be painted or covered
with a brick veneer or stone aggregated. All buildings within a
development shall possess a similar architectural theme. Building styles
and colors shall be compatible with existing buildings in the area.
(4) Design of building facade facing any public street must be at least equal to
the quality of the front or main entrance to the building.
(5) Buildings shall be designed to relate to grade conditions with a minimum
of grading and exposed foundation walls.
(6) Exterior building materials shall be composed of colors that will be
consistent with the environment.
(7) Mechanical equipment shall be located or screened so as not to be visible
from public and private streets. Screens shall be aesthetically incorporated
into the design of the building whether located on the ground or on the
roof. Roof tops of buildings shall be free of any mechanical equipment
unless completely screened from all points of view along all public streets
by an architectural parapet. Screening materials shall be compatible with
those of the building.
(A) Landscaping. The requirements of Chapter 24 of this Title shall apply to this
zone.
(B) Grading and Drainage. All drainage of water from any lot must follow
applicable City requirements. Drainage shall not be allowed to flow upon
adjacent lots unless an easement for such purpose has been granted by the owner
of the lot upon which the water flows.
Amended November 6, 2018
A site plan with grading and drainage plans and showing the relationship of all
proposed improvements on the site must be approved by the Planning
Commission and City Council before such activities may begin. Lot grading shall
be kept to a minimum. Roads and development shall be designed for preservation
of natural grade.
(C) Ditches and Canals. Open ditches or canals shall not be allowed within the
project site. The developer shall work with the property owners and irrigation
companies to:
(1) Determine methods of covering, realigning, or eliminating ditches or
canals within or adjoining the development.
(2) Determine the sizes of pipe and culverts required.
(3) Determine responsibility of periodic inspection, cleaning and maintenance
of such ditches, pipes and culverts.
(D) Utilities. All future utility distribution lines shall be underground in the
designated easements. No pipe, conduit, cable, line for water, gas, sewer,
drainage, steam, electricity or any other energy or service shall be installed or
maintained upon any lot (outside of any building) above the surface of the ground
except hoses, movable pipes used for irrigation or other purpose during
construction. Transformers shall be grouped with other utility meters where
possible and screened with vegetation and other appropriate methods.
(E) Lighting. Electrical reflectors, spotlights, floodlights and other sources of
illumination may be used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, signs, parking and
loading areas, provided they are equipped with proper lenses or other devices
concentrating the illumination upon the building, landscaping, signs, parking and
loading areas, on any property, and preventing any bright, direct illumination
upon adjacent property or any public right-of-way. No unshielded lights,
reflectors, or spotlights shall be so located that they are shining towards or are
directly visible from frequently traveled public right-of-way.
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
CHAPTER 12-14 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL/BUSINESS PARK ZONE I-1
12-14-101 Purpose & Objectives
12-14-102 Permitted Uses
12-14-103 Conditional Uses
12-14-104 Accessory Uses
12-14-105 Area and Density Requirements
12-14-106 Lot Frontage
12-14-107 Yard Requirements
12-14-108 Development Standards
12-14-109 Building Height
12-14-110 Uses Within Buildings
12-14-111 Distance Between Buildings
12-14-112 Outside Storage Prohibited
12-14-113 Permissible Lot Coverage
12-14-114 Storage – Trash, Garbage, Etc.
12-14-115 Parking, Loading and Access
12-14-116 Clear Vision and Intersections
12-14-117 Bonds
12-14-118 Signs
12-14-119 Site Plan Review
12-14-120 Development Requirements
12-14-121 Restrictive Covenants
12-14-122 Outside Retail Displays and Outdoor Storage of Retail Products
12-14-101 Purpose and Objectives
The light Industrial/Business Park (I-1) is a zoning district provided to allow light
manufacturing, business parks, professional offices, research and development businesses within
the City, to encourage a productive operating environment for light industry and businesses and
to protect industries within the district from the adverse effects of incompatible uses.
Regulations contained herein are intended to reduce the impact of light industries and business
parks on surrounding non-industrial land uses, to lessen traffic congestion, and to protect the
health and safety of residents and workers in the area and within the City in general. This zoning
district is established to:
Allow light manufacturing, business parks, professional offices, and research and
development businesses in those areas specified in the Master Plan of the City.
(A) Promote aesthetically pleasing light industrial and business park areas.
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
(B) Encourage creation of planned light manufacturing, offices, research and
development parks and complexes exhibiting the qualities of good design and
efficient function to serve the needs of the public.
(C) Regulate the development of the light industrial areas to provide for improved
appearance, protection of adjacent properties, preservation of street functions,
provision of off-street parking and efficient use of municipal services,
(D) Provide areas in the City where light manufacturing firms can engage in
assembling, distribution, office or warehousing activities which are performed
entirely within a building designed and constructed in a manner which does not
cause or produce a nuisance to adjacent properties.
(E) Provide adequate and accessible employment opportunities and light industrial
and business services to City residents and other area residents.
12-14-102 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1 Zone:
(A) Office Buildings for Finance, Insurance, Real Estate, Medical and Dental and
other Professional Service Organizations
(B) Public Parks, Public Recreational Grounds and Buildings; Public Buildings and
Public Utilities
12-14-103 Conditional Uses
(A) Apiaries
(B) Automotive service centers
(C) Banks, credit unions and savings and loans
(D) Business, commercial or light industry which are determined by the City to be
similar and compatible
(E) Canning, processing and preserving of food products
(F) Coating, plating and engraving and allied services
(G) Commercial printing
(H) Condominiums (limited to non-residential only)
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
(I) Grazing and pasturing
(J) Light manufacturing, compounding, processing, milling or packaging of products
(K) Lumber, building products, hardware and home improvement retail stores,
garden center and other nursery-type sales from permanent structures; and other
retail sales from permanent structures.
(L) Manufacture and assembly of communications equipment, electronic component
accessories and electronic computer equipment
(M) Manufacturing of apparel and other finished products made from fabric and
leather
(N) Manufacturing of professional, scientific and controlling instruments and optical
goods
(O) Paint, glass and wall paper manufacture and wholesale and retail sales
(P) Planned business parks
(Q) Planned light industrial parks
(R) Processing, packaging, assembling of products in association with a retail outlet
on the property
(S) Rail spurs for uses incidental to other permitted or approved conditional uses in
the I-1 and I-2 zones. Approval of any rail spur shall require a written
development agreement between the property owner and the City. The
development agreement for a rail spur shall address the issues identified in Woods
Cross City Code § 12-21-121, Supplementary Regulations.
(T) Recreational Facilities
(U) Self-Service Storage Facilities
(V) Wholesale stores or businesses, except for the storage or sale of live animals, and
the storage or sale of commercial explosives
(W) Outcall Services as defined and conducted in accordance with City Business
Regulations and Zoning Ordinances regarding sexually-oriented businesses
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
(X) Sexually-Oriented Businesses as defined and conducted in accordance with City
Business Regulations and Zoning Ordinances regarding sexually-oriented
businesses
12-14-104 Accessory Uses
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to the permitted uses and conditional
uses provided herein may be approved by the City in accordance with the provisions of
this Title.
12-14-105 Area and Density Requirements
Each single lot or parcel of land in an I-1 Zoning District shall contain a minimum of 1
acre.
12-14-106 Lot Frontage
The initial lot or parcel of land in the I-1 Zone shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet
abutting a public street.
12-14-107 Yard Requirements
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply to the I-1 Zone:
(A) Front Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the I-1 Zone shall have a front
yard depth of not less than 30 feet except the Planning
Commission may reduce the front yard to 20 feet if it finds
the yard reduction provides a more attractive and efficient
use of the property and will not be detrimental for any
reason.
(B) Side Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the I-1 Zone shall have a side
yard of at least 30 feet ; the total width of the two
required side yards shall not be less than 70 feet on land
located adjacent to a zoning district other than the I-1
district. There shall be no requirements in those instances
where the side property line abuts another property
located within the I-1 Zone.
(C) Side Yard-Corner Lots: On corner lots, the side yard contiguous to the street shall
be not less than 30 feet except the Planning Commission
may reduce the side yard to 15 feet if it finds the yard
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
reduction provides a more attractive and efficient use of
the property and will not be detrimental for any reason.
(D) Side Yard-Driveways: When used for access to any garage, carport or parking
area having less than five parking spaces, the side yard
shall be wide enough to accommodate an unobstructed 12
foot paved driveway. When used for access to a garage,
carport or parking areas having 6 or more parking spaces,
the side yard shall be wide enough to provide an
unobstructed 12 foot paved driveway for a one-way
traffic, or a 20 foot paved driveway for two-way traffic.
(E) Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of 15 feet for all uses within the
I-1 Zone and in cases where a building is located upon a
lot or parcel adjacent to any zone other than an I-1 or I-2
Zone the rear yard shall be 30 feet. In the event that the
rear of a building faces an arterial or collector street, there
shall be a set back of 30 feet. The Planning Commission
may reduce the rear yard, if in its judgment the yard
reduction provides a more attractive and more efficient
use of the property and will not be detrimental for any
reason.
12-14-108 Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply within the I-1 Zone:
(A) Architectural Design.
(1) All buildings within this zone shall be designed by a licensed, professional
architect and all drawings submitted for approvals and/or permits shall
bear the architect's stamp for the State of Utah.
(2) All sides of a building shall receive equal design consideration with
particular attention given to areas exposed to public view.
(3) Building exterior materials visible from the public road shall be eightyfive
percent (85%) brick, stone, stucco, glass, colored decorative block, or
stone aggregate. Building exterior materials not visible from the public
street shall in the least case be painted or covered with a brick veneer or
stone aggregate. Metal buildings may be permitted if the exterior building
materials standards and other requirements set forth herein are complied
with and the building is approved by the Planning Commission. In
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
determining whether or not a particular metal building is acceptable, the
Planning Commission shall consider the following factors:
(a) the visibility of the site from neighboring residential uses and
adjacent streets;
(b) the degree to which the proposed finished materials are compatible
with the appearance of neighboring industrial structures and uses;
(c) the location of the proposed finishing materials on the building;
(d) the degree to which a particular metal material may be shielded by
landscaping or some other feature;
(e) the purpose of the zone in promoting well designed aesthetically
pleasing industrial uses which reduce the impact of light industries
and business parks on surrounding non-industrial land uses.
All buildings within a development shall possess a similar architectural theme. Building
styles and colors shall be compatible with existing buildings in the area.
(4) Design of building facade facing any public street must be at least equal to
the quality of the front or main entrance to the building.
(5) Buildings shall be designed to relate to grade conditions with a minimum
of grading and exposed foundation walls.
(6) Exterior building materials shall be composed of colors that will be
consistent with the environment.
(7) Mechanical equipment shall be located or screened so as not to be visible
from public and private streets. Screens shall be aesthetically incorporated
into the design of the building whether located on the ground or on the
roof. Roof tops of buildings shall be free of any mechanical equipment
unless completely screened from all points of view along all public streets
by an architectural parapet. Screening materials shall be compatible with
those of the building.
(B) Landscaping. The requirements of Chapter 24 of this Title shall apply to this
Zone.
(C) Grading and Drainage. All drainage of water from any lot must follow
applicable City requirements. Drainage shall not be allowed to flow upon
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
adjacent lots unless an easement for such purpose has been granted by the owner
of the lot upon which the water flows.
A site plan with grading and drainage plans and showing the relationship of all
proposed improvements on the site must be approved by the Planning
Commission and City Council before such activities may begin. Lot grading shall
be kept to a minimum. Roads and development shall be designed for preservation
of natural grade.
(D) Ditches and Canals. Open ditches or canals shall not be allowed within the
project site. The developer shall work with the property owners and irrigation
companies to:
(1) Determine methods of covering, realigning, or eliminating ditches or
canals within or adjoining the development.
(2) Determine the sizes of pipe and culverts required.
(3) Determine responsibility of periodic inspection, cleaning and maintenance
of such ditches, pipes and culverts.
(E) Utilities. All future utility distribution lines shall be underground in the
designated easements. No pipe, conduit, cable, line for water, gas, sewer,
drainage, steam, electricity or any other energy or service shall be installed or
maintained upon any lot (outside of any building) above the surface of the ground
except hoses, movable pipes used for irrigation or other purpose during
construction. Transformers shall be grouped with other utility meters where
possible and screened with vegetation and other appropriate methods.
(F) Lighting. Electrical reflectors, spotlights, floodlights and other sources of
illumination may be used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, signs, parking and
loading areas, provided they are equipped with proper lenses or other devices
concentrating the illumination upon the building, landscaping, signs, parking and
loading areas, on any property, and preventing any bright, direct illumination
upon adjacent property or any public right-of-way. No unshielded lights,
reflectors, or spotlights shall be so located that they are shining towards or are
directly visible from frequently traveled public right-of-way.
12-14-109 Building Height
In the I-1 Zone the height of every building or structure hereinafter designed, erected or
structurally altered or enlarged shall conform to the requirements of the most recent
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
edition of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City and to the requirements of
the Airport Protective area provisions of Chapter 26 of this Title.
12-14-110 Uses Within Buildings
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all uses established in the I-1 Zone shall be
conducted entirely within a fully enclosed building
12-14-111 Distance Between Buildings
The distance between buildings shall be as dictated by the latest edition of the Uniform
Building Code as adopted by the City of Woods Cross.
12-14-112 Business ActivitiesWithin Enclosed Buildings – Outside Storage
Requirements
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter for authorized outdoor storage, and
with the exception of vehicular traffic upon the premises incident to an authorized
use, all business activities within the I-1 Zone shall be conducted entirely within
an approved fully enclosed building.
(B) Subject to the requirements of this section, outside storage is allowed within the I-
1 Zone only when the type and quantity of stored items are incidental to an
authorized use on the premises, and incidental to the specific business activity(ies)
described by an applicant and approved by the City in the site plan and planning
commission review processes.
(1) The purposes and objectives of these regulations governing outside
storage are to minimize and mitigate visual and other impacts of outside
storage within the I-1 Zone upon adjacent properties, public rights-ofway,
residential uses, and publicly accessible spaces of any public or quasipublic
use, and to otherwise promote the health, safety and welfare of
residents of the City.
(2) These regulations are not intended to govern outdoor retail displays or
outdoor storage of retail products.
(3) As used herein, the term “outside storage” shall mean the keeping or
storage of any inventory, goods, material, equipment or merchandise,
including raw, semi-finished, and finished materials for any period of
time, and incidental to the primary approved use of the premises.
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
(4) Planning Commission review and site plan approval shall be required of
any outside storage area. The site plan shall demonstrate that every
purpose and requirement of this Section will be met.
(C) Outside storage of authorized material and equipment shall comply with and be
conditioned upon the following:
(1) Outside storage shall be prohibited on any lot or parcel that abuts a
current or planned residential use as shown on the City’s zoning map and
general plan, as revised.
(2) The area in which outside storage may be conducted shall be behind the
rear line of the primary structure on the premises. Outside storage shall be
prohibited in front or side yard areas.
(3) In order to ensure that the objectives and requirements of this section are
met, the view of material or equipment located in the outside storage area
shall effectively be screened as follows:
(a) The entire perimeter of the outside storage area shall be screened
by a solid wall, built of aesthetically pleasing durable materials
that are architecturally consistent and compatible with the exterior
surface of the primary structure on the premises, such as decorative
concrete, split-face block or masonry surfaces and similar
materials; provided, however, that where the parcel is encumbered
by pipeline easements that prohibit the use of use of materials that
require a concrete footing, the fence may be constructed 100%
opaque sight obscuring lighter-weight materials that will meet the
purposes and intent of this Chapter. Where lighter-weight fencing
materials are proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate the need for
such materials by written confirmation from the holder of the
easement, and use of the same shall be subject to the review and
approval processes of the planning commission.
(b) The height of the solid wall shall be not less than eight (8) feet, and
shall not exceed ten (10) feet; and
(c) The authorized material and equipment kept within the perimeter
of the outside storage area shall be maintained at a height that is
below the height of solid wall.
(4) A landscaping area shall be constructed and maintained on the exterior of
any solid wall that faces a street or public right of way, or that faces any
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
publicly accessible space of a public or quasi-public use. The landscape
area shall be designed and maintained in a manner that will soften the
view of the solid wall. The landscape area shall be at least five (5) feet in
width.
(5) All outside storage areas shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
a manner that will at all times ensure that dust and debris is not blown
from the premises, that appropriate noise mitigation measures are taken,
and to otherwise ensure that the outside storage does not have a negative
impact upon nearby property. The methods for controlling dust and debris
and mitigating other impacts on nearby property shall require hard
surfaces such as concrete or asphalt, shall require surface drainage
systems, and shall otherwise be consistent with requirements imposed as
part of the site plan approval process, which may be based on relevant
factors such as operating hours, soils or other conditions.
(6) Any lighting used to illuminate an outside storage area shall be designed,
directed and shielded to ensure that adjacent residential areas are not
illuminated, and shall meet all other lighting requirements of this Chapter.
(7) The outside storage area shall otherwise meet the Development Standards
of this Chapter.
(8) An outside storage area shall not be used in a manner that violates Section
114 of this Chapter, entitled “Storage – Trash, Garbage, Etc.”
(9) Outside storage areas shall be configured and maintained in a way that
does not obstruct ingress or egress of any building or parking lot, and does
not obstruct any fire or emergency lane, vehicular or pedestrian access, or
sight distance required under this Title.
(D) An occupant’s violation of the requirements hereof shall be a Class B
misdemeanor. An occupant’s violation of the requirements hereof two (2) or
more times within any 12-month period, shall be cause for revocation of the
occupant’s business license.
(E) If any provision of this Section conflicts with any other provision of this Title,
this Section shall be construed and enforced in the manner that best meets the
purposes of this Section as set forth herein.
12-14-113 Permissible Lot Coverage
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
Lot coverage by buildings and covered or semi-enclosed out buildings or accessory
buildings shall not exceed 70%. Coverage for both buildings and paved areas (parking,
loading and circulation) shall not exceed 90%, thereby reserving a minimum of 10% for
landscaped areas after completion of any future expansion. Existing developments may
expand only to the extent of the coverage limits above. If such existing developments
currently exceed the above coverage limits, expansion shall not be permitted.
12-14-114 Storage – Trash, Garbage, Etc.
No trash, garbage, used materials or wrecked, inoperable or abandoned vehicles or equipment
shall be stored in an open area. All such materials shall be kept in fully enclosed buildings. All
structures built to accommodate dumpsters and receptacles for the storage of trash and garbage
shall be constructed using a design compatible with the primary structure and meeting all of the
architectural design standards outlined in Section 12-14-108.
12-14-115 Parking, Loading and Access
Each lot or parcel in the I-1 Zone shall have on the same lot or parcel off-street parking
sufficient to comply with Chapter 20 of this Title.
12-14-116 Clear Vision and Intersections
No landscape, wall, fence, sign or other structure that would obstruct the clear vision of
intersecting streets shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by
the street property lines and a line connecting them at points 30 feet from the intersection
of the street lines.
12-14-117 Bonds
In order to insure the development will be constructed to completion in an acceptable
manner, the owner/developer shall enter into an agreement and provide a letter of credit
or escrow deposit similar to the requirement applicable to subdivisions within the City.
The agreement and letter of credit or escrow deposit shall assure timely installation of all
required landscaping, flood control facilities, parking, street improvements and any other
improvements required pursuant to the approved site plan.
12-14-118 Signs
The requirements of the Sign Ordinance of the City shall apply to this zone.
12-14-119 Site Plan Review
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
The requirements of Chapter 19 of this Title shall be enforced for any uses requiring site
plan review.
12-14-120 Development Requirements
The following requirements shall apply to Industrial Park or Business Park developments
under this Chapter:
(A) Minimum Land Area. The minimum land area required for development of an
industrial park or business park is 5 acres.
(B) Single ownership. The park sites shall be owned by one person or entity at the
time of application or the subject of an application filed jointly by all owners of
the property.
(C) Lots. Main buildings may be located on individual lots, the design and minimum
area of which shall be approved by the Planning Commission during site plan
review. Lots shall be of sufficient size to allow for required off-street parking,
adequate side yards and landscaping. No lot shall face directly onto any public
street or highway that abuts the industrial park or business park site along any
exterior boundary.
(D) Off-street Parking and Loading. All off-street parking and loading shall
comply with the requirements of Chapter 20 of this Title.
(E) Improvements. Improvements including, but not limited to curb, gutter, storm
drainage, water lines, sewers, sidewalks, etc. shall be installed in accordance with
the development standards of the City for improvements and landscaping.
(F) Ownership Association. Owners of properties within an industrial park or
business park shall be represented by a property owner's association for the
purpose of assuring to the City that all required improvements and landscaping
are provided and thereafter maintained.
12-14-121 Restrictive Covenants
The Owner of an Industrial Park or Business Park shall be required to impose and record
restrictive covenants running with the land to carry out the conditions of the Conditional
Use Permit.
12-14-122 Outside Retail Displays and Outdoor Storage of Retail Products
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
The display, sale and storage of merchandise, goods, materials, vehicles or equipment for
sale at retail as a conditional use under this Chapter may be conducted outside of enclosed
buildings when approved by the Planning Commission with the following conditions and
considerations:
1. The merchandise, goods, material, vehicles offered for sale in an outdoor area
shall be incidental to the specific use approved by the City.
2. All outdoor display, sales and storage areas and pads shall be designated on
site plans submitted to the City.
3. Outdoor displays in front of buildings and within parking lots, e.g., lawn
mowers, trailers, tires, garden supplies, plants, sheds, fencing, building
materials, and general merchandise, shall only be displayed in front of
buildings and within parking lots as shown on the approved site plan for the
development, and shall be placed only upon concrete or asphalt surfaces.
4. Outdoor displays shall not obstruct ingress or egress of any building or
parking lot, nor shall they obstruct any fire lane, nor otherwise impede
vehicular or pedestrian circulation or sight distances. Said displays shall
maintain all required parking, access, and circulation requirements as
established in this title and maintain a minimum setback of forty feet (40)
from driveways.
5. Display areas to be located within the required front landscape setbacks, shall
be constructed using concrete or asphalt pads and shall meet the following
minimum requirements:
A. No more than two (2) display pads are allowed within the required
front landscape area; and each pad shall be separated by a distance not
less than fifty (50) feet measured from the closest edge of each pad;
B. Display pads shall not be allowed within any side landscape areas:
C. Display pads may cover no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
required front landscape area; and the height of the pad shall not be
more than two feet (2’) above the sidewalk grade;
6. Retail or storage areas to be located within a non-covered structure subject to
the following minimum requirements:
A. All outside retail and storage areas shall be paved with concrete or
asphalt surfaces.
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
B. Outside retail-storage areas shall be fully enclosed with a sightobscuring
fence or wall that is 100% opaque.
C. The enclosure shall be constructed using a design compatible with the
primary structure and meeting all of the architectural design standards
outlined in Section 12-14-108; or shall be constructed of ornamental
metal fencing materials. Chain link, wood, vinyl or similar fencing
materials are prohibited.
D. All screen fencing shall have a minimum height of 7 feet.
E. No material, equipment or other items stored within an outside
screened area shall be stacked or piled to exceed the height of the
screening fence.
F. All screening walls, fences and landscaping shall be maintained by
owner at all times.
Chapter 12-14 Light Industrial /Business Park Zone I-1 Updated May 15, 2018
CHAPTER 12-16 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
12-16-101 Purpose and Objectives
12-16-102 Conditional Use
12-16-103 Area and Density Requirements
12-16-104 Standards and Requirements
12-16-105 Application and Preliminary Development Plans
12-16-106 Action – Preliminary Development Plans
12-16-107 Final Development Plans
12-16-108 Action – Final Development Plans
12-16-109 Open Spaces
12-16-110 Bonds
12-16-111 Condominium Covenants
12-16-112 Inadequate Maintenance
12-16-101 Purpose and Objectives
The purpose of planned unit development (PUD) is to encourage creative and
efficient utilization of land through the clustering of buildings and the integration of
compatible land uses. The planned unit development may provide a mixture of
commercial, residential and recreational uses in a planned environment, provided that the
specific location, amount, density and relationship of said uses are approved by the City
Council in consideration of the prior recommendation of the Planning Commission as
part of a comprehensive development plan established for the planned unit development.
The design and/or mixture of land uses is intended to create a more convenient and more
effective integration of uses which may work in concert to create a more attractive and
desirable environment in which people can enjoy commercial activities, employment,
residence and leisure within the same development. The application of a planned unit
development concept is intended to encourage good neighborhood and building design,
thus ensuring substantial compliance with the intent of the zoning district regulations and
other provisions of this Title relating to the public health, safety and general welfare, and
at the same time securing the advantages of large-scale site planning for commercial and
residential development.
12-16-102 Conditional Use
Planned unit developments may be allowed as a conditional use in zones
providing for planned unit developments as a conditional use. The PUD shall meet the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, except as such requirements are
modified in writing by the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter. In addition, the City Council, after receiving recommendations of the Planning
Commission, may modify the requirements of any zone to provide for a planned unit
development.
\\Woodscross\sys\WPCOMMON\Zoningordinance\T12ch16.doc
12-16-103 Area and Density Requirements
The minimum land eligible for a condominium project shall be one (1) acre. PUD
density requirements shall be established based upon the densities allowed within the
zoning district where the PUD is located; provided, however, densities higher than those
ordinarily allowed in any zoning district, after receiving recommendation of the Planning
Commission, may be approved by the City Council subject to conditions imposed by the
City Council.
12-16-104 Standards and Requirements
A planned unit development established under the provisions of this Chapter shall
conform to the following standards and requirements:
A. Single Development Control. The area proposed for the planned unit
development shall be under single development control through ownership by
one person, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or joint
venture during development to provide for full supervision and control of said
development, and to ensure conformity with these provisions and all
conditions imposed upon the preliminary and final development plans.
B. Plan Preparation Team. The final development plan shall be prepared by a
design team which is composed of qualified professionals which shall include:
an architect, an engineer, and either a landscape architect or community
planner.
C. Land Area. The minimum land area for a PUD shall be 20 acres, however
phases of the PUD may be constructed on not less than 5 acres provided the
entire PUD covers a minimum land area of at least 20 acres.
D. Location of Buildings. With the following exceptions, buildings may be
located as approved in the final development plans. Locations and
arrangements of buildings on each lot or parcel should be accomplished in a
manner that will best utilize the lot or parcel area and create an attractive
environment. The following exceptions shall be considered as minimum
requirements if they apply:
1. Garages facing directly on a street, whether in the front or side yard, shall
be set back at least 25 feet from the property line.
2. In those instances where a proposed PUD will front upon one or more
existing public streets, the setback from the street shall be equal to that
required by the most restrictive zoning on property immediately adjacent
thereto or across the public street therefrom.
\\Woodscross\sys\WPCOMMON\Zoningordinance\T12ch16.doc
E. Core. Where feasible, buildings and uses of lowest height and intensity shall
be arranged around the boundaries of the development.
F. Site Plan. Site plan approval shall be required and shall be obtained in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19 of this Title.
G. Attached or Detached. The proportion of attached residential dwelling units
to detached units shall be determined by the City Council in consideration of
the prior recommendation of the Planning Commission.
H. Tree Preservation. Every effort shall be made by creative site planning to
preserve all existing desirable and healthy trees or substantial shrubs on a
development site.
I. Open Spaces. Not less than 20 percent of the gross area of the planned unit
development shall be retained in permanent open space. Land proposed to be
devoted to vehicular streets or roads, parking, driveways, required setbacks,
and commercially paved areas shall not be included in computations of
permanent open space unless allowed under the provisions of the zoning
district in which the PUD is located. The required open space shall be an area
professionally designed and landscaped.
J. Utilities. All buildings shall be served by a public sewer and a public water
supply. All utilities within the planned community shall be placed
underground, including telephone, electrical, and television cables. Dwelling
units under separate ownership, whether attached or detached, shall have
separate water metering. In addition, all landscaped and open space areas
shall be served by a pressurized, secondary irrigation water supply.
K. Height. The maximum height of buildings within the planned unit
development shall be as follows:
1. Single-Family Residential Areas. A maximum of 2 stories, not to exceed
35 feet;
2. Multiple-Residential Areas. A maximum of 2 stories, not to exceed 35
feet;
3. Commercial Areas. 35 feet or as approved by the City Council;
4. Institutional Areas. 35 feet or as approved by the City Council;
5. Recreational Areas. A maximum of 2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet.
L. Parking. All uses within the planned unit development shall be provided with
off-street parking in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 20 of this
\\Woodscross\sys\WPCOMMON\Zoningordinance\T12ch16.doc
Title except that parking requirements contained in each zoning district shall
be controlling in the event of any conflict with the requirements of Chapter
20.
M. Street Improvements. All streets developed and maintained within the
planned unit development shall be developed totally in conformity with the
Woods Cross City construction standards for the class of street being
constructed. When said streets have been developed to City standards, they
may be offered to Woods Cross City for dedication as public streets by
appropriate warranty deed. In instances of severe topography, security
requirements or other special circumstances which make dedication or
development to City standards impractical or undesirable, the City Council, in
consideration of the prior recommendation of the Planning Commission, may
allow development of the said streets to special standards specifically
approved as part of the final development plan.
N. Street Dedication. Dedication of public streets shall be made in accordance
with the General Plan of Woods Cross City, and further as may be determined
by the City Council upon recommendation of the Planning Commission on the
condition that they are necessary to serve the vehicular and pedestrian traffic
needs of the proposed planned community and the needs of the City of Woods
Cross. Said streets shall be designed to coordinate and properly integrate with
the street plan of the City and adjacent existing streets.
O. General PUD standards for Open Space. Maintained open space in a PUD
shall meet the following minimum requirements:
1. Grading. All areas shall be properly graded so as to cause no drainage
problems to adjacent buildings or other uses.
2. Grass or Ground Cover. All open space shall be grass or appropriate
landscaped ground cover to provide a visually pleasing as well as
functional space for appropriate activities.
3. Native Vegetation. Where it is deemed appropriate, native grasses and
plants may be used along equestrian trails, bicycle paths, etc. Steps shall
be taken by developers to guard against such spaces becoming a fire
hazard or haven for insects.
4. Trees. All open space areas shall have the following minimum number of
both deciduous and evergreen trees to provide visual relief and a source of
rural atmosphere:
a. A minimum of twenty (20) trees per acre shall be installed and
maintained.
\\Woodscross\sys\WPCOMMON\Zoningordinance\T12ch16.doc
i. Tree sizes shall be a minimum of 2 ½ inches caliper, or if
evergreen, seven feet tall or larger.
ii. A minimum of 1/3 of the trees shall be evergreen trees.
b. Irrigation. All areas shall be watered by an installed pressurized
irrigation system.
12-16-105 Application and Preliminary Development Plans
The application of the PUD to a land area shall be accompanied by eight copies of
a preliminary development plan containing the following information and materials.
A. Legal Description. A complete and accurate legal description of the property
to be occupied by the planned unit development;
B. Topographic Maps. Topographic maps of the entire site, including contour
intervals no greater than two feet;
C. Use Allocation. A map delineating the entire site and specific areas for each
of the general land use categories, i.e., single-family residential, multiple-unit
residential, institutional, commercial, recreational and open space. Said map
should contain a tabulation of the total acreage and the acreage to be devoted
to each of the above listed general land use categories;
D. Traffic. Proposed circulation pattern of vehicular and pedestrian traffic,
including private and public streets and pedestrian paths;
E. Facilities. Parks, common open spaces, playgrounds, commercial areas,
parking areas, and other public or private recreation facilities and
improvements proposed within the planned unit development;
F. Intensive Uses. The general location of all multiple-unit dwelling,
institutional and commercial structures in the planned community, and an
indication of proposed population densities and building densities (units per
acre), including tables or graphs showing the percentages of each dwelling
type being proposed;
G. Minimum Square Footage. Proposed minimum square footage of all
buildings to be located within the planned unit development;
H. Parking. Proposed location of parking and ingress or egress to parking
facilities;
\\Woodscross\sys\WPCOMMON\Zoningordinance\T12ch16.doc
I. Landscaping. Typical landscaping plans for a selected portion of each of the
general land use areas which have a different landscaping character or
different landscaping intensities. Said typical landscaping plan should provide
an indication of the types and sizes of plants and materials which are to be
used, including locations of sprinkler and irrigation systems;
J. Buildings. Preliminary elevations or perspectives of all building types
proposed within the development;
K. Subdivision Plat. Preliminary subdivision plat, if the site is being subdivided,
showing a general layout of all proposed lots;
L. Utilities. A utility sketch showing the manner in which adequate sewage
disposal and water are to be provided to the site, including the point from
which said services are to be extended;
M. Ownership. Evidence that the applicant has sufficient ownership or rights of
control over the subject property to effectuate the proposed plan in the manner
presented;
N. Schedule. A preliminary development schedule indicating the phases in
which development will occur and the approximate dates when said phases
will be completed;
O. Covenants. A draft of the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions
if required;
P. Other. Other materials as may reasonably be required by the City Planner or
the Planning Commission.
12-16-106 Action-Preliminary Development Plans
A. Conceptual Approval. The Planning Commission may approve, preliminarily
and in concept, and subject to further review, the preliminary development
plans for the PUD, and may thereafter recommend to the City Council the
adoption of said plans and the preliminary approval of the PUD.
B. Determination. The Planning Commission shall determine whether the
evidence presented is such as to establish:
1. The proposed planned unit development will provide a pleasant and
attractive environment in which the relationship of land uses is properly
planned and the uses are in conformity with the Woods Cross General
Plan.
\\Woodscross\sys\WPCOMMON\Zoningordinance\T12ch16.doc
2. The proposed planned unit development will create no detriment to
adjacent properties or to the general area in which it is located, and that it
will be in substantial harmony with the characteristics of the community
and the existing development of the area.
3. The planned unit development will provide for the efficient utilization of
land and substantial amounts of usable open space in reasonable
proportion to residential densities and the intensity of commercial and
institutional development.
4. The applicants of the PUD are legally in control of the property and are
financially able to carry out the proposed project.
5. The applicants intend to start construction of the first phase within one
year of the approval of the development and have the apparent capacity of
doing so.
6. An environment of sustained desirability and stability will be created.
C. Additional Conditions. The Planning Commission may impose such
conditions on preliminary development plans as it may deem appropriate to
meet the goals and objectives of the Woods Cross General Plan and this
Chapter.
D. Deadline of Council. The City Council shall take action upon the preliminary
development plan within the sixty (60) day period after its submission to them
by the Planning Commission. Failure to act within that time period shall be
deemed a denial by the City Council.
E. Deadline of Developer. Any failure to submit a final development plan on the
planned unit development or any portion thereof within one year of the
approval by the City Council of the preliminary development plan shall
terminate all proceedings, cancel any approval given, and render the
previously submitted preliminary development plan null and void.
12-16-107 Final Development Plans
Eight copies of the final development plans shall be submitted to the City Planner
for action by the Planning Commission and the City Council. Said plans may be
submitted in phases, provided each such phase can exist as a separate entity capable of
independently meeting the requirements and standards of this Chapter. The City may
require a prorata share of the open space, park, playground, recreation facility, and other
amenities be provided with each phase of the PUD. In lieu thereof, the City may accept
security satisfactory to the City to insure that the foregoing are provided in a timely
manner as determined by the City. The separate development of each phase shall not be
\\Woodscross\sys\WPCOMMON\Zoningordinance\T12ch16.doc
detrimental to the overall concept of the PUD as a whole nor to adjacent properties in the
event that the remainder of the project is not completed. Final development plans shall
include the following information and materials:
A. Preliminary Plan Components. All of the components designated for
submission with the preliminary development plans;
B. Site Plan. Detailed site plan with complete dimensions showing precise
locations of all buildings and structures, proposed uses of buildings and
structures, lot or parcel sizes and locations, designation of common open
spaces and special use areas, and a detailed traffic circulation pattern
including unencumbered ownership of the proposed streets;
C. Building Exteriors. Final exterior design for all building types, presented as
exterior perspectives or exterior elevations;
D. Landscaping. Detailed landscaping plans showing the types and uses of all
plant materials, decorative materials, recreation equipment, special effects,
and sprinkler and irrigation systems, and the location of each of them;
1. All areas in which the City requires landscaping shall have a minimum
number of both deciduous and evergreen trees to provide for shade and to
provide visual relief and a source of rural atmosphere. The following shall
be required:
a. A minimum of twenty (20) trees per acre shall be installed and
maintained.
i. Tree sizes shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches caliper or if
evergreen, seven feet tall or larger.
ii. A minimum of 1/3 of the trees shall be evergreen trees.
b. All areas shall be watered by an installed pressurized irrigation system;
E. Parking. Dimensional parking layout showing the location of individual
parking stalls and all areas of ingress and egress;
F. Engineering Plans. Dimensioned engineering plans or final subdivision plat
showing site grading, street improvements with profiles and typical sections,
surface and subsurface drainage, and public utility locations. A detailed
utility plan showing the manner in which adequate water and sanitary sewer
are to be provided to the site. Also submission of engineering feasibility
studies if required by the City Engineer;
\\Woodscross\sys\WPCOMMON\Zoningordinance\T12ch16.doc
G. Covenants. The fully executed declarations of covenants, conditions, and
restrictions together with open space easements and other bonds, guarantees
or agreements as required herein or as may be deemed necessary by the
Planning Department and/or the City Attorney;
H. Schedules. A time schedule for the completion of landscaping, parking, street
improvements and amenities which are secured as provided for subdivisions.
12-16-108 Action-Final Development Plans
The Woods Cross Planning Commission may recommend approval of
development plans if it finds: (1) that the proposed development meets all applicable
requirements and standards, (2) that it is in substantial compliance with the approved
preliminary development plans, and (3) that the development fully meets the objectives
and purposes of the General Plan. The City Council may impose such conditions on the
approval of the final development plans as are deemed appropriate to comply with these
provisions and to assure that there be no detriment to the Woods Cross community or to
surrounding properties. No building permit for any portion of the planned unit
development shall be issued until the PUD is approved and final development plans have
been fully approved, all conditions of approval are satisfied, and any subdivision plat is
recorded. All development and construction within the PUD shall be in full conformity
with the approved final development plans.
12-16-109 Open Spaces
Within all areas where condominium ownership is or may be established within
the planned unit development, an adequate guarantee shall be provided for permanent
retention and maintenance of all open space and areas of common ownership
A. Park. The developer shall be required to develop and provide for the
perpetual maintenance of all open space, unless the City accepts the same as a
City park.
B. Easement. In the case of private reservation, the open space to be reserved
shall be protected against building development by conveying to the City as a
condition of project approval, an open space easement over such areas,
restricting the area against any future building or use, except as approved on
the final development plans.
C. Association. The care and maintenance of the area within such open space
reservation shall be provided for by the developer by establishing a
corporation responsible for such maintenance, which corporation shall be
empowered to receive, in advance, funds sufficient to provide proper
maintenance as an assessment on the property owners within the PUD. In the
event the corporation ceases to exist or operate for any reason, the owners of
\\Woodscross\sys\WPCOMMON\Zoningordinance\T12ch16.doc
each lot or unit within the PUD shall have the responsibility to maintain, at
their expense, the open space and any common areas or facilities located
within the PUD.
D. Management. The open space shall be managed by a person or firm having
adequate expertise and experience in property management to assure that said
maintenance is accomplished proficiently and at a high standard of quality.
E. Amendments. Subsequent amendments may be made to the area reserved for
open space as follows:
1. Submittal to the City of a petition of two-thirds or more of the property
owners within the development.
2. Submitted to the Planning Commission for its recommendation to the
City Council.
3. Upon approval by the City Council.
12-16-110 Bonds
In order to ensure that the planned unit development will be constructed to
completion in an acceptable manner, the developer (owner) shall enter into an agreement
with and provide to the City a standby letter of credit, escrow deposit, or cash bond
similar to the requirements applicable to subdivisions. The agreement and letter of credit,
escrow deposit, or cash bond shall assure timely provision of construction and installation
of all required landscaping, parking and street improvements, including paving, curbs,
sidewalks, and water lines, and all required open space, parks, playgrounds, recreation
facilities and other amenities shown on the final development plan for each phase of the
PUD together with a prorata of any improvements or amenities which will pertain to the
entire PUD and shall be in a form satisfactory to the City. The applicant shall also file a
schedule of anticipated completion dates for such improvements. Installation of the
improvements and the related secured agreements may be accomplished in such phases of
the planned unit development as are approved by the City Council in consideration of the
prior recommendation of the Planning Commission. In the event that the improvements
are not completed as agreed, the City may undertake to complete the improvements and
pay for such improvements from the letter of credit, escrow deposit or cash bond.
12-16-111 Condominium Covenants
\\Woodscross\sys\WPCOMMON\Zoningordinance\T12ch16.doc
The developer of any property which is being developed as a condominium
project shall, prior to final development approval, submit to the Planning Department a
proposed declaration of covenants relating to the project, which shall become part of the
final development plan, shall be recorded, and shall be such as to run with the land. Said
covenants shall include management policies which shall assure an adequate quality of
maintenance throughout the useful life of the development and shall provide a perpetual
entity which is to be responsible for maintenance within the condominium development.
The declaration of covenants shall, as a minimum, contain the following:
A. Association. Throughout the useful life of the development, the establishment
of a corporation existing and responsible for all maintenance of common areas
and empowered to levy and to recover the cost thereof, in advance, as an
assessment to each unit owner within the condominium development. In the
event the corporation ceases to exist or operate for any reason, the owners of
each lot or unit within the PUD shall have the responsibility to maintain, at
their expense, the open space and any common areas or facilities located
within the PUD;
B. Maintenance. The expressly stated duty and method proposed for
maintenance, repair and replacement of common areas and facilities and
distribution of costs thereof;
C. Assessment. The manner of collecting from unit owners their share of
common expenses, and the method of assessment. Assessments shall be
collected in advance, in anticipation of expenses, and when delinquent shall
become a lien on the unit of a nonpaying owner;
D. Damage. Provisions as to percentage of votes by unit owners which shall be
necessary to determine whether to rebuild, repair, restore or sell property in
the event of damage or distribution of all or part of the project;
E. Amendments. The method and procedure by which the declaration may be
amended.
The Planning Commission shall review the amendment declaration affecting
the property or any unit therein. If approved, it will be forwarded to the City
Council. Following the approval of the City Council it will be recorded with
the Davis County Recorder.
Such declaration of amendments thereto shall be maintained as part of the
final development plan for the development.
12-16-112 Inadequate Maintenance
\\Woodscross\sys\WPCOMMON\Zoningordinance\T12ch16.doc
The failure to comply or neglect in complying with the requirements imposed in
connection with approval of the planned unit development and/or failure to maintain the
buildings and premises in accordance with the conditions of approval is a violation of this
Title.
\\Woodscross\sys\WPCOMMON\Zoningordinance\T12ch16.doc
CHAPTER 12-15 INDUSTRIAL ZONE I-2
12-15-101 Purpose and Objectives
12-15-102 Permitted Uses
12-15-103 Conditional Uses
12-15-104 Accessory Uses
12-15-105 Area and Density Requirements
12-15-106 Lot Frontage
12-15-107 Yard Requirements
12-15-108 Development Standards
12-15-109 Building Height
12-15-110 Distance Between Buildings
12-15-111 Permissible Lot Coverage
12-15-112 Storage
12-15-113 Parking, Loading and Access
12-15-114 Clear Vision and Intersections
12-15-115 Bonds
12-15-116 Site Plan Review
12-15-117 Signs
12-15-101 Purpose and Objectives
The Industrial (I-2) is a zoning district provided to allow certain permitted uses and heavy
manufacturing and petroleum refining and storage as conditional uses. This zoning district is
established to:
A. Provide area in the City where heavy industries may operate and conduct business
consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(B) Regulate the development and activities allowed in the heavy industrial area to
provide for improved appearance, protection of adjacent properties, preservation of
street functions, provision of off-street parking and efficient use of municipal
services.
(C) Provide specific areas within the City where heavy manufacturing or petroleum
refining industries can engage in processing, assembling, manufacturing, refining
and storing at appropriate locations and to discourage uses from locating within this
zone which will tend to deteriorate or interfere with the use of land for light
industrial/business park purposes.
(D) Promote aesthetically pleasing industrial areas.
(1) To limit the extension or proliferation of heavy manufacturing or petroleum
refining and storage activities within the City limits.
(2) To provide for improved appearance, protection of adjacent properties, and
to assure clean, attractive heavy industrial sites, appropriate buffering,
screening and landscaping and to encourage good design and efficient
function of existing facilities and related accessory buildings thereto.
(E) Require standards which will promote the health, safety and welfare of the general
public and persons residing or working in areas which are near or adjacent to heavy
industries.
12-15-102 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted in the I-2 Zone:
(A) Any permitted use allowed in the light industrial/ business park zone (I-1).
(B) Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to the above.
12-15-103 Conditional Uses
The following uses may be allowed in the Industrial Zone (I-2) as a conditional use:
(A) Any conditional use permitted in the light industrial/ business park zone (I-1).
(B) Manufacturing and/or fabrication provided that the same are non-polluting, nonexplosive,
non-hazardous, not noisy or injurious to health and emit no noxious or
unpleasant odors.
(C) Petroleum refining or storage, and gas manufacturing or storage when consistent
with the statutes, rules and regulations of the Utah State Department of
Environmental Quality and the ordinances of Davis County relating thereto, and
subject also to the following minimum restrictions and conditions:
(1) Liquified petroleum gas shall be stored no closer to any boundary line of a
lot on which it is located than the following minimum distances:
If Stored If Stored
Water Capacity Per Container Underground Aboveground
Less than 500 gallons 20 feet 20 feet
Over 500 gallons 40 feet 40 feet
(2) Flammable liquids shall be stored no closer to any boundary line of a lot on
which they are located than the following minimum distances:
a. Outside Aboveground
Capacity Minimum Distance
0-50,000 gallons 30 feet
Excess of 50,000 One-half (1/2) times the greatest dimension of
the average of the width and length of
a rectangular tank (or diameter of a
cylindrical tank) or height, but not less
than 30 feet or more than 350 feet.
b. Dikes shall be provided around all above-ground storage tanks in
excess of 500 gallons capacity. The effective dike holding volume
(volume of liquid which will be contained within the dike area) shall
be a minimum of 110% of the volume of the largest storage tank
contained within the dike area. No such dike shall be constructed
within 30 feet of the front lot line or of any street bordering the
property containing such storage facility.
c. Underground Storage
For underground storage the minimum distances from the storage
tank or facility to the boundary line of the lot on which it is located
may be reduced by the Planning Commission to 50 percent of that
required for above-ground storage.
(D) Rail spurs for uses incidental to other permitted or approved conditional uses in
the I-1 and I-2 zones. Approval of any rail spur shall require a written
development agreement between the property owner and the City. The
development agreement for a rail spur shall address the issues identified in Woods
Cross City Code § 12-21-121, Supplementary Regulations.
12-15-104 Accessory Uses
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to the permitted uses and conditional
uses provided herein may be approved by the City in accordance with the provisions of this
Title.
12-15-105 Area and Density Requirements
Each single lot or parcel of land in an I-2 Zoning District shall contain a minimum of 1 acre
except that additional parcels which are located within the I-2 Zone may be added to sites of
one acre or more with no additional area requirements.
12-15-106 Lot Frontage
The initial lot or parcel of land in the I-2 Zone shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet,
except that additional parcels which are located within the I-2 Zone may be added with no
additional width requirements.
12-15-107 Yard Requirements
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply to the I-2 Zone:
(A) Front Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the I-2 Zone shall have a
front yard depth of not less than 30 feet except the
Planning Commission may reduce the front yard to
20 feet if it finds the yard reduction provides a more
attractive and efficient use of the property and will
not be detrimental for any reason.
(B) Side Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the I-2 Zone shall have a
side yard of at least 30 feet, and the total width of the
two required side yards shall be not less than 70 feet
on land located adjacent to a Zoning district other
than the I-2 district. There shall be no requirements
in those instances where the side property line abuts
another property located within the I-2 Zone.
(C) Side Yard Corner Lots: On corner lots, the side yard contiguous to the street
shall be not less than 30 feet except the Planning
Commission may reduce the side yard to 15 feet if it
finds the yard reduction provides a more attractive
and efficient use of the property and will not be
detrimental for any reason.
(D) Side Yard Driveways: When used for access to any garage, carport, loading
area or parking area having less than five parking
spaces, the side yard shall be wide enough to
accommodate an unobstructed 12 foot paved
driveway. When used for access to a garage,
carport, loading area or parking area having 6 or
more parking spaces, the side yard shall be wide
enough to provide an unobstructed 12 foot paved
driveway for one-way traffic or a 20 foot paved
driveway for two-way traffic.
(E) Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of 15 feet for all uses
within the I-2 Zone and in cases where a building is
located upon a lot or parcel adjacent to any Zone
other than an I-2 Zone the rear yard shall be 30 feet.
The Planning Commission may reduce the rear yard,
if in its judgement the yard reduction provides a more
attractive and more efficient use of the property and
will not be detrimental for any reason.
12-15-108 Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply within the I-2 Zone:
(A) Site or Property Screening
(1) Buildings, structures or other facilities on the property shall be situated in
accordance with a Site Plan approved by the City. All industrial sites or
properties shall utilize buffering and screening by means of landscaped
berms, fences, walls, landscaping or otherwise as approved in the Site Plan
to locate and/or screen equipment, facilities, and structures so as not to be
visible from public and private streets or from adjacent properties which are
not zoned I-2. All buildings and other facilities shall be kept in good repair
and painted with colors that will be consistent with the environment.
(2) All facilities shall receive design consideration with particular attention
given to areas exposed to public view.
(3) Mechanical equipment shall be located or screened wherever possible so as
not to be visible from public points of view. Buffering and screening
materials shall be compatible with City performance standards for industrial
properties.
(B) Landscaping:
The requirements of Chapter 24 of this Title shall apply to this Zone.
(C) Grading and Drainage.
All drainage of water from any lot must follow applicable City requirements.
Drainage shall not be allowed to flow upon adjacent lots unless an easement for such
purpose has been granted by the owner of the lot upon which the water flows.
A site plan with grading and drainage plans and showing the relationship of all
proposed improvements on the site must be approved by the Planning Commission
before such activities may begin. Lot grading shall be kept to a minimum. Roads
and development shall be designed for preservation of natural grade.
(D) Utilities.
All future utility distribution lines shall be underground in the designated easements.
No pipe, conduit, cable, line for water, gas, sewer, drainage, steam, electricity or any
other energy or service shall be installed or maintained upon any lot (outside of any
building) above the surface of the ground except hoses, movable pipes used for
irrigation or other purpose during construction. Transformers shall be grouped with
other utility meters where possible and screened with vegetation and other
appropriate methods.
(E) Lighting.
Electrical reflectors, spotlights, floodlights and other sources of illumination may be
used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, signs, parking and loading areas, provided
they are equipped with proper lenses or other devices concentrating the illumination
upon the building, landscaping, signs, parking and loading areas, on any property,
and preventing any bright, direct illumination upon adjacent property or any public
right-of-way. No unshielded lights, reflectors, or spotlights shall be so located that
they are shining towards or are directly visible from frequently traveled public rightof-
way.
12-15-109 Building Height
In the I-2 Zone the height of every building or structure hereinafter designed, erected or
structurally altered or enlarged shall conform to the requirements of the most recent edition
of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City of Woods Cross; provided however,
that in no circumstances shall any structure be erected to a height greater than six stories or
75 feet. Any height over 50 feet shall be considered as a conditional use and shall be subject
to the provisions relating thereto. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary all
buildings and structures shall conform to the requirements of the airport protective area
provisions of this Title in cases where those provisions are more restrictive.
12-15-110 Distance Between Buildings
The distance between buildings shall be as dictated by the latest edition of the Uniform
Building Code as adopted by the City of Woods Cross.
12-15-111 Permissible Lot Coverage
Lot coverage by buildings and covered or semi-enclosed out buildings or accessory
buildings or related facilities shall not exceed 70% of the area of the lot. Coverage for both
buildings, facilities, and paved areas (parking, loading and circulation) shall not exceed
90%, thereby reserving a minimum of 10% for landscaped areas after completion of any
future expansion. Existing developments may expand only to the extent of the coverage
limits above. If such existing developments currently exceed the above coverage limits,
expansion shall not be permitted.
12-15-112 Storage
No trash, garbage, used materials or wrecked, inoperable or abandoned vehicles or
equipment shall be stored in an open area. All such materials shall be screened from public
streets by an opaque fence or wall, or shall be kept in fully enclosed buildings. All
structures built to accommodate the storage of trash and garbage shall be constructed using a
design compatible with the primary structure and meeting all of the architectural design
standards outlined in Section 12-15-108.
12-15-113 Parking, Loading and Access
The requirements of Chapter 20 of the Title shall apply to the I-2 Zone.
12-15-114 Clear Vision and Intersections
No landscape, wall, fence, sign or other structure that would obstruct the clear vision of
intersecting streets shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the
street property lines and a line connecting them at points 30 feet from the intersection of the
street lines.
12-15-115 Bonds
In order to insure the development will be constructed to completion in an acceptable
manner, the owner/developer shall enter into an agreement and provide a letter of credit or
escrow deposit similar to the requirement applicable to subdivisions within the City. The
agreement and letter of credit or escrow deposit shall assure timely installation of all
required landscaping, flood control facilities, parking, street improvements and any other
improvements required pursuant to the approved Site Plan.
12-15-116 Site Plan Review
The requirements of Chapter 19 of this Title shall be enforced for any uses requiring site
plan review.
12-15-117 Signs
The requirements of the Sign Ordinance of the City shall apply to this zone.
Chapter 12-15A Airport Zone AP Updated May 2015
CHAPTER12-15A AIRPORT ZONE AP
12-15A-101 Purpose and Objectives
12-15A-102 Permitted Uses
12-15A-103 ConditionalUses
12-15A-104 Accessory Uses
12-15A-105 Area and Density Requirements
12-15A-106 Lot Frontage
12-15A-107 YardRequirements
12-15A-108 Development Standards
12-15A-109 Building Height
12-15A-110 UsesWithin Buildings
12-15A-111 UsesWithin Hangars
12-15A-112 Distance Between Buildings
12-15A-113 Outside Storage Prohibited
12-15A-114 Permissible Lot Coverage
12-15A-115 Storage
12-15A-116 Parking, Loading and Access
12-15A-117 Clear vision and Intersections
12-15A-118 Bonds
12-15A-119 Signs
12-15A-120 Site Plan Review
12-15A-121 Business or Industrial Parks
15-15A-122 Outdoor Retail Displays and Outdoor Storage of Retail Products
12-15 A-101 Purpose and Objectives
The Airport Zone AP is established to:
(1) Allow airport and airport related services.
(2) Allow light manufacturing business parks, professional offices and research
development business within the zone.
(3) Promote aesthetically pleasing light industrial business park in the airport areas.
(4) Encourage creation of planned light manufacturing, offices, research and
development parks and complexes, exhibiting the qualities of good design and
efficient function to serve the needs of the public.
(5) Regulate the development of light industrial and airport areas to provide for
improved appearance, protection of adjacent properties, preservation of street
functions, provisions of off-street parking and efficient use of municipal services.
(6) Provide areas in the City where airport and light manufacturing engage in their
Chapter 12-15A Airport Zone AP Updated May 2015
activities which are performed entirely within buildings designed and constructed in a
manner which does not cause or produce a nuisance to adjacent properties.
(7) Provide adequate and accessible employment opportunities and airport, light industrial
and business services to City residents and other area residents.
12-15 A-102 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted in the AP Zone.
(1) Airport
(2) Public Parks, Public Recreational Grounds and Buildings; Public Buildings and Pubic
Utilities
(3) Agriculture
12-15 A-103 ConditionalUses
(A) Airport Related Services
(B) Apiaries
(C) Automotive Service Centers
(D) Banks, credit unions and savings and loans
(E) Business, commercial or light industry which are determined by the City to be similar
and compatible with the airport
(F) Canning, processing and preserving of food products
(G) Coating, plating and engraving and allied services
(H) Commercial printing
(I) Condominiums (limited to non-residential only)
(J) Grazing and pasturing
(K) Hangars & shade hangars
(L) Light manufacturing, compounding, processing, milling or packaging of products
(M) Lumber, building products, hardware and home improvement retail stores, garden center
and other nursery-type sales from permanent structures; and other retail sales from
Chapter 12-15A Airport Zone AP Updated May 2015
permanent structures.
(N) Manufacture and assembly of communications equipment, electronic equipment
accessories and electronic computer equipment
(O) Manufacturing of apparel and other finished products made from fabric and leather
(P) Manufacturing of professional, scientific and controlling instruments and optical goods
(Q) Paint, glass and wallpapers manufacture and wholesale and retail sales
(R) Planned business parks
(S) Planned light industrial parks
(T) Processing, packaging, assembling of products in association with a retail outlet on the
property
(U) Recreational Facilities
(V) Wholesale stores or businesses, except for the storage or sale of live animals, and the
storage or sale of commercial explosives
12-15A-104 Accessory Uses
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to the permitted uses and conditional uses
provided herein may be approved by the City in accordance with the provisions of this Title.
12-15A-105 Area and Density Requirements
Each single lot or parcel of land in the AP Zoning District shall contain a minimum of 1/2 acres.
12-15 A-106 Lot Frontage
Each lot or parcel of land in the AP Zone shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet
abutting a public street. However, parcels of land, which in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, are interior to the airport facilities and are proposed for use as an airport service
such as a hangar may request a waiver of this requirement by the Planning Commission,
which waiver may be granted upon finding the following:
(1) The parcel of land is interior to and functions as part of the airport facilities.
(2) The proposed use of the property is for airport related activities such as hangars. Access
to the property will be through the main parking lot and entrance to the airport.
Chapter 12-15A Airport Zone AP Updated May 2015
1-15 A-107 YardRequirements
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply to the AP Zone:
(1) Front Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the AP Zone shall have a front yard depth of
not less than 30 ft. except the Planning Commission may reduce the front yard to 20
ft. if it finds the yard reduction provides a more attractive and efficient use of the
property and will not be detrimental for any reason.
(2) Side Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the AP Zone shall have a side yard of at least
30 feet; the total width of the two required side yards shall not be less than 70 feet on
land located adjacent to a zoning district other than the AP, or I-1 or I-2 district.
There shall be no requirements in those instances where the side property line abuts
another property located within the AP Zone, I-1 or I-2 Zones.
(3) Side Yard-Corner Lots: On corner lots, the side yard contiguous to the street
shall not be less than 30 feet except the Planning Commission may reduce the side
yard to 15 feet if it finds the yard reduction provides a more attractive and efficient
use of the property and will not be detrimental for any reason.
(4) SideYard-Driveways:When used for access to any garage, carport, hangar or parking
area having less than 5 parking spaces, the side yards shall be wide enough to
accommodate an unobstructed 12 ft. paved driveway. When used for access to a garage,
carport or parking areas having 6 or more parking spaces, the side yards shall be
wide enough to provide an unobstructed 12 ft. paved driveway for one way traffic, or a
20 ft. paved driveway for 2 way traffic.
(5) Rear Yard: There shall be a read yard of 15 feet for all uses within the AP Zone and in
cases where a building is located upon a lot or parcel adjacent to any zone other than the
AP, I-1 or I-2 Zones, the rear yard shall be 30 feet. In the event that the rear of a building
faces an arterial or collector street, there shall be a set back of 30 feet. The Planning
Commission may reduce the rear yard, if in its judgment the yard reduction provides a
more attractive and more efficient use of the property and will not be detrimental for any
reason.
(6) Other Requirements: For property within the AP Zone, which has been determined by
the Planning Commission to be interior to the airport as outlined in 12-15A-106, a
reduced yard requirement may be granted if, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, such reduction or reductions will not be detrimental for any reason.
12-15 A-108 Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply within the AP Zone:
Chapter 12-15A Airport Zone AP Updated May 2015
(A) ArchitecturalDesign.
(1) All buildings within this zone shall be designed by a licensed, professional
architect and all drawings submitted for approvals and/or permits shall bear
the architect's stamp for the State of Utah.
(2) Building exterior materials visible from a public right-of-way shall be eightyfive
percent (85%) brick, stone, stucco, glass, colored decorative block, or
stone aggregate. The building exterior materials not visible from the public rights
of way shall in the least case be painted or covered with a brick veneer or stone
aggregate. Metal buildings may be permitted if the exterior building materials
standards and other requirements set forth herein are complied with and the
building is approved by the Planning Commission. In determining whether or
not a particular metal building is acceptable, the Planning Commission shall
consider the following factors:
(a) the visibility of the site from neighboring residential uses and adjacent
streets;
(b) the degree to which the proposed finished materials are compatible with the
appearance of neighboring industrial structures and uses;
(c) the location of the proposed finishing materials on the building;
(d) the degree to which a particular metal material may be shielded by
landscaping or some other feature;
(e) the purpose of the zone in promoting well designed aesthetically pleasing
industrial uses which reduce the impact of light industries and business parks
on surrounding non-industrial land uses.
(3) All buildings within a development shall possess a similar architectural theme.
Building styles and colors shall be compatible with existing buildings in the
area. All sides of a building shall receive design consideration with particular
attention given to walls exposed to public view.
(4) Design of building facade facing any public rights of way must be at least equal
to the quality of the front or main entrance to the building.
(5) Buildings shall be designed to relate to grade conditions with a minimum of
grading and exposed foundation walls.
(6) Exterior building materials shall be composed of colors that will be consistent
with the environment.
Chapter 12-15A Airport Zone AP Updated May 2015
(7) Mechanical equipment shall be located or screened so as not to be visible from
public and private rights of way. Screens shall be aesthetically incorporated
into the design of the building whether located on the ground or on the roof.
Roof tops of buildings shall be free of any mechanical equipment unless
completely screened from all points of view along all public rights of way by
an architectural parapet. Screening materials shall be compatible with those of the
building.
(B) Landscaping. The requirements of Chapter 24 of this Title shall apply to this Zone.
In cases where aircraft requirements would conflict with certain landscaping
elements, the Planning Commission may approve requirements different than those of
Chapter 24 if in its opinion such alternate requirements provide for a safer and more
efficient use of the property.
(C) Grading and Drainage. All drainage of water from any lot must follow applicable City
requirements. Drainage shall not be allowed to flow upon adjacent lots or properties
unless an easement for such purpose has been granted by the owner of the lot upon
which the water flows.
A site plan with grading and drainage plans and showing the relationship of all
proposed improvements on the site must be approved by the Planning Commission
before such activities may begin. Lot grading shall be kept to a minimum. Roads and
development shall be designed for preservation of natural grade.
(D) Ditches and Canals. Open ditches or canals shall not be allowed within the project
site. The developer shall work with the property owners and irrigation companies to:
(1) Determine methods of covering, realigning, or eliminating ditches or canals
within or adjoining the development.
(2) Determine the sizes of pipe and culverts required.
(3) Determine responsibility for periodic inspection, cleaning and maintenance of such
ditches, pipes and culverts.
(E) Utilities. All future utility distribution lines shall be underground in the designated
easements. No pipe, conduit, cable line for water, gas, sewer, drainage, steam,
electricity or any other energy or service shall be installed or maintained upon any lot
(outside of any building) above the surface of the ground except hoses, movable pipes
used for irrigation or other purposes during construction. Transformers shall be
grouped with other utility meters where possible and screened with vegetation and
other appropriate methods.
(F) Lighting. Electrical reflectors, spotlights, floodlights and other sources of illumination
may be used to illuminate airport facilities, buildings, landscaping, signs, parking and
loading areas, provided they are equipped with proper lenses or other devises
Chapter 12-15A Airport Zone AP Updated May 2015
concentrating the illumination upon the building, landscaping, signs, parking and
loading areas, on any property, and preventing any bright, direct illumination upon
adjacent property or public rights-of-way or interfering with the safe operation of
aircraft within the zone. No unshielded lights, reflectors, or spotlights shall be so
located that they are shining towards or are directly visible from frequently traveled
public rights-of-way, taxi-ways or runways.
12-15A-109 Building Height
In the AP Zone, the height of every building or structure hereinafter designed, erected or
structurally altered or enlarged shall conform to the requirements of the most recent edition
of the Uniform Building Code, as adopted by the City and to the requirements of the Airport
Protective Provisions of Chapter 26 of this Title.
12-15A-110 UsesWithin Buildings
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all uses established in the AP Zone shall be
conducted entirely within a fully enclosed building.
12-15A-111 UsesWithin Hangars
All structures hereinafter approved as aircraft hangars shall be used only for the storage,
maintenance and construction of aircraft.
12-15A-112 Distance Between Buildings
The distance between buildings shall be as dictated by the latest edition of the Uniform
Building Code as adopted by the City ofWoods Cross.
12-15A-113 Outside Storage Prohibited
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the storage of merchandise, goods, materials or
equipment shall be accommodated entirely within a fully enclosed building; to be constructed
using a design compatible with the primary structure.
12-15A-114 Permissible Lot Coverage
Lot coverage by buildings and covered or semi-enclosed out buildings or accessory
buildings shall not exceed 70%. Coverage for both buildings and paved areas (parking, loading
and circulation) shall not exceed 90%, thereby reserving a minimum of 10% for landscaped
areas after completion of any future expansion. Existing developments may expand only to the
extent of the coverage limits above. If such existing developments currently exceed the above
coverage limits, expansion shall not be permitted.
12-15A-115 Storage – Trash, Garbage, Etc.
Chapter 12-15A Airport Zone AP Updated May 2015
No trash, garbage, used materials or wrecked, inoperable or abandoned vehicles and aircraft or
equipment shall be stored in an open area. All such materials shall be kept in fully enclosed
buildings. All structures built to accommodate dumpsters and receptacles for the storage of trash
and garbage shall be constructed using a design compatible with the primary structure and
meeting all of the architectural design standards outlined in Section 12-15A-108.
12-15A-116 Parking, Loading and Access
Each lot or parcel in the AP Zone shall have on the same lot or parcel off-street parking
sufficient to comply with Chapter 20 of this Title.
12-15A-117 Clear vision and Intersections
No landscape, wall, fence, sign or other structure that would obstruct the clear vision of
intersecting streets shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the
street property lines and a line connecting them at points 30 feet from the intersection of the
public street lines.
12-15A-118 Bonds
In order to insure the development will be constructed to completion in an acceptable
manner, the owner/developer shall enter into an agreement and provide a letter of credit or
escrow deposit similar to the requirement applicable to subdivisions within the City. The
agreement and letter of credit or escrow deposit shall assure timely installation of all required
landscaping, flood control facilities, parking, street improvements and any other improvements
required pursuant to the approved site plan.
12-15A-119 Signs
The requirements of the Sign Ordinance of the City shall apply to this zone.
12-15A-120 Site Plan Review
The requirements of Chapter 19 of this Title shall be enforced for any uses requiring site plan
review.
12-15A-121 Business or Industrial Parks
Any industrial park or business park developments must comply with the requirements of
Sections 12-14-120 and 12-14-121 of this Title.
12-15A-122 Outside Retail Displays and Outdoor Storage of Retail Products
The outside display, sale and storage of merchandise, goods, materials, vehicles or equipment for
sale at retail as a conditional use under this Chapter may be conducted outside of enclosed
Chapter 12-15A Airport Zone AP Updated May 2015
buildings when approved by the Planning Commission with the following conditions and
considerations:
1. The merchandise, goods, material, vehicles offered for sale in an outdoor area
shall be incidental to the specific use approved by the City.
2. All outdoor display, sales and storage areas and pads shall be designated on site
plans submitted to the City.
3. Outdoor displays in front of buildings and within parking lots, e.g., lawn mowers,
trailers, tires, garden supplies, plants, sheds, fencing, building materials, and
general merchandise, shall only be displayed in front of buildings and within
parking lots as shown on the approved site plan for the development, and shall be
placed only upon concrete or asphalt surfaces.
4. Outdoor displays shall not obstruct ingress or egress of any building or parking
lot, nor shall they obstruct any fire lane, nor otherwise impede vehicular or
pedestrian circulation or sight distances. Said displays shall maintain all required
parking, access, and circulation requirements as established in this title and
maintain a minimum setback of forty feet (40') from driveways.
5. Display areas to be located within the required front landscape setbacks, shall be
constructed using concrete or asphalt pads and shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
A. No more than two (2) display pads are allowed within the required front
landscape area; and each pad shall be separated by a distance not less than
fifty (50) feet measured from the closest edge of each pad;
B. Display pads shall not be allowed within any side landscape areas;
C. Display pads may cover no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
required front landscape area; and the height of the pad shall not be more than
two feet (2') above the sidewalk grade;
6. Retail storage areas to be enclosed within a non-covered structure shall meet the
following minimum requirements:
A. All outside retail and storage areas shall be paved with concrete or asphalt
surfaces.
B. Outside retail-storage areas shall be fully enclosed with a sight-obscuring fence or
wall that is 100% opaque.
C. The enclosure shall be constructed using a design compatible with the primary
structure and meeting all of the architectural design standards outlined in Section
Chapter 12-15A Airport Zone AP Updated May 2015
12-15A-108; or shall be constructed of ornamental metal fencing materials. Chain
link, wood, vinyl or similar fencing materials are prohibited.
1. All screen fencing shall have a minimum height of 7 feet.
2. No material, equipment or other items stored within an outside screened area shall
be stacked or piled to exceed the height of the screening fence.
3. All screening walls, fences and landscaping shall be maintained by owner at all
times.
CHAPTER 12-15B LIGHT INDUSTRIAL I-1A
12-15B-101Purpose & Objectives
12-15B-102Permitted Uses
12-15B-103Conditional Uses
12-15B-104Accessory Uses
12-15B-105Area and Density Requirements
12-15B-106Lot Frontage
12-15B-107Yard Requirements
12-15B-108Development Standards
12-15B-109Building Height
12-15B-110Uses Within Buildings
12-15B-111Distance Between Buildings
12-15B-112Outside Storage
12-15B-113Permissible Lot Coverage
12-15B-114Storage
12-15B-115Parking, Loading and Access
12-15B-116Clear Vision and Intersections
12-15B-117Bonds
12-15B-118Signs
12-15B-119Site Plan Review
12-15B-120Development Requirements
12-15B-121Restrictive Covenants
12-15B-101Purpose and Objectives
The light Industrial (I-1A) is a zoning district provided to
allow light manufacturing, business parks, professional offices,
research, development businesses and limited outside storage
within the City, to encourage a productive operating environment
for light industry and businesses and to protect industries within
the district from the adverse effects of incompatible uses.
Regulations contained herein are intended to reduce the impact of
light industries and business parks on surrounding non-industrial
land uses, to lessen traffic congestion, and to protect the health
and safety of residents and workers in the area and within the
City in general. This zoning district is established to:
I.Allow light manufacturing, business parks, professional
offices, and research and development businesses in those areas
specified in the Master Plan of the City.
(A) Promote aesthetically pleasing light industrial and
business park areas.
(B) Encourage creation of planned light manufacturing,
offices, research and development parks and complexes
exhibiting the qualities of good design and efficient
function to serve the needs of the public.
(C) Regulate the development of the light industrial areas
to provide for improved appearance, protection of
adjacent properties, preservation of street functions,
provision of off-street parking and efficient use of
municipal services,
(D) Provide areas in the City where light manufacturing
firms can engage in assembling, distribution, office or
warehousing activities which are performed entirely
within a building designed and constructed in a manner
which does not cause or produce a nuisance to adjacent
properties.
(E) Provide adequate and accessible employment
opportunities and light industrial and business
services to City residents and other area residents.
(G) Provide a limited area to allow salvage yards and
related facilities as outlined in the City's
General Plan.
12-15B-102Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1A Zone:
I.Office Buildings for Finance, Insurance, Real Estate,
Medical and Dental and other Professional Service Organizations
(A) Public Parks, Public Recreational Grounds and
Buildings; Public Buildings and Public Utilities
12-15B-103Conditional Uses
The following uses may be allowed in the Light Industrial
Zone (I-1A) as a conditional use:
(A) Automotive service centers
(B) Banks, credit unions and savings and loans
(C) Business, commercial or light industry which are
determined by the City to be similar and compatible
(D) Canning, processing and preserving of food products
(E) Coating, plating and engraving and allied services
(F) Commercial printing
(G) Hotels and motels
(H) Light manufacturing, compounding, processing, milling
or packaging of products
(I) Lumber, hardware and home improvement and wholesale and
retail sales
(J) Manufacture and assembly of communications equipment,
electronic component accessories and electronic
computer equipment
(K) Manufacture of apparel and other finished products made
from fabric and leather
(L) Manufacturing of professional, scientific and
controlling instruments and optical goods
(M) Paint, glass and wallpaper manufacture and wholesale
and retail sales
(N) Planned business parks
(O) Planned light industrial parks
(P) Processing, packaging, assembling of products in
association with a retail outlet on the property
(Q) Recreational Facilities
(R) Salvage Yards
(S) Self-Service Storage Facilities
(T) Wholesale stores or businesses, except for the storage
or sale of live animals, and the storage or sale of
commercial explosives
12-15B-104Accessory Uses
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to the
permitted uses and conditional uses provided herein may be
approved by the City in accordance with the provisions of this
Title.
12-15B-105Area and Density Requirements
Each single lot or parcel of land in an I-1A Zoning District
shall contain a minimum of 1 acre.
12-15B-106Lot Frontage
The initial lot or parcel of land in the I-1A Zone shall have
a minimum frontage of 100 feet abutting a public street.
12-15B-107Yard Requirements
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply to the I-
1A Zone:
I.Front Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the I-1A
Zone shall have a front yard depth of not less than 30 feet except
the Planning Commission may reduce the front yard to 20 feet if it
finds the yard reduction provides a more attractive and efficient
use of the property and will not be detrimental for any reason.
(A) Side Yard: Each lot or parcel of land in the
I-1A Zone shall have a side
yard of at least 30 feet ; the
total width of the two
required side yards shall not
be less than 70 feet on land
located adjacent to a zoning
district other than the I-1A
or I-1 district. There shall
be no requirements in those
instances where the side
property line abuts another
property located within the I-
1A or I-1 Zones.
(B) Side Yard-Corner Lots: On corner lots, the side yard
contiguous to the street shall
be not less than 30 feet
except the Planning Commission
may reduce the side yard to 15
feet if it finds the yard
reduction provides a more
attractive and efficient use
of the property and will not
be detrimental for any reason.
(C) Side Yard-Driveways: When used for access to any garage,
carport or parking area having
less than five parking spaces,
the side yard shall be wide
enough to accommodate an
unobstructed 12 foot paved
driveway. When used for
access to a garage, carport or
parking areas having 6 or more
parking spaces, the side yard
shall be wide enough to
provide an unobstructed 12
foot paved driveway for a oneway
traffic, or 20 foot paved
driveway for two-way traffic.
(D) Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard of 15
feet for all uses within the
I-1A Zone and in cases where a
building is located upon a lot
or parcel adjacent to any zone
other than an I-1A, I-1 or I-2
Zone the rear yard shall be 30
feet. In the event that the
rear of a building faces an
arterial or collector street,
there shall be a set back of
30 feet. The Planning
Commission may reduce the rear
yard, if in its judgment the
yard reduction provides a more
attractive and more efficient
use of the property and will
not be detrimental for any
reason.
12-15B-108Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply within the I-
1A Zone:
I. Architectural Design.
(1) All buildings within this zone shall be designed
by a licensed, professional architect and all
drawings submitted for approvals and/or permits
shall bear the architect's stamp for the State of
Utah.
(2) All sides of a building shall receive equal design
consideration with particular attention given to
areas exposed to public view.
(3) Building exterior materials facing the public road
shall be 85 percent brick, stone, stucco, glass,
colored decorative block, or stone aggregate.
Building exterior materials not visible from the
public street shall in the least case be painted
or covered with a brick veneer or stone aggregate.
All buildings within a development shall possess
a similar architectural theme. Building styles
and colors shall be compatible with existing
buildings in the area.
(4) Design of building facade facing any public street
must be at least equal to the quality of the front
or main entrance to the building.
(5) Buildings shall be designed to relate to grade
conditions with a minimum of grading and exposed
foundation walls.
(6) Exterior building materials shall be composed of
colors that will be consistent with the
environment.
(7) Mechanical equipment shall be located or screened
so as not to be visible from public and private
streets. Screens shall be aesthetically
incorporated into the design of the building
whether located on the ground or on the roof.
Roof tops of buildings shall be free of any
mechanical equipment unless completely screened
from all points of view along all public streets
by an architectural parapet. Screening materials
shall be compatible with those of the building.
(A) Landscaping. The requirements of Chapter 24 of this
Title shall apply to this Zone.
(B) Grading and Drainage. All drainage of water from any
lot must follow applicable City requirements. Drainage
shall not be allowed to flow upon adjacent lots unless
an easement for such purpose has been granted by the
owner of the lot upon which the water flows.
A site plan with grading and drainage plans and showing
the relationship of all proposed improvements on the
site must be approved by the Planning Commission and
City Council before such activities may begin. Lot
grading shall be kept to a minimum. Roads and
development shall be designed for preservation of
natural grade.
(C) Ditches and Canals. Open ditches or canals shall not
be allowed within the project site. The developer
shall work with the property owners and irrigation
companies to:
(1) Determine methods of covering, realigning, or
eliminating ditches or canals within or adjoining
the development.
(2) Determine the sizes of pipe and culverts required.
(3) Determine responsibility of periodic inspection,
cleaning and maintenance of such ditches, pipes
and culverts.
(D) Utilities. All future utility distribution lines shall
be underground in the designated easements. No pipe,
conduit, cable, line for water, gas, sewer, drainage,
steam, electricity or any other energy or service shall
be installed or maintained upon any lot (outside of any
building) above the surface of the ground except hoses,
movable pipes used for irrigation or other purpose
during construction. Transformers shall be grouped
with other utility meters where possible and screened
with vegetation and other appropriate methods.
(E) Lighting. Electrical reflectors, spotlights,
floodlights and other sources of illumination may be
used to illuminate buildings, landscaping, signs,
parking and loading areas, provided they are equipped
with proper lenses or other devices concentrating the
illumination upon the building, landscaping, signs,
parking and loading areas, on any property, and
preventing any bright, direct illumination upon
adjacent property or any public right-of-way. No
unshielded lights, reflectors, or spotlights shall be
so located that they are shining towards or are
directly visible from frequently traveled public rightof-
way.
12-15B-109Building Height
In the I-1A Zone the height of every building or structure
hereinafter designed, erected or structurally altered or enlarged
shall conform to the requirements of the most recent edition of
the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City and to the
requirements of the Airport Protective area provisions of Chapter
26 of this Title.
12-15B-110Uses Within Buildings
All uses established in the I-1A Zone shall be conducted
entirely within a fully enclosed building except those uses deemed
by the Planning Commission to be customarily and appropriately
conducted in the open and properly screened or buffered.
12-15B-111Distance Between Buildings
The distance between buildings shall be as dictated by the
latest edition of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City
of Woods Cross.
12-15B-112Outside Storage
The storage of merchandise, goods, materials, vehicles or
equipment may be conducted outside of enclosed structures when
approved by the Planning Commission with the following conditions
and considerations:
1. All such outside storage areas shall be fully
enclosed with a sight obscuring fence or wall that
is 100% opaque.
2. All screen fencing shall have a minimum height of
7 feet.
3. No material, equipment or vehicles stored within
an outside screened area shall be stacked or piled
to exceed the height of the screening fence.
4. All screening walls, fences and landscaping shall
be maintained by owner at all times.
5. At no time, may any equipment, material or
vehicles be stored, loaded or unloaded, outside of
a screened storage area. All such activities must
be conducted within the fully enclosed fenced
area.
12-15B-113Permissible Lot Coverage
Lot coverage by buildings and covered or semi-enclosed out
buildings or accessory buildings shall not exceed 70%. Coverage
for both buildings and paved areas (parking, loading and
circulation) shall not exceed 90%, thereby reserving a minimum of
10% for landscaped areas after completion of any future expansion.
Existing developments may expand only to the extent of the
coverage limits above. If such existing developments currently
exceed the above coverage limits, expansion shall not be
permitted.
12-15B-114Storage
No trash, garbage, or used materials shall be stored in an
open area. All such materials shall be kept in fully enclosed
buildings. All structures built to accommodate the storage of
trash and garbage shall be constructed using a design compatible
with the primary structure and meeting all of the architectural
design standards outlined in Section 12-14-108.
12-15B-115Parking, Loading and Access
Each lot or parcel in the I-1A Zone shall have on the same
lot or parcel off-street parking sufficient to comply with Chapter
20 of this Title.
12-15B-116Clear Vision and Intersections
No landscape, wall, fence, sign or other structure that would
obstruct the clear vision of intersecting streets shall be placed
on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street
property lines and a line connecting them at points 30 feet from
the intersection of the street lines.
12-15B-117Bonds
In order to insure the development will be constructed to
completion in an acceptable manner, the owner/developer shall
enter into an agreement and provide a letter of credit or escrow
deposit similar to the requirement applicable to subdivisions
within the City. The agreement and letter of credit or escrow
deposit shall assure timely installation of all required
landscaping, flood control facilities, parking, street
improvements and any other improvements required pursuant to the
approved site plan.
12-15B-118Signs
The requirements of the Sign Ordinance of the City shall
apply to this zone.
12-15B-119Site Plan Review
The requirements of Chapter 19 of this Title shall be
enforced for any uses requiring site plan review.
12-15B-120Development Requirements
The following requirements shall apply to Industrial Park or
Business Park developments under this Chapter:
(A) Applications. Persons desiring to create an industrial
or business park shall file a written application with
the City. The City may approve or deny the
application, taking into account the provisions of this
chapter.
(B)Minimum Land Area. The minimum land area required for
development of an industrial park or business park is 5 acres.
(C) Single ownership. The park sites shall be owned by one
person or entity at the time of application or the
subject of an application filed jointly by all owners
of the property.
(D) Lots. Main buildings may be located on individual
lots, the design and minimum area of which shall be
approved by the Planning Commission during site plan
review. Lots shall be of sufficient size to allow for
required off-street parking, adequate side yards and
landscaping. No lot shall face directly onto any
public street or highway that abuts the industrial park
or business park site along any exterior boundary.
(E) Off-street Parking and Loading. All off-street parking
and loading shall comply with the requirements of
Chapter 20 of this Title.
(F) Improvements. Improvements including, but not limited
to curb, gutter, storm drainage, water lines, sewers,
sidewalks, etc. shall be installed in accordance with
the development standards of the City for improvements
and landscaping.
(G) Ownership Association. Owners of properties within an
industrial park or business park shall be represented
by a property owner's association for the purpose of
assuring to the City that all required improvements and
landscaping are provided and thereafter maintained.
12-15B-121 Restrictive Covenants
The Owner of an Industrial Park or Business Park shall be
required to impose and record restrictive covenants running with
the land to carry out the conditions of the Conditional Use
Permit.

Amended November 6, 2018
CHAPTER 12-16A CONDOMINIUM ORDINANCE
12-16A-101. Purpose.
12-16A-102. Definitions.
12-16A-103. Compliance with Subdivision Ordinance.
12-16A-104. Planning Commission/City Council Review.
12-16A-105. Residential Condominiums to Comply with Planned Unit Development
Ordinance.
12-16A-106. Preliminary Plat Review.
12-16A-107. Final Plat Review.
12-16A-108. Final Plat Requirements.
12-16A-109. Recording.
12-16A-110. Declaration.
12-16A-111. Bylaws.
12-16A-101. Purpose.
This Chapter is intended to allow flexibility and diversification in the use of land in the
following zones of Woods Cross City; R-2, R-4, C-2, S-1, I-1, and AP. Condominium ownership
of space may be allowed as a conditional use in each of these zones. Use of the condominium
space shall be limited to those uses allowed in each zone. Nothing in this Chapter shall be
interpreted to state or imply that a condominium project, unit, association of unit owners or
management committee is exempt from compliance with the zoning ordinance, building codes or
similar development regulations adopted by Woods Cross City. No condominium plat or any
record of survey declaration or other material as required for recordation under this Chapter or
the Utah Condominium Ownership Act as set forth in Title 57, Chapter 8, Utah Code Annotated,
shall be recorded in the office of the Davis County Recorder until all aspects of the condominium
project have been approved by Woods Cross City.
12-16A-102. Definitions.
The definitions set forth at Section 57-8-3, Utah-Code Annotated, (1953), are hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
12-16A-103. Compliance with Subdivision Ordinance.
All condominium developments Woods Cross City shall be developed and comply with
the requirements of Title 11, the Woods Cross City Subdivision Ordinance, regarding
the submission of plats, and the installation of and security for necessary Public
improvements.
12-16A-104. Planning Commission/City Council Review.
Amended November 6, 2018
The approval process for condominium developments within Woods Cross City shall
follow the requirements of Chapter 12-19 of this Title, the Woods Cross City Site Plan
regulations. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 12-19, the Planning Commission
and City Council shall consider as part of the site plan review process:
(1) The geographic layout of the condominium project.
(2) The facilities for utility lines, roads and parking areas which will be constructed.
(3) The percentage of the project which will be devoted to common or recreational
use and whether or not those areas are usable and contiguous, or acceptable
configuration.
(4) Contents of the declaration with respect to the standard which must be adhered to
concerning maintenance, upkeep and operation of any roads, utility facilities,
recreational areas and open space included in the project.
12-16A-105. Residential Condominium to Comply with Planned Unit Development
Ordinance.
In addition to the requirements of Sections 12-16A-103 and 12-16A-104, all residential
condominium developments within Woods Cross City shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 12-16 of this Title, Planned Unit Developments, except that
when the condominium project involves the conversion of existing structures into
condominium ownership, the City Council may allow development located on less than 1
acre, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission and subject to any reasonable
conditions.
12-16A-106. Preliminary Plat Review.
In addition to the requirements of Section 11-3-103 of this Code, the preliminary plat
shall:
(1) Observe all requirements in chapter 12-20 (Off-Street Parking and Loading,
Woods Cross City Zoning Ordinance) and all parking facilities shall be clearly
shown on the plat.
(2) Show clearly the construction phases of the project.
(3) Have the preliminary declaration.
Amended November 6, 2018
(4) Certain items listed above or set forth with Section 11-3-103 may be waived at the
discretion of the Planning Commission when the condominium project involves
the conversion of existing structures into condominium ownership. However, all
conversions must be inspected by the City prior to preliminary approval to ensure
compliance with current building codes.
12-16A-107. Final Plat Review
At any time after approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission, but no
later than one year thereafter, the linen, four copies and an 11" x 17" copy shall be
submitted to the Community Development Department who will distribute copies to the
appropriate staff members for review of conformance to the preliminary plat and City
standards. Upon the Planning Commissions review and approval, the Commission will
forward the plat to the City Council for final action. If the final plat is rejected by any of
the foregoing officers or agencies of the City, it shall be returned to the developer with a
written statement of the reasons for rejection.
12-16A-108. Final Plat Requirements.
The final plat shall comply in all respects with the preliminary plat requirements together
with the provisions of Section 11-4-103 of this Code, and, in addition shall:
(1) Show the size in square feet and where applicable, the address of each unit in the
condominium project.
(2) Contain all other applicable items pertaining to the type of condominium project
as required by Title 57, Chapter 8, Utah Code Annotated.
12-16A-109. Recording.
The final plat, when and only when it bears all official approvals and required signatures,
shall be filed for record in the Office of the Davis County Recorder by the Community
Development Director.
12-16A-110. Declaration.
Prior to the conveyance of any unit in a condominium project, a declaration shall be
recorded which declaration shall comply in all respects with the provisions of Title 57,
Chapter 8, Utah Code Annotated.
12-16A-111. Bylaws.
The administration of every property within a condominium project shall be governed by
Amended November 6, 2018
laws which may be either embodied in the declaration or in a separate instrument, a copy
of which shall be attached to and recorded with the declaration. The contents of the
bylaws shall be governed by Section 57-8-16, Utah Code Annotated.
CHAPTER 12-16B MIXED USE CENTER
Repealed
Ordinance #579
2/6/18
Chapter 12-17 Repeal
Ordinance 406
12-2-97
CHAPTER 12-18 CONDITIONAL USES
12-18-101 Purpose
12-18-102 Conditional Use Permit
12-18-103 Application
12-18-104 Accompanying Document
12-18-105 Fee
12-18-106 Public Hearing
12-18-107 Factors to be Considered
12-18-108 Determination
12-18-109 Appeal of Decision
12-18-110 Inspection
12-18-111 Time Limit
12-18-112 Home Occupation
12-18-113 Duration
12-18-114 Amendment and Revocation
12-18-101 Purpose
To allow the proper integration into the City of uses which
may be suitable only in certain locations in the City or Zoning
District, or only if such uses are designed or laid out on the
site in a particular manner.
12-18-102 Conditional Use Permit
A conditional use permit shall be required for all uses
listed as conditional uses in the Zone regulations or elsewhere in
this Ordinance. A conditional use permit may be revoked upon
failure to comply with conditions precedent to the original
approval of the permit.
12-18-103 Application
Application for a conditional use permit shall be made by the
property owner or certified agent thereof to the City Planner or
the Chairman of the Planning Commission.
12-18-104 Accompanying Documents
Detailed site plans drawn to scale and other drawings
necessary to assist the Planning Commission in arriving at an
appropriate decision shall be furnished by applicant.
12-18-105 Fee
The fee for any conditional use permit as provided in the
City's schedule of fees shall accompany the application, no part
of which shall be refunded.
12-18-106 Public Hearing
No public hearing need be held. However, a hearing may be
held when the Planning Commission shall deem such a hearing to be
necessary and in the public interest.
A. Such hearing, if deemed necessary, shall be held within
a reasonable time after receipt of the application. The
particular time and place shall be established by the Commission.
(B) The Planning Commission shall publish a notice of
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less
than 10 days prior to date of said hearing. Failure of property
owners to receive notice of said hearing shall in no way affect
the validity of action taken.
12-18-107 Factors to be Considered
The following factors shall be weighed and considered when
determining whether a conditional use permit application should be
approved, denied, or approved with conditions:
(A) Harmony of the request with the general objectives of
the Master Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, and the particular zone in
which the request is located.
(B) Whether or not the proposed facility is necessary or
desirable to the City.
(C) Harmony of the request with existing uses in the
neighborhood.
(D) Development or lack of development adjacent to the site.
(E) Whether or not the request may be injurious to potential
development in the vicinity.
(F) Present and future requirements for transportation,
traffic, water, sewer and other utilities.
(G) Suitability of the specific property for the proposed
use.
(H) Number of other similar conditional uses in the area and
the public need for the conditional use.
(I) Economic impact on the neighborhood.
(J) Aesthetic impact on the neighborhood.
(K) Safeguards afforded to prevent noxious or offensive
omissions such as noise, glare, dust, pollutants and odor.
(L) Attempts by the applicant to minimize other adverse
effects on people and property in the area.
(M) Impact of the proposed use on the health, safety and
welfare of the City, the area, and persons owning or leasing
property in the area.
12-18-108 Determination
The Planning Commission may permit a conditional use to be
located within any district in which the particular conditional
use is permitted by the use regulations of this Title. In
authorizing any conditional use the Planning Commission shall
impose such requirements and conditions necessary for the
protection of adjacent properties and the public welfare. The
Planning Commission shall not authorize a conditional use permit
unless the evidence presented is such as to establish:
(A) That the proposed use of the particular location is
necessary or desirable to provide a service or facility which will
contribute to the general well-being of the neighborhood and the
community.
(B) That such use will not, under the circumstances of the
particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety or general
welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity, or
injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity.
(C) That the proposed use will comply with regulations and
conditions specified in this Ordinance for such use.
(D) That the proposed use will conform to the intent of the
Master Plan of the City.
12-18-109 Appeal of Decision
Any person shall have the right to appeal to the City Council
any decision rendered by the Planning Commission by filing, in
writing and in triplicate, with said City Council at any regular
meeting thereof within 30 days following the date upon which the
decision from which appeal is being taken is made by the Planning
Commission.
(A) The City Council shall notify the Planning Commission of
the date of said review in writing at least 7 days preceding said
date set for hearing so that the Planning Commission may prepare
the record for said hearing
(B) The City Council shall hold a properly noticed public
hearing on the appeal and after proper review of the decision of
the Planning Commission, may affirm, reverse, alter or remand for
further review and consideration any action taken by the Planning
Commission and shall make such decision within 30 days of the
hearing of the appeal.
12-18-110 Inspection
Following the issuance of a conditional use permit by the
Planning Commission, a building permit may be issued pursuant to
City Ordinance and development shall be undertaken and completed
in compliance with said permits.
12-18-111 Time Limit
Unless there is substantial action under a conditional use
permit within a maximum period of one year of its issuance, the
conditional use permit shall expire. The Planning Commission may
grant a maximum extension of 6 months under exceptional
circumstances.
12-18-112 Home Occupation
Any home occupation authorized by the provisions of these
Ordinances must be approved each year if required by the Planning
Commission prior to the issuance of a business license thereof.
The Planning Commission may make changes, alterations,
adjustments, regulations and restrictions as may be necessary for
the best good of the City and also the applicant seeking a permit
for a home occupation.
12-18-113 Duration
Unless otherwise specified by the Planning Commission and
subject to the provisions in this Chapter relating to the
amendment or revocation of a conditional use permit, a conditional
use permit shall be of indefinite duration and shall run with the
land. The Planning Commission may grant a conditional use permit
for a limited period of time, or grant a conditional use permit
that will be subject to review at a later date(s), if it finds
that a limited permit is necessary to protect the health, safety
or welfare of the community.
12-18-114 Amendment or Revocation
(A) Interested party. Any interested party may apply to the
City for the amendment or revocation of a conditional use permit.
For purposes of this section, "interested party" shall include
the following persons or entities:
1. The owner or lessee of the property for which the
conditional use permit was granted.
2. The City.
3. Any owner or lessee of the property that lies
within three hundred feet (300') of the property for
which the conditional use permit was granted.
4. Any person that can show that the conditional use
has a direct impact on his or her health, safety or
welfare.
(B) Fee. Any person or entity, other than the City, seeking
to amend or revoke a conditional use permit, shall pay a fee in an
amount established by resolution of the City Council.
(C) Procedure. The procedure for amending or revoking a
conditional use permit shall be the same as the original
application procedure set forth in this Chapter.
(D) Justification. A conditional use permit may be amended
at the request of the holder of the permit upon showing a good
cause. A conditional use permit may be amended or revoked at the
request of any other interested party if the Planning Commission
finds one or more of the following:
1. That the conditional use permit was obtained by
misrepresentation or fraud.
2. That the use for which the permit was granted has
ceased or has been suspended for six months.
3. That the holder or user of the conditional use
permit has failed to comply with any of the conditions
placed on the issuance of the permit.
4. That the holder or user of the conditional use
permit has failed to comply with any City, State or
Federal law governing the conduct of the use.
5. That the holder or user of the conditional use
permit has failed to construct or maintain the site as
shown on the approved site plan.
6. That the operation of the use or the character of
the site has been found to be a nuisance or a public
nuisance by a Court of competent jurisdiction in any
civil or criminal proceeding.
(E) Hearing. No conditional use permit shall be amended or
revoked against the wishes of the holder or user of the permit
without first giving him or her an opportunity to appear before
the Planning Commission and show cause as to why the permit should
not be amended or revoked. Amendment or revocation of the permit
shall not limit the City's ability to initiate or complete other
legal proceedings against the holder or user of the permit.
CHAPTER 12-19 SITE PLAN REVIEW
12-19-101 Purpose and Objectives
12-19-102 Approval Required
12-19-103 Application and Fee
12-19-104 Accompanying Maps and Drawings Required
12-19-105 Consideration in Review of Applications
12-19-106 Findings and Decisions
12-19-107 Notification of Approval or Denial
12-19-108 Completion and Maintenance of Site
12-19-109 Site Plan Modifications and Amendment
12-19-110 Signs
12-19-111 Issuance of Permit
12-19-112 Bonds
12-19-113 Deadline for Development
12-19-101 Purpose and Objectives
A design review procedure is established in order to
encourage adequate advance planning and thereby assurance a good
quality of environment for the City. Such procedure is intended
to provide for orderly, harmonious, safe and functionally
efficient development, and thus for the stability of property
values and the general welfare of the community. It is not the
purpose of this Chapter to so rigidly control design so as to
stifle creativity or individual expression, or to cause
substantial, unnecessary expense; rather, any control exercised is
intended to be the minimum necessary to efficiently achieve the
objectives stated above.
12-19-102 Approval Required
Site plan approval shall be required for all of the following
uses, together with any others for which it is required elsewhere
in these Ordinances:
A. Any industrial use.
(B) Any commercial use.
(C) Any institutional use.
(D) Any multiple-unit residential development.
(E) Any conditional use.
12-19-103 Application and Fee
Application shall be made by the property owner or an
authorized agent on a form prescribed for this purpose by the
City. At the time of filing the application, the applicant shall
pay to the City a fee as provided in the City's schedule of fees,
which fees may be changed from time to time by resolution of the
City Council.
12-19-104 Accompanying Maps and Drawings Required
The application shall be accompanied by six (6) copies of the
preliminary site plan and shall indicate the following:
(A) Structures. The location of all proposed and existing
structures on the subject property and on immediately adjoining
properties to show that adequate light and air are preserved and
to show that the development will not be detrimental to the
orderly and harmonious development of the City.
(B) Landscaping and Fencing. Location and types of
landscaping and/or fencing and screening within yards and setback
areas, including proposed sprinkling and irrigation systems.
(C) Access. Design of ingress and egress to provide a
functional on-site traffic flow and to prevent interference with
traffic on adjacent streets.
(D) Parking. Location of off-street parking and loading
facilities in compliance with applicable parking standards as set
forth in Chapter 20 of this Title.
(E) Architectural Drawings. Architectural drawings,
sketches, or perspective drawings of the exterior elevations of
proposed buildings, or structures, including types of materials to
be used.
(F) Engineering Drawings. Engineering drawings and
specifications for all proposed on and off site improvements.
(G) Sewer. Location and size of existing sanitary sewer
lines and proposed laterals to existing mains.
(H) Garbage. Location and size of all existing and proposed
garbage dumpsters, receptacles, or other garbage disposal
facilities.
(I) Hydrants. Location of the nearest existing and proposed
hydrants.
(J) Irrigation. Locations of any existing irrigation
systems including but not limited to open ditches, pipe culverts,
etc..
(K) Improvements. Locations of existing and proposed curb,
gutter and sidewalk.
(L) Asphalt. Locations of the existing edge of asphalt
surfacing and width of abutting streets.
(M) Drainage. Storm drainage plan.
(N) Drawing Orientation. North arrow and drawing scale.
(O) Other owners. Names of adjoining property owners.
(P) Engineer. All drawings containing locations and designs
of water, sewer, storm drainage and design of streets must be
signed and stamped by a qualified, registered engineer.
(Q) Trees and Shrubs. Locations of existing trees and
shrubs.
(R) Vicinity Map. A map showing the property location in
relation to the surrounding area.
(S) Signs. Location of any proposed free standing or
monument signs.
12-19-105 Consideration in Review of Applications
The Planning Commission and the City Planner shall review the
application and consider the following matters, and others when
applicable.
(A) Considerations Relating to Traffic Safety and Traffic
Congestion.
(1) The effect of the site development plan on traffic
conditions on abutting streets.
(2) The layout of site with respect to location and
dimensions of vehicular and pedestrian entrances,
exits, driveways, and walkways.
(3) The arrangement and adequacy of off-street parking
facilities to prevent traffic congestion, and
compliance with the provisions of Chapter 20.
(4) The location, arrangement, and dimensions of truck
loading and unloading facilities.
(5) The circulation patterns within the boundaries of
the development.
(6) The surfacing and lighting of off-street parking
facilities.
(B) Consideration Relating to Outdoor Advertising.
(1) Compliance with the provisions of the City Sign
Ordinance.
(C) Consideration Relating to Landscaping.
(1) The location, height, and materials of walls
fences, hedges, and screen plantings to ensure
harmony with adjacent development, or to conceal
storage areas, utility installations, or other
unsightly development.
(2) The planting of ground cover or other surfaces to
prevent dust and erosion.
(3) The unnecessary destruction of existing healthy
trees.
(4) Compliance of project with Chapter 12-24 hereof.
(D) Consideration Relating to Buildings and Site Layout.
(1) Consideration of the general silhouette and mass,
including location on the site, elevations, and
relation to natural plan coverage, all in
relationship to the character of the neighborhood.
(2) Consideration of exterior design in relation to
adjoining structures in height, bulk, and area
openings, breaks in facade facing on the street,
line and pitch of roofs, and the arrangement of
structures on the parcel.
(3) Compliance of project with any applicable
development standards.
(E) Consideration Relating to Drainage and Irrigation. The
effect of the site development plan on the adequacy of the storm
and surface water drainage. The need for piping of irrigation
ditches bordering or within the site.
12-19-106 Findings and Decisions
Upon a finding by the Planning Commission that the
application meets the intent of this Chapter and after
consideration of the items listed in the previous Section, the
design approval shall be granted, subject to such conditions as
are necessary; otherwise, approval shall be denied. The Planning
Commission may request further information or subsequent
presentation after a preliminary approval.
12-19-107 Notification of Approval or Denial
Notification of Approval or Denial. Upon the granting or
denying of site plan approval, the City Planner shall prepare and
mail or deliver to the applicant a formal statement of the
decision, and, in the case of a denial, the reasons therefor.
12-19-108 Completion and Maintenance of Site
Every site shall conform to the approved site plan or amended
site plan. No structures or improvements may be added to a site
that are not included on the approved site plan. All improvements
shown on the approved site plan or amended site plan shall be
maintained in a neat and attractive manner.
Failure to complete or maintain a site in accordance with the
approved site plan shall be a violation of the terms of this
Chapter. The City may initiate criminal and/or civil legal
proceedings against any person, firm or corporation, whether
acting as principal, agent, property owner, lessee, employee or
otherwise, for failure to complete or maintain a site in
accordance with this Chapter and with the approved site plan.
12-19-109 Site Plan Modifications and Amendments
No element of an approved site plan shall be changed or
modified without first obtaining approval of an amended site plan
as follows:
(A) When Required. An amended site plan shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission for review and approval whenever any of
the following changes are proposed for a site located in a
nonresidential zone:
(1) The exterior dimensions of a building on the site
are to be changed; or
(2) The amount or type of proposed landscaping is to be
changed (unless the applicant adds landscaping in addition to the
landscaping required by the original site plan); or
(3) The number or location of on-site parking spaces is
to be changed; or
(4) Exterior display areas are to be established or
changed; or
(5) Additions or deletions to existing buildings,
structures or fixtures on site are being made; or
(6) New buildings or structures are being added to the
site; or
(7) The Zoning Ordinance otherwise provides that an
amended site plan shall be submitted.
(B) Approval. The procedure for approval of an amended site
plan shall be the same as the procedure for approval of an
original site plan as set forth in this Chapter.
(C) Required Improvements. When a site plan is amended, the
site shall be brought into compliance with the current Zoning
Ordinance in the following areas:
(1) Landscaping.
(2) Storage.
(3) Off-street parking.
(4) Lighting.
(5) Vehicular access.
(6) Conservation of values.
(7) Off-street loading and unloading.
(8) Setbacks and building heights.
(9) On-site surface water drainage.
(10) Off-site curb, gutter and sidewalk.
(11) Piping of irrigation ditches.
(12) Sign requirements.
12-19-110 Signs
In carrying out the purpose of this Chapter with respect to
signs the Planning Commission shall pay particular attention to
the location of the sign upon the site, and its effects upon
parking, ingress and egress, the effects upon neighboring
properties, and the general harmony of said sign with the
neighborhood. Sign approval shall be granted by separate
application in accordance with the City's Sign Ordinance.
12-19-111 Issuance of Permit
A building permit shall not be issued for any building or
structure, external alterations thereto, or any sign or
advertising structure until the provisions of this Chapter have
been compiled with. Any building permit issued shall expressly
require that development be undertaken and completed in conformity
with the site plans as approved.
12-19-112 Bonds
In order to assure that the development will be constructed
to completion in an acceptable manner, the applicant shall enter
into an agreement and provide a satisfactory letter of credit,
cash bond or escrow deposit similar to the requirements applicable
to subdivisions. The agreement and letter of credit or escrow
deposit shall assure timely construction and installation of all
required landscaping, flood control facilities, parking, street
improvements and any other improvements required for site plan
approval.
12-19-113 Deadline for Development
Any failure to obtain a building permit within 1 year of the
approval of any site plan shall terminate and cancel the prior
site plan approval given whereupon a new site plan must be
submitted and approval obtained pursuant to this Chapter.
CHAPTER 12-20 OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
12-20-101 Purpose and Objectives
12-20-102 General
12-20-103 Parking Design Standards
12-20-104 Street Access
12-20-105 Parking Areas, Development and Maintenance
12-20-106 Alternatives to On-Site Parking
12-20-107 Location
12-20-108 Required Improvements and Maintenances
12-20-109 Parking Spaces Required
12-20-110 Special Provisions for Residential Development
12-20-111 Off-Street Loading
12-20-112 Storage of Commercial Vehicles-Restricted Zone
12-20-113 Parking of Fleet Vehicles in I-1 Zone and AP Zone
12-20-101 Purpose and Objectives
The purpose of this Chapter is to reduce street congestion and traffic hazards in the City by
requiring adequate, attractively designed facilities for off-street parking and loading as an integral
part of every use of land within the City.
12-20-102 General
There shall be provided at the time of erection of any main building or at the time any main
building is enlarged or increased in capacity or the use thereof is changed, or before any
conditional use permit or building permit is issued, minimum off-street parking space with
adequate provision for ingress and egress by standard-sized automobiles in accordance with
the requirements herein. All required parking facilities shall be maintained so long as any
use requiring such facilities continues.
12-20-103 Parking Design Standards
All off-street parking facilities shall be built in conformity with the following standards:
(A) Carports. Carports for residential units shall have minimum inside dimensions of 9
feet by 20 feet.
(B) Garages. Garages shall have minimum inside dimensions of 10 feet by 20 feet with
a minimum door width of 8 feet.
(C) Spaces, Multiple Dwellings. Multiple dwelling residential developments shall have
parking spaces measuring at least 9 feet by 18 feet.
(D) Spaces, Commercial/Industrial. Commercial and industrial developments shall have
parking spaces measuring at least 9 feet by 18 feet. No tractor trailers or trucks with
dimensions exceeding the 9 feet X 18 feet stall requirements shall be parked on any
property unless a site plan providing larger parking stalls is approved by the City.
(E) Handicapped. Stalls for the handicapped shall be at least 13 feet by 18 feet, unless
along side other such stalls, in which case they shall be not less than 11 feet by 18
feet.
(F) Backing Space. Backing space must be provided for all parking areas so that cars
will not back onto a public street. Public sidewalks shall not be used as a part of the
required backing area. Backing space shall be at least 24 feet.
(G) Driveway. When used for access to a parking area having 6 or more parking spaces,
a driveway shall be at least 12 feet wide for one-way traffic or 20 feet wide for twoway
traffic. Said driveway shall provide paved access to a public street. When used
for access to 5 or less parking spaces, a driveway shall be at least 12 feet wide for
one-way or two-way traffic.
(H) Access. Every parking stall shall be designed to permit reasonable ingress and
egress by standard-sized vehicles.
(I) Parallel. Parallel parking spaces shall be 8 feet by 20 feet.
(J) Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicle parking shall be allowed in multipleunit
projects only in those areas specifically designated on an approved plan for that
purpose.
12-20-104 Street Access
Access between a public street and required parking facilities shall be provided as follows:
(A) Two-way. For two-way traffic, a maximum of one driveway for each 150 feet of
frontage on an arterial or collector street Such driveway shall not be less than 30
feet in width, or more than 40 feet in width.
(B) One-way. For one-way traffic, a maximum of one driveway for each 150 feet of
frontage on an arterial or collector street. Such driveway shall not be less than 15
feet or more than 20 feet in width. A one-way driveway shall not be closer than 12
feet to any part of another one-way driveway.
(C) Proximity to Intersection. No driveway shall be closer than 40 feet to an intersection
of two streets, measured from the corner of the property line. In a residential zone,
such minimum distance shall be 20 feet.
(D) Development Standards. Height, location, structural specifications, maximum and
minimum curbs, radii permitted, and maximum roadway approach angles to the
center line of the street shall be as required in any specified Development Standards.
12-20-105 Parking Areas, Development and Maintenance
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including a
commercial parking lot and also an automobile, farm equipment, or other open-air sales lot,
shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
(A) Landscaping. The provisions of Chapter 24 of this Title shall be complied with.
(B) Surfacing. Every parcel of land hereafter used as a parking area or driveway shall be
paved with an asphaltic or concrete surfacing, shall have appropriate bumper guards
where found necessary by the City Planner, and shall be so arranged and marked as
to provide orderly and safe traffic circulation, parking, loading, unloading, and
storage of vehicles and shall be provided with a paved access from a public street.
(C) Lighting. Parking areas shall be adequately lighted with such lighting arranged and
designed so as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises in any residential or
agricultural zone and adjacent streets. Lighting arrangement and design shall be
approved by the Planning Commission.
12-20-106 Alternatives to On-Site Parking
For any new use, structure, or building other than a dwelling, required off-site parking,
which due to the size or location of the premises, cannot be provided on the premises, may
be provided on other property in accordance with the following provisions:
(A) Easement. If a building, structure, or improvement requiring parking is located upon
a parcel under different ownership, or upon a different lot from that upon which the
required parking is provided, an easement from the owner(s) of the property thus to
be used shall be executed and recorded in the Office of the Davis County Recorder
in a form first approved by the City Council and providing that the dominant
tenement of the building or other improvement will have the right to use such
parking space so long as said building, structure, or improvement exists within the
City.
(B) Time. Up to 50% of the parking facilities required by this Chapter for a use
considered to be primarily a daytime use may be provided by the parking facilities of
a use considered to be primarily a nighttime use, and up to 50% of the parking
facilities required by this Chapter for a use considered to be a nighttime use may be
provided by the parking facilities of a use considered to be primarily daytime use,
provided that such reciprocal parking area shall be contiguous, and the joint use of
such facilities is approved by the Planning Commission and is assured by executing
and recording in the office of the Davis County Recorder covenants as prescribed by
this Chapter.
12-20-107 Location
Off-street parking facilities shall be located as hereinafter specified. Where distance is
specified, such distance shall be the shortest distance measured from the nearest point on the
building that such facility is required to serve.
(A) Dwelling. For any type of dwelling, parking facilities shall be located on the same
lot or building site as the dwelling which they are required to serve.
(B) Certain Other Buildings. For hospitals, sanitariums, special care facilities,
retirement centers, asylums, orphanages and schools, parking facilities shall be
located on the same lot as the buildings they are required to serve.
(C) Other. For uses other than those specified above, parking facilities shall be located
not over 200 feet from the building they are required to serve. All parking areas to
be located with a paved, direct access way to the building and does not cross a
public street.
(D) Encroachments on Dwellings. No required off-street commercial or industrial
parking shall be permitted in any yard of any dwelling.
(E) Mixed Occupancies in the Building. In the case of mixed uses in the building or on
a lot, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be
considered as providing required parking facilities for any other use, except as
provided in the preceding Section.
12-20-108 Required Improvements and Maintenances
Every lot or parcel used as a public or private parking area shall be paved with asphaltic
cement or concrete and maintained so as to eliminate dust or mud, and shall be so graded
and drained as to dispose of all surface water. Said surface water drainage shall not cross
over the surface of a sidewalk.
12-20-109 Parking Spaces Required
For purposes of this Section "floor area" in the case of offices, and most commercial uses,
shall mean the floor area used or intended to be used by tenants, or for service to the public
as customers, patrons, clients, or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures and
equipment used for display or sales of merchandise. It shall not include areas used
principally for non-public purposes, such as storage, incidental repair, processing, packaging
or merchandise.
Except as otherwise provided in this Title, the number of off-street parking spaces for
various uses will be as follows:
(A) Automobile Courts (Motels). 1 + space for each sleeping unit or dwelling.
(B) Banks, Business or Professional Offices. 1 space for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area.
(C) Barber Shops. 2 spaces per chair.
(D) Beauty Shops. 3 spaces per chair.
(E) Bowling Alleys. 4 spaces for each lane.
(F) Car Wash and Fast Lube Services. 3 spaces in approach lane to each bay.
(G) Churches and Accessory Uses. 1 space for each 5 seats in the chapel or assembly
area, of if there is no fixed seat assembly area, then 1 space for each one hundred
square feet of floor space used for assembly purposes.
(H) Dwelling, Single Family and Two Family. 2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
(I) Dwellings, Multiple Family.
(1) 1 bedroom - 1.5 spaces per unit.
(2) 2 bedrooms - 2 spaces per unit.
(3) 3 bedrooms - 2.5 spaces per unit.
(4) More than 3 bedrooms - 2.5+ spaces per unit.
For purposes of this Chapter a "+" following the number of parking spaces
required indicates the number of spaces required may be increased, as
determined by the Planning Commission, utilizing the criteria and standards
of this Chapter.
(J) Food Establishments for the Sale and Consumption on the Premises of Food and
Beverages. 1 parking space for each 4 seats, including stools, benches, and booths,
or 1 for each 100 square feet of floor area when number of seats is unknown. Plus 1
space for each 2 employees on duty during any one shift.
(K) Food Establishments for the Sale of Food and Beverages for mainly Off Premise
consumption. 1 parking space for each 110 square feet of gross floor area.
(L) Hospitals. 2 parking spaces for each bed.
(M) Hotels. 1 + parking space per sleeping unit and 1 space for each 200 square feet of
assembly, banquet or sit-down restaurant facilities.
(N) Libraries. One parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
(O) Manufacturing Uses, Research and Testing Laboratories, Creameries, Bottling
Establishments, Bakeries, Canneries, Printing and Engraving Shops, Etc.: Not less
than 1 parking space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. Additional
employee parking may be required during site plan review.
(P) Museums and Similar Non-Assembly Cultural Facilities. 1 + space for each 500
square feet of gross floor area.
(Q) Medical and Dental Clinics or Offices. 1 parking space for each 200 square feet of
gross floor area.
(R) Mortuaries. 1 parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area of assembly rooms
used for services.
(S) Motels. (See automobile courts).
(T) Motor Vehicle and Machinery Repair. 3 exterior parking spaces for each stall, bay
or work station.
(U) Offices not Providing Customer Services or Sales on the Premises. 1 parking space
for each 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(V) Restaurants. (See food establishments).
(W) Retail Stores, Including Shopping Centers, Except as Otherwise Specified Herein. 1
+ parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area.
(X) Rooming and Boarding Housing, Lodging Houses, Clubs, and Fraternity Housing
having Sleeping Rooms. 1 parking space for each tenant.
(Y) Schools, Private, Vocational, etc. 1 parking space for each employee and 1 space for
each 3 students of driving age.
(Z) Special Care Facility. 1 + parking space for each 3 beds or for each 3 patients,
residents, or other persons using the facility.
(AA) Stadiums, Sports Arenas, Auditoriums (Including School Auditoriums) and Other
Places of Public Assembly and Dance Halls, Clubs and Lodges having no Sleeping
Quarters. 1 parking space for every 6 seats and/or 1 parking space for each 100
square feet of gross floor area used for assembly and not containing fixed seats.
(BB) Swimming Pools, Commercial and Public. 1 parking space for each 5 persons based
upon capacity load.
(CC) Theaters. 1 parking space for each 4 seats up to 800 seats, plus 1 parking space for
each 6 seats over 800 seats.
(DD) Transportation Terminals and Facilities. Adequate number of parking spaces, as
determined by the Planning Commission.
(EE) Warehouse and Wholesale Storage Building (Dead Storage of High Volume
Distribution). 1 + parking space for each employee on the maximum shift.
(FF) Uses Not Listed. The parking requirements for uses not listed above shall be
determined to be adequate by the Planning Commission.
(GG) Handicap Parking facilities designed to accommodate the handicapped may be
required by the Planning Commission.
12-20-110 Special Provisions for Residential Development
(A) Guidelines for Development. Off-street parking requirements for residential
developments listed in this Chapter are furnished for guidance. Individual project
parking requirements will be developed by the developer or builder using the
planning principles listed herein. The objective is to assure adequate but not
excessive parking areas. It is the responsibility of the developer to show that
adequate parking areas are provided.
(B) Approval. Approval of the proposed parking plan may be given by the Planning
Commission for multiple family developments following appropriate review. Single
family residential approvals will be given by the City Planner in conjunction with
issuance of a building permit.
(C) Principles. The following planning principles are provided as appropriate
considerations for arriving at a parking area requirement for multiple unit residential
developments. Other factors may also exist which are an influence in determining
the total parking requirement.
(1) Size of housing units by number of bedrooms.
(2) Cost range of units proposed.
(3) Owner/tenant characteristics and lifestyle (i.e., singles, couples, families,
professional, retired, elderly, etc.).
(4) Examination of existing comparables by area of projects.
(5) Size of project.
(6) Special parking requirements for visitors and recreational vehicles.
(7) Future parking expansion capabilities.
(8) Transportation alternatives.
(9) Work place relationships.
(10) Needs of the handicapped or elderly.
(11) Restrictive covenants.
(D) Residential. The parking area allotted in any multiple family residential project shall
not exceed 50% of the lot area remaining after subtracting the area covered by
foundations of buildings and driveways. This subsection is not intended as a
restriction on any determination of the amount of parking area required, but rather as
an indication of minimum lot size.
12-20-111 Off-Street Loading
The following provisions shall apply to off-street loading:
(A) Amount Required. For every building or part thereof having a gross floor area of
10,000 square feet or more, which is to be occupied by a commercial or industrial
use, to or from which delivery of materials or merchandise are regularly made by
motor vehicle, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same lot with such
building, at least one off-street loading space plus one for each additional 20,000
square feet of floor area.
(B) Dimensions. Each loading space shall be not less than 14 feet in width, 25 feet in
length, and 15 feet in height.
(C) Location. Such space may occupy any required side or rear yard or court except that
it shall be located no closer than 30 feet to any lot in any residential zone, and it shall
be enclosed by a concrete or masonry wall or landscaping not less than 6 feet in
height.
12-20-112 Storage of Commercial Vehicles - Residential Zone
No trucks, motor vehicles, or commercial trailers which exceed the rated capacity of one
and one-half (1 1/2) tons shall be stored or parked on any lot or parcel within any residential
zone, nor shall any contracting and/or earth-moving equipment be stored or parked on any
lot or parcel in a residential zone, except as needed to perform construction of improvements
within a reasonable time on said lot or parcel.
12-20-113 Parking of Fleet Vehicles in I-1 Zone and AP Zone
(A) For purposes of this Section, “fleet vehicles” shall mean any motor vehicles
owned by any person or entity or leased by any person or entity that are used in the normal
operation of any permitted and/or conditional use in the I-1 Zone or the AP Zone. Personal
automobiles and pick-up trucks are not considered fleet vehicles.
(B) All fleet vehicles must be:
(1) Properly licensed and street operable.
(2) Parked on an approved hard surface.
(3) Parked in a parking area designated for such purpose on the site plan.
(4) Under the gross vehicle weight of 33,000 pounds.
(5) Used in the daily operations of the permitted or conditional use in the I-1
Zone or the AP Zone
(C) A maximum of twenty (20) fleet vehicles may be parked on the site in designated
parking areas, which areas shall comply with the provisions of Section 12-20-105 of this
Ordinance. Parking stalls used for parking fleet vehicles shall be in addition to what the City’s
ordinances require for parking stalls on the site. No outside storage of the fleet vehicles shall be
allowed on the site except as provided herein.
CHAPTER 12-21 SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
12-21-101 Supplementary Regulations
12-21-102 Additional Use Regulations
12-21-103 Additional Yard Regulations
12-21-104 Projections In to Yards
12-21-105 Additional Height Regulations
12-21-106 Annexation
12-21-107 Clear View Of Intersecting Streets
12-21-108 Building Regulations
12-21-109 Fence Regulations
12-21-110 Satellite Earth Stations
12-21-111 Conservation of Values
12-21-112 Temporary Uses
12-21-113 Self-Service Storage Facilities
12-21-114 Flag Lots
12-21-115 Noise Abatement Requirements
12-21-116 Sexually-Oriented Businesses
12-21-117 Dwelling Regulations
12-21-118 Keeping Urban Chickens
12-21-119 Apiaries
12-21-120 Westwood Mobile Home Subdivision
12-21-121 Rail Spurs as a Conditional Use
12-21-122 Development Agreements
12-21-123 Public Utility Facilities
12-21-101 Supplementary Regulations
The regulations hereinafter set forth in this Chapter qualify or supplement, as the case
may be, the zone regulations appearing elsewhere in this Ordinance.
12-21-102 Additional Use Regulations
The requirements of this Ordinance as to minimum building site area shall not be
construed to prevent the use for a single-family dwelling of any lot or parcel of land in
the event that such lot or parcel of land is held in separate ownership at the time the
original Ordinance of which this Section is a revision and codification became effective.
12-21-103 Additional Yard Regulations
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, every required front, side and rear
yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky. Unless otherwise
provided in this Chapter, any encroachment into the required front, side and rear
yard is prohibited.
(B) Accessory buildings may be permitted in the required rear yard subject to the
distance, location, and size restrictions for accessory buildings as set forth in the
underlying zone. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted in the required front
or side yard.
(C) On any lot held under a separate ownership from adjacent lots, and of record at
the time of passage of the original Ordinance of which this Section is a revision
and codification, the side yard requirements may be waived to the extent that the
buildable width of such lot is not reduced to less than 25 feet, except that at least a
4 foot side yard is required on each side of any interior lot and the side yard on the
street side of a corner lot must be at least 10 feet.
12-21-104 Projections Into Yards
(A) The following improvements and/or structures may project into or be erected
within any required front, side or rear yard area, except that required driveways
shall remain unobstructed from the ground upwards:
(1) Fences and walls, subject to clear view standards and compliance with
applicable City Ordinances.
(2) Landscaping elements, including trees, shrubs and other plants, subject to
clear view standards and compliance with applicable City Ordinances.
(3) Necessary appurtenances for utility services, subject to clear view
standards and compliance with applicable City Ordinances.
(B) The following structures or architectural features may project into a required front
or rear yard not more than 4 feet and into a required side yard not more than 2
feet, except that required driveways shall remain unobstructed from the ground
upward:
(1) Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or similar architectural
features.
(2) Fireplace structures, bay windows or other similar architectural features
provided they are not wider than 10 feet and are generally parallel to the
wall of which they are a part.
(3) Stairways, door stoops, fire escapes, awnings, and planter boxes or
masonry planters.
(C) Except as otherwise provided herein, decks, balconies, porches, patios and similar
structures shall be prohibited within the required front, side and rear yards.
(1) A deck or patio that is open on three sides, is not covered, and is less than
3 feet in height as measured from the finished grade, may project into the
required rear yard not more than 15 feet; provided, such decks and patios
may not extend into or over a utility easement or within 5 feet of any
property line.
(2) A covered porch may project into the front yard not more than 4 feet.
12-21-105 Additional Height Regulations
(A) Public, semi-public, or public service buildings or hotels, when authorized in a
zone, may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet, if the building is set back
from each otherwise established building line at least one foot for each additional
foot of building above the normal height limit required for the zone in which the
building is erected.
(B) Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the
building, and fire or parapet walls, skylight, towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys,
smokestacks, water tanks, wireless masts, theater lofts, silos or similar structures
may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed, but no space above the
height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space.
(C) No main building shall be erected to a height less than 8 feet 6 inches.
12-21-106 Annexation
Annexed land shall, upon annexation, be classified in the same zone as that existing on
contiguous land or as classified by the City Council.
12-21-107 Clear View Of Intersecting Streets
No obstruction to view in excess of 2 feet in height, except a reasonable number of trees,
shall be maintained on the premises of a corner lot between the front and side street lines
and the building lines, provided that such trees as are planted shall be not less than 15 feet
from the front and side street lines, and are pruned high enough to permit unobstructed
vision to automobile drivers.
12-21-108 Building Regulations
Domestic water supply and sewage disposal shall comply with the County Health
Department requirements as represented by a certificate of approval from said Health
Department in all applications for a building permit where either an approved supply of
piped water under pressure, or a sewer, is not available.
In all cases where septic tanks are required for sewage disposal, the County Health
Department must approve all subdivisions and/or building plans in any zone. On the
recommendation of the County Health Department, the Planning Commission may
increase all area restrictions set forth herein, when the reason for so doing is to provide
adequate sewage disposal. The Building Inspector shall grant no building permit for
structures requiring septic tanks without the approval of the County Health Department in
writing.
12-21-109 Fencing Regulations
(A) Residential Zones: The following restrictions shall apply to all fences located in
residential zones:
(1) Front Yard. The maximum height of a sight-obscuring fence located
within a front yard shall be 3 feet. The maximum height of a non sightobscuring
fence located within the front yard shall be 4 feet.
(2) Clear Vision Area - Corner Lots. In all zones which require a front yard,
no structure in excess of 2 feet in height, with the exception of a 4 foot
high non-site obscuring fences, shall be placed on any corner lot within a
triangular area formed by the street property lines and the line connecting
them at points 30 feet from the intersection of the street lines. Street trees
and other landscaping are permitted which are pruned and trimmed so as
not to obstruct a clear view by motor vehicle drivers, as determined by the
City Engineer.
(3) Side Yard (Street) - Corner Lots. The maximum height of a sight
obscuring fence constructed within 5 feet of any street shall be 3 feet.
(4) Other Areas. The maximum height of any fence located on any other
portion of the lot shall be six (6) feet. However, a fence may be erected to a
height of eight (8) feet along a property line that adjoins the Interstate 15
right-of-way.
(B) Non-residential Zones. The following restrictions shall apply to all fences located
in nonresidential zones:
(1) Height. The maximum height of fences in non-residential zones shall be 7
feet.
(1) Location. No fence higher than 3 feet shall be located in the front or side
yard adjacent to a street.
(2) Adjacent to Residential. Any fences located adjacent to a residential zone
which are required in addition to the buffering requirements contained in
Chapter 24 of this Title shall be 6 feet in height. The height of the fence
shall be measured from the property line of the adjacent residential
property. The Planning Commission may, however, for good cause,
require up to an 8 foot fence.
(4) Other Areas. The maximum height of any fence located on any other
portion of the lot shall be six (6) feet. However, a fence may be erected to
a height of eight (8) feet along a property line that adjoins the Interstate 15
right-of-way.
(C) Ranch or Farm Fence. The maximum height of a non-sight obscuring ranch or
farm fence shall be 8 feet. Ranch or farm fences are only allowed on parcels for
which the primary use of the land is ranching or farming. Ranch or farm fences
shall not be required to comply with the setback requirements set forth above.
However, if the City Planner and City Police Chief determine that the fence
would cause a public safety problem, more restrictive requirements may be
imposed.
(D) Concertina Wire or Outriggers. Concertina and outriggers shall be prohibited in
all Zones except the I-l and I-2 Zones.
(E) Clear Vision Area. No fence shall be constructed so that it obstructs the clear
vision area of a corner lot.
(F) Retaining Walls. Where a retaining wall protects a cut below or a fill above the
natural grade and is located on the line separating lots, such retaining wall may be
topped by a fence, wall or hedge of the same height that would otherwise be
permitted at the location if no retaining wall existed.
(G) Definitions.
SIGHT OBSCURING OR NON-SIGHT FENCE. A fence so constructed that it
limits or impairs visibility through and beyond such fence. An open mesh chain
link or other similar open type fence shall be considered sight obscuring if slats
are placed therein or grapes or other vines are allowed to grow thereon.
CONCERTINA WIRE. Spiral strands of wire, generally barbed, placed
horizontally along the top of a fence.
OUTRIGGERS. A fence whereon the upper portion is angled outward from the
lower vertical portion.
(H) Illustration. See Appendix "C" attached hereto, identified as "Figure l, Fences".
12-21-110 Satellite Earth Stations
A satellite earth station may be located in any residential, commercial, manufacturing or
open space zone.
(A) A satellite earth station shall be located behind the front setback line in all zones.
(B) In the residential and open space zones, satellite earth stations shall not be used
for commercial purposes, but shall be for private use only.
(C) In the Residential (R) zones, satellite earth stations mounted to the ground shall
not exceed a maximum height of twenty feet (20') above grade. In all other zones,
satellite earth stations mounted to the ground shall not exceed the maximum
height for structures in the zone.
12-21-111 Landscaping, Maintenance and Storage
(A) Any lot in any zone shall be improved and maintained as follows:
(1) Landscaping shall be installed and properly maintained in a good
condition free from weeds and noxious plants, refuse and debris in front
and side yards including the park strip.
(2) Landscaping shall be installed within 14 months from the date of
occupancy. When unique or unforeseen circumstances exist, the
Community Development Department may grant an extension.
(3) Driveways leading from a street to a parking lot, private garage, carport or
other off-street parking space shall be paved surfacing except that such
paved surfacing need not extend more than seventy feet (70’) from the
street right-of-way line. Paved surfacing shall be completed within one
year from the date of the occupancy of the building
(4) No trash or rubbish shall be allowed to accumulate on any lot in any zone.
(5) It shall be unlawful to park, store, leave or to permit the parking, storing,
or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed motor vehicle of any kind or part
thereof, which is in a wrecked, junked, partially dismantled, inoperative or
abandoned condition, whether attended or not, upon any private property
within the City limits for a period of time in excess of 15 days, except that
two (2) or less such vehicles or parts thereof may be stored if within a
building, or placed behind an opaque screening fence; and except that said
vehicles and parts may be within a junk yard or automobile wrecking yard
lawfully established pursuant to the provisions of this Title.
(B) Where allowed, the storage of merchandise, partially or completely dismantled
automobiles or salvage materials in any zone shall be enclosed in a sight-obscuring
fence of not less than six (6) feet in height, and such storage shall not be placed in a
greater height than the enclosing wall or fence.
12-21-112 Temporary Uses
(A) Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to allow certain
land uses within the City of Woods Cross which are temporary in nature and are
not permitted or conditional uses in any zone. The character of such uses requires
proper conditions to protect the owners, occupants, and users of adjacent
properties and to insure compatibility with the zone district and adjacent
properties.
(B) Scope and Applicability. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the
temporary uses enumerated herein. This Chapter is intended to regulate all
temporary used conducted on private property. This Chapter shall not apply to
activities lawfully conducted by a government agency.
(C) Permitted Temporary Uses. Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, and to
other applicable regulations of the zoning district in which the use is permitted,
the following temporary uses shall be permitted in the zoning district specified
upon a finding by the Zoning Administrator that the parcel on which the
temporary use will be located is adequate in size, that there is adequate parking
and traffic access, that the uses will not conflict with the uses in the neighborhood
of the subject property and that the applicant has agreed to comply with such
other conditions as the Zoning Administrator deems necessary to insure that the
temporary use will not have any material detrimental impact upon other
properties.
(1) Produce Stands- permitted only in A-1, C-1, C-2, I-1 and S-1 zones.
(2) Farmers Market- permitted in the C-2 and I-1 zones. The site must have
adequate parking. Requires new conditional use permit annually.
(3) Seasonal Product Sales-Christmas trees, fireworks, flower stands,
snowcones, and shaved ice stands permitted only in C-1, C-2, I-1, and S-1
zones.
(4) Construction Offices- permitted in all zones.
(5) Construction Staging Area- permitted only in I-1 and I-2 zones.
(6) Festival, Carnival or Circus Events- permitted only in C-2 and I-1 zones.
Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed 5 days. The
concessionaire responsible for operation of any such festival, carnival or
circus shall submit, at least 10 calendar days in advance of the event date,
a site layout displaying adequate ingress and egress plan for emergency
vehicles with no dead-end aisles.
(D) Application for Temporary Use Permit. An application for temporary use
permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator at least 10 days prior to the date
of requested use. The Zoning Administrator may deny an application or issue a
temporary use permit. In authorizing a temporary use, the Zoning Administrator
shall impose such requirements and conditions as considered necessary for the
protection of adjacent properties and the public welfare in conformance with
standards as provided in this Title. The City Council may set a permit fee, which
shall be paid by the applicant before any temporary use permit is issued. An
application for a temporary use permit shall be accompanied by the following
information:
(1) A detailed written description of the proposed temporary use, including
requested length of permit and hours of operation.
(2) A description of the lot or property on which the requested use is to be
conducted, including but not limited to, parking areas, curb, gutter,
sidewalk and curb cuts. Parking areas for the proposed use shall be
surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other surface acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator. Storage containers may not be used in conjunction with a
temporary use. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, the
ownership shall be identified along with evidence of permission of the
owner for such temporary use to take place.
(3) Site map, if requested by Zoning Administrator.
(4) Sufficient information to determine the yard requirements, sanitary
facilities and availability of parking and access to serve the use.
(5) The Zoning Administrator may impose other conditions necessary to
assure that the temporary use does not have a detrimental impact on the
subject or neighboring properties.
(E) Expiration of Temporary Use. Each temporary use permit shall contain an
expiration date based upon the nature of the use.
(1) Produce Stand- five months- June 1st to November1st.
(2) Farmers Market- five months- June 1st to November 1st.
(3) Seasonal Produce Sale- expiration date based upon the use.
(4) Construction Offices- one hundred and eighty days.
(5) Construction Staging Area- one hundred and eighty days.
(6) Festival, Carnival or Circus Events- five consecutive days in a calendar
year per applicant.
(7) Any use in excess of the limits above requires conditional use approval.
(8) The site much be restored to its original condition upon expiration of the
temporary use permit. In order to assure that the site is restored to its
original condition, a bond as set forth in the City’s consolidated fee
schedule shall be posted prior to the issuance of a temporary use permit.
(F) Revocation of Temporary Use Permit.
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall, upon reasonable notice and after a
hearing, be empowered to suspend or revoke the temporary use permit of
any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of the Chapter or
any of the conditions set forth on their permit.
(2) If, at any time, a permit under the provisions of this Section is suspended
or revoked, it shall thereafter be unlawful for any person to operate, open,
maintain, manage or conduct any temporary use until a new permit is
issued by the City.
(G) Standards for Temporary Use. Temporary use shall comply with the general
standards as provided below, plus any additional conditions as may be established
by the Zoning Administrator.
(1) Acceptable space shall be available for any off-street parking and traffic
circulation generated by the use.
(2) Sanitary facilities shall be available for waste disposal for protection of
community health and safety.
(3) Night lighting, if allowed, shall be compatible with adjacent uses.
(4) Hours of operation shall be compatible with adjacent uses.
(5) Signs must be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(6) No use shall be placed in the public right-of-way. Display areas shall be
limited and applications shall comply with the requirements of the City’s
Business License Ordinance.
(7) In addition to the standards listed above the following shall apply to
construction staging areas:
(i) Site shall be surrounded with a 6-foot, chainlink fence.
(ii) Site shall be provided with a hard or gravel surface to
prevent dust and mud.
(iii) Gravel, mud and debris shall not be tracked from site on to
adjacent streets.
(iv) Hazardous material shall not be stored on site.
(H) Planning Commission Review. When considered appropriate by the Zoning
Administrator or the Planning Commission, a temporary use permit may be
referred to the Planning Commission for review.
(I) Appeal. Any person adversely affect by the decision of the Zoning Administrator
or the Planning Commission may appeal the decision to the Board of Adjustment
by filing a written appeal with the Board of Adjustment within ten (10) days of
the decision, setting forth the reasons why the decision should be overturned or
modified. Decisions of the Board of Adjustment may be appealed as outlined in
Section 12-4-102(K) of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Woods Cross.
12-21-113 Self-Service Storage Facilities
(A) Purpose and Intent. This section is provided for the development of self-service
storage facilities in the I-1 Light Industrial Zone. It is intended that such facilities
shall be planned in a manner that they will be in harmony with the intended
environment of the I-1 Light Industrial Zone.
(B) Permits Required. Self Service Storage facilities may be permitted as a
conditional use in the I-1 Light Industrial Zones of the City, subject to the
development standards set forth in this section. Where this section does not
provide specific direction concerning development standards, the provisions in the
other applicable chapters of this title shall apply.
(C) Development Standards.
(1) Minimum Land Area. The minimum area required for development of a
self-service storage facility is two (2) acres, but in no case shall the
development exceed ten (10) acres or be less than 2 acres.
(2) Site Plan Review. The requirements of Chapter 19 of this title shall apply.
(3) Landscaping. The requirements of Chapter 24 shall apply.
(4) Site Design. Building shall be so situated and/or screened that overhead
access doors are not visible from off the site.
(5) Screening. The project shall be screened by a six foot high decorative
block wall to be installed at the front and side corner yard setback lines
and may consist of either solid facades of the storage structures or a block
wall. Under no circumstances shall said walls be placed at property lines.
The yard setback area shall be landscaped in conformance with the
standards set forth in Chapter 24 of this title. All other sides of the
property shall be screened with a minimum 6-foot sight-obscuring fence.
(6) Off-Street Parking and Loading. Parking shall be provided by parking
lanes adjacent to the buildings. These lanes shall be, at minimum, 26 feet
wide where cubicles open onto one side of the parking lane only and at
minimum, 30 feet wide where cubicles open onto both sides of the parking
lane. In addition, two (2) covered parking spaces shall be provided
adjacent to the manager's residence. Four (4) parking stalls shall be
provided for customer use adjacent to the facility's office.
(7) Outside Storage. No outside storage shall be permitted.
(8) Signage. Signs shall be limited to one sign for each property line abutting
or joining a street right-of-way.
Signs identifying the nature of the storage facility shall not exceed 15 feet
in height or 40 sq. feet in area.
No additional advertising signs will be permitted on the property or
buildings.
(9) Accessibility. Vehicular ingress-egress shall be limited to 1 point for each
side of property abutting any public street. Such access or driveway shall
be so designed as to allow a minimum of two (2) cars to pull off the street
between the security gate and the road. If appropriate, emergency vehicle
access may be required by the Planning Commission.
(10) Building Heights. Building heights shall be limited to one(1) story, not to
exceed 16 feet at the eaves.
(11) Storage Unit Size. Any storage unit, stall or locker shall not exceed 600
square feet size.
(12) Lighting. All outdoor lights shall be shielded to direct light and glare only
onto the self-service storage facility premises and may be of sufficient
intensity to discourage vandalism and theft. The Planning Commission
may set standards and restrictions on lighting of such facilities.
(13) All service-storage facility rental contracts shall include clauses
prohibiting:
(i) The storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive
materials, or hazardous chemicals, and
(ii) The use of the property for uses other than dead storage.
(14) Conformance with all other applicable City regulations and requirements
is required.
(D) Live in Manager. A resident manager shall be required on site and shall be
responsible for maintaining the operation of the facility in conformance with the
conditions of approval and all applicable ordinances.
(E) Use Restrictions. No person, on the premises covered by a conditional use permit
for a self-service storage facility, shall conduct any of the following:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or lessee of any self-service
storage facility or portion thereof to offer for sale, or to sell any item of
personal property or to conduct any type of commercial activity of any
kind whatsoever, other than leasing of the storage units, or to permit same
to occur upon any area designated as a self-service storage facility. A selfservice
storage facility may hold quarterly sales to liquidate property
which has been abandoned or to collect unpaid rents.
(2) It shall be unlawful to conduct the servicing or repair of motor vehicles,
boats, trailers, lawnmowers or similar equipment.
(3) It shall be unlawful to store flammable liquids, highly combustible or
explosive materials or hazardous chemicals or waste on the premises of
any self-service storage facility.
(F) Hours of Operation. The Planning Commission may restrict the hours of
operation if circumstances exist which warrant such a restriction.
12-21-114 Flag Lots
(A) Purpose. In order to provide a more efficient use of land and only as a "last
resort," flag lots may be approved as a conditional use when listed as a
conditional use within a particular zone. The purpose in allowing flag lots is to
accommodate the development of property that otherwise cannot be developed
under the regulations contained in the ordinances of the City. The primary
purpose of this Section is not to make development of property easier or less
costly. Rather it is intended to provide a means to evaluate the possible
development of property for which no other way to develop exists.
(B) Considerations. The following items shall be considered by the Planning
Commission in determining whether to approve a Flag Lot request.
(1) Under the requirements of the City's Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision
Regulations, if there is a possibility for a street and it would use less than
50% of the proposed area, a Flag Lot shall not be considered.
(2) Whether the Flag Lot would be adjacent to another Flag Lot.
(3) Development of the property in question through adherence to the City's
zoning and subdivision regulations would not be practical.
(4) Creation of a Flag Lot should not foreclose the possibility of future
development of other large interior parcels that are not developable until a
street is extended to them across other adjacent properties.
(C) Flag Lot Requirements. All Flag Lot development shall conform with the
following conditions:
(1) A Flag Lot shall be comprised of a staff (narrow) portion that is
contiguous with a flag (wide) portion.
(2) The staff portion of the lot shall front on and be contiguous to a public
street. The minimum width of the staff portion, at any point, shall be 20
feet, however, two lots may share a minimum 30 ft. staff portion and
required frontage.
(3) All driveways shall be paved along their length with asphalt or concrete.
Such surface shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed
loads of fire and emergency vehicles. The minimum paved width of a
driveway shall be 10 feet. A shared staff shall have a minimum paved
width of 18 feet.
(4) Any side yard from a lot adjacent to the staff portion shall be at least 8
feet.
(5) The maximum length of a Flag Lot staff shall not exceed 200 feet.
(6) No building or structure shall be located in the staff portion of the lot.
(7) The flag portion of the Lot shall conform to the minimum lot development
standards of the zoning district in which it is located. In addition, all yard
setbacks and all other regulations of the zoning district shall be complied
with.
(8) The front yard shall be considered to be the side of the Flag Lot portion
that adjoins the staff, i.e. towards the street of origin.
(9) Any portion of a Flag Lot staff that is not hard surfaced for egress/ingress
shall be landscaped.
(10) The Planning Commission may require screen fencing to be erected
around the staff portion of the Lot in consideration of affected adjacent
properties.
(11) The main building on a Flag Lot shall be located no further than 250 feet
from the street on which the Lot has frontage. The main building shall be
located no further than 250 feet from a fire hydrant measured over a route
a fire hose would logically be laid.
(12) All requests for Flag Lot development shall be submitted to the South
Davis Fire District for review and approval prior to Planning Commission
review.
(13) All flag lots shall have the street address displayed in a prominent location
where the staff portion fronts on the public street.
(D) Subdivision Land. All flag lot development shall conform to the requirements of
the City's Subdivision Ordinance.
12-21-115 Noise Abatement Requirements
Any undeveloped land adjacent to a proposed or existing State Highway or Interstate that
is to be utilized for a noise sensitive use as defined by the latest Utah Department of
Transportation Noise Abatement Policy shall include noise abatement measures
consistent with the latest UDOT Noise Abatement Policy and determined appropriate and
necessary by the Planning Commission.
12-21-116. Sexually-Oriented Businesses.
(A) Purpose. The purpose and objective of this Section is to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually-oriented businesses
or their location in areas deleterious to the City, regulate the signage of such
businesses, control the adverse affects of such signage, and prevent inappropriate
exposure of such businesses to the community. This Section is to be construed as
a regulation of time, place, and manner of the operation of these businesses,
consistent with the United States and Utah Constitutions.
(B) Definitions. Terms involving sexually-oriented businesses which are not
defined in this Title shall have the meanings set forth in the City Business
Regulations regarding sexually-oriented businesses.
(C) Location of Businesses.
(1) Outcall services shall be allowed as a conditional use in areas zoned C-2
and I-1.
(2) Sexually-oriented businesses, except outcall services, shall only be
allowed as a conditional use in areas zoned I-1, provided that no sexuallyoriented
business shall be located:
(i) Within 1,000 feet of any school, public park, library, or religious
institution;
(ii) Within 500 feet of any agricultural or residential zoning boundary
within the City; or
(iii) Within 600 feet of any other sexually-oriented business, except
outcall services.
(3) Distance requirements between structures and uses specified in this
Section shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or zoning districts, from the property boundaries of the school,
public park, religious or cultural activity, residential use, or other sexuallyoriented
business, or from the right-of-way line of a gateway to the
structure of the sexually-oriented business.
(4) Distance requirements from zoning districts for this Section shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
zoning districts, from the closest zoning boundary of a residential or
agricultural district to the sexually-oriented business structure.
(D) Effect on Non-Conforming Businesses. All existing legal, non-conforming
sexually-oriented businesses, as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this Section, or any amendment hereto, shall comply with the provisions of this
Section within nine (9) months from the date this ordinance is enacted.
(E) Signs. Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in the City Sign Ordinance,
the more restrictive requirements for signs shall prevail. Signs for sexuallyoriented
businesses shall be limited as follows:
(1) No more than one exterior sign shall be allowed.
(2) No sign shall be allowed to exceed 18 square feet.
(3) No animation shall be permitted on or around any sign or on the exterior
walls or roof of such premises.
(4) No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to or inferring
the nature of the business shall be allowed on any sign. Said signs shall
contain alphanumeric copy only.
(5) Only flat wall signs and/or awning signs shall be permitted.
(6) Painted wall advertising shall not be allowed.
(7) Other than the signs specifically allowed by this Section, the sexuallyoriented
business shall not attach, construct, or allow to be attached or
constructed any temporary sign, banner, light, or other device designed to
draw attention to the business location.
12-21-117 Dwelling Regulations
In addition to the requirements set forth elsewhere in these Ordinances, all single-family
dwellings within Woods Cross City shall comply with the following:
(A) Building Lot. Except as otherwise provided, every dwelling shall be located and
maintained on a separate building lot having no less than the minimum area,
width, setback, yard, and frontage requirements for a dwelling in the zone in
which the lot is located.
(B) Minimum Size. All dwellings erected within the City shall have a minimum of
eleven hundred (1100) square feet of finished gross floor area, exclusive of
basements, open porches, carports and garages. The width of each dwelling shall
be at least twenty feet (20’) at the narrowest part of its first story exclusive of any
garage area. The width shall be considered the lesser of the two primary
dimensions.
(C) Federal Standards. All dwellings must be constructed in accordance with the
Uniform Building Codes, as adopted amended by the City, or be certified under
the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act (HUD
Code) and approved and issued an insignia by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development. If the dwelling is certified by the Department of
Housing and Urban Development, the dwelling or additional structures may not
be modified in violation of the HUD Code or the Uniform Building Codes, as
adopted and amended by the City, whichever is applicable to the modification.
(D) Real Property. The real property and the dwelling thereon must be held in
common ownership and taxed as real property.
(E) Permanent Foundation. All dwellings must be adequately installed and secured to
a permanent concrete foundation in accordance with the Uniform Building Codes,
as adopted and amended by the City, or the Installation Standards as defined in
Chapter 2, whichever is applicable.
(F) Utilities. All dwellings must be permanently connected to and approves for all
required utilities.
(G) Exterior Siding. Exterior siding and trim materials shall consist of durable,
weather resilient materials approved for dwelling construction in the Uniform
Building Codes such as masonry, stucco, wood, vinyl, and steel or aluminum
residential siding. In no case may corrugated metal or corrugated plastic covering
be used on a dwelling.
(H) Garages. All dwellings shall be provided with a garage of carport constructed
concurrently with the dwelling in accordance with the provision of Chapter 20 of
this Title and the Uniform Building Codes, as adopted and amended by the city.
(I) Roof. The roof of the dwelling must be pitched at a minimum of three to twelve
(3:12) and shall have a roof or surface of wood shakes or shingles, asphalt,
concrete, clay or metal tiles or slate. The roof overhang must be at least twelve
inches (12”) measured from the vertical side of the dwelling.
(J) Model Homes. No residential occupancy permit shall be issued for a model home
until such time as the structure has been fully converted to a residence. Such
conversion shall include but not be limited to restoring the garage from an office
back to a garage, driveway restoration and the removal of signage and lighting.
The restoration of all areas with appropriate landscaping shall be completed by
the end of the next growing season. The developer or contractor constructing the
model home shall provide the City with a performance bond to ensure the
residential conversion upon termination of the use of the model home. The City
shall determine the amount of the bond.
12-21-118 Keeping Urban Chickens
Purpose and Intent: This Section sets forth the following conditions and regulations for
keeping urban chickens in designated zones within the City:
(A) It is unlawful for any person to keep within the City any urban chickens without
first making an application for and obtaining a Conditional Use Permit to do so.
The fee for such permit shall be as set forth in the City consolidated fee schedule.
(B) The City has discretion to revoke the permit for cause and may also revoke the
permit where a complaint is made to the City regarding noise or odor due to
chickens and the owner of the property at issue fails to mitigate such noise or odor
to the City’s satisfaction.
(C) No more than a combination of ten (10) hen chickens or chicks shall be allowed
on a single lot.
(D) No chickens shall be kept in a residential zone for the purpose of commercial
production and distribution.
(E) Partially enclosed and/or roofed structure (e.g. cages, pens, coops, etc.) shall be at
least three (3) feet behind the main building, at least one (1) foot from all property
lines, and fifteen (15) feet from dwellings on adjacent lots.
(F) A chicken coop must provide at least two (2) square feet of space for each
chicken kept therein.
(G) All coops or structures where chickens are kept shall be painted or sprayed with
disinfectant at least every four months.
(H) All droppings under roosts or hutches shall be cleaned out at least once every two
(2) weeks.
(I) All structures for housing animals shall be kept and maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition for the health and wellbeing of the animals and the surrounding
neighbors.
(J) It is unlawful for the owner of property on which urban chickens are kept, or for
any person in charge of urban chickens, to permit such animals to trespass upon
the premises of another.
(K) Application for an urban chicken permit shall have the consent of the property
owner.
(L) A minimum of 400 square feet of fenced landscaped rear yard area shall be
provided.
(M) Any roosters hatched shall be properly removed from the property within six (6)
months of age.
(N) All feed shall be properly stored within a rodent proof container.
(O) The slaughtering of hen chickens shall be permitted for personal food use with all
discarded material being placed within a secured container and disposed of
properly.
(P) Roosters and hen chickens that are no longer desired or in excess of the allowed
number shall be properly slaughtered and disposed of or removed from the
property. It shall be strictly prohibited for unwanted animals to be deposited and
abandoned at any off premises location within the City or County.
(Q) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any chickens in a manner contrary to
provisions of this Section. Any such violation shall be subject to enforcement
procedures found within this Title and/or be subject to the provisions of
City/County Animal Control regulations.
12-21-119 Apiaries
Purpose and Intent: This Section sets forth the following conditions and regulations for
keeping apiaries in designated zones within the City:
(A) It is unlawful for any person to keep within the City any apiary without first
making an application for and obtaining a conditional use permit to do so. The
fee for such permit shall be set forth in the City’s consolidated fee schedule.
(B) The City has discretion to revoke the permit for cause at any time and may also
revoke the permit where a complaint is filed with the City regarding interference
with the normal use and enjoyment of any public property or property of others
and the owner of the property at issue fails to mitigate interference to the City’s
satisfaction.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any beekeepers to keep any colony or colonies in such a
manner or of such disposition as to cause any unhealthy condition, interfere with
the normal use and enjoyment of human and animal life of others or interfere with
the normal use enjoyment of any public property or private property of others.
(D) Flyways. In each instance in which a colony is situated within 25 feet of a public
or private property line of the property upon which the apiary is situated as
measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, the beekeeper
and property owner shall establish and maintain a flyway barrier of at least 6 feet
in height consisting of a solid wall, fence, dense vegetation, or combination
thereof that is parallel to the property line and extends 10 feet beyond the colony
in each direction so that all bees are forced to fly at an elevation of at least 6 feet
above the ground level over the property lines in the vicinity of the apiary.
(E) Water. Each person keeping bees shall ensure that a convenient source of water is
available to the bees at all times during the year so that the bees will not
congregate at swimming pools, pet watering bowls, bird baths, or other water
sources where they may cause human, bird, or domestic pet contact.
(F) Number of colonies. It shall be unlawful to keep more than the following number
of colonies on any tract of land within the city based upon the size or
configuration of the tract on which the apiary is situated:
(1) One quarter acre or less – 2 colonies
(2) More than one quarter acre but less than one half acre size – 4 colonies
(3) More than one half acre but less than one acre – 6 colonies
(4) One acre or larger – 8 colonies
(5) Regardless of tract size where all hives are situated at least 200 feet in any
direction from all property lines of the tract on which the apiary is situated
there shall be no limit to the number of colonies.
(G) All apiaries within the City shall be registered with the Utah Department of
Agriculture as required by the laws, rules and regulations of the State of Utah.
12-21-120 Westwood Mobile Home Subdivision
Any addition or enlargement of buildings or structures located within the Westwood
Mobile Home Subdivision which are approved by the City pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 12-22 of this Ordinance shall comply with the following requirements:
(A) No home, measured from foundation or mobile home structure without
add-ons to the property line, shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to
the property line.
(B) Add-ons, consisting of patios, carports, cemented or hard surfaced areas,
or other non-enclosed additions to the manufactured mobile home, shall be
located not closer than five (5) feet from the property line. All such
homes and add-ons shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the road
curbs.
(C) If the mobile home tongue remains attached it shall be set back a
minimum of six (6) feet from the road curbs or walks.
(D) Accessory buildings, located to the rear or side of the main building or
manufactured mobile home, shall have a side and rear yard of not less than
one (1) foot and shall be located not closer than ten (10) feet to a mobile
home on adjacent property.
(E) Driveways shall not be considered part of the home or add-ons for the
purposes of this Section.
12-21-121 Rail Spurs as a Conditional Use
Rail spurs are allowed as a conditional use in Light Industrial (I-1) and Heavy Industrial
(I-2) Zones. No application for a conditional use permit for a rail spur in the City shall be
approved until the property owner proposing the rail spur and the City have entered a
written development agreement. The development agreement shall not become effective
until approved by the Woods Cross City Council. The issues to be addressed in the
written development agreement shall include the following:
(A) A completed set of design plans showing, in detail, the location and elevation of
each rail spur and its size and location, as well as all construction, development and
structures associated with the use of the rail spur including facilities to load or
unload rail cars and other issues addressed in this section.
(B) How the rail spur will improve the safety of the community and other benefits to the
community;
(C) Impact on at-grade railroad crossings particularly changes that may negatively
impact the movement of street traffic throughout the City. This shall include details
about the current traffic level of rail cars used at the facility, any increase or decrease
in rail traffic that will be generated by the proposed new rail spur, and the effect of
such rail traffic upon the movement of street traffic throughout the City;
(D) How the proposed rail spur will affect air quality in the City and protect or improve
air quality;
(E) Impacts on adjacent properties and the surrounding neighborhood such as sound,
odor, light, glare and aesthetics, including information about the hours of operation
for the rail spur, to ensure there are no negative impacts on adjacent residential uses;
(F) Buffering elements shall be required for sound, light, glare, odors and aesthetics on
boundaries adjacent to or within 1,500 feet of residential uses;
(G) Provisions for handling waste, waste water and storm waters, including the
installation of environmental containment systems at the facility;
(H) Compliance with applicable regulations of any governmental agencies having
jurisdiction over the business operations of the property owner or user.
(I) Details regarding the removal or modification of any existing rail spurs and other
structures or facilities;
(J) The impacts on any public infrastructure not addressed herein;
(K) Compliance with the City Code and the City’s General Plan;
(L) Any other matters that relate to the protection and promotion of the health, safety and
welfare of the City residents and the general public; and
(M) The development agreement shall include the legal description of the real property
involved and shall be recorded with the office of the Davis County Recorder, State
of Utah.
12-21-122 Development Agreements
The city is empowered and authorized to utilize development agreements to accomplish
the purposes of its land use ordinances. All development agreements entered by the City shall
comply with the requirements of the City’s ordinances and regulations.
12-21-123 Public Utility Facilities
(a) Definitions. As used herein the terms “Public Utility Facilities,” “Facilities” or “Facility”
mean any above-ground device or group of devices of a culinary water, irrigation, sewer,
natural gas, electricity, telecommunications, cable television, or other public, quasi-public
or private utility system. Excluded from this definition are: (a) conventional utility poles,
(b) features or equipment to be placed on utility poles, (c) features or equipment whose
primary benefit is limited to the building or land use where the feature or equipment is
located; and (d) facilities for the treatment or storage of solid or hazardous waste.
(b) Purpose, Scope and Intent. The purpose of this section is to establish use and
development regulations for public utility facilities to ensure they are compatible with
adjoining uses. This Chapter shall apply to Public Utility Facilities within the City. These
requirements shall not be construed to prohibit or limit other applicable provisions of this
Title, the Woods Cross City Code, or other laws. By adopting this section, the City
intends to minimize the visual impact of Public Utility Facilities on streets, open spaces
and adjoining development, to minimize the impact of Public Utility Facilities on
vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the City, to ensure appropriate and safe sight lines, to
keep larger Public Utility Facilities away from residential uses to the extent reasonably
possible, to promote aesthetic values within the City, and otherwise to ensure the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the City.
(c) Permitted Facility Development Standards. A Public Utility Facility that conforms to the
development standards of this subsection (c) shall be permitted in any zone in the City.
(i) Location. A permitted Public Utility Facility shall be located on property
owned by the public utility or within a dedicated public utility easement,
at least fifteen (15) feet from any habitable structure, and shall not be
located in the path of any planned street or trail as illustrated on the City's
General Plan.
(ii) Maximum Size. The maximum above-ground size, consisting of
equipment and any surrounding real property needed for the facilities, of a
permitted Public Utility Facility shall be as follows:
(A) If located within the parkstrip of an improved street, five (5) feet
horizontally parallel to a street by two (2) feet perpendicular to the
street and three (3) feet vertically above existing grade.
(B) If not located within the parkstrip of an improved street, six (6)
feet in any direction horizontally and six (6) feet vertically above
grade.
(iii) Color and Appearance. A permitted Public Utility Facility shall be painted
or constructed of materials with earth-tone colors.
(iv) Security. A permitted Public Utility Facility shall be made secure as
needed to provide public safety and to protect utility equipment.
(v) Visual Obstructions. A permitted Public Utility Facility shall conform to
the visual obstruction regulations of this Title.
(d) Conditional Use Facility Development Standards. A public utility substation that does not
conform to the permitted facility development standards of subsection (c), above, may be
established in any zone where such use is identified as a conditional use, subject to the
conditional use requirements of this Title, and subject to the following development
standards:
(i) Landscaping. A Facilities site shall be landscaped in accordance with a
landscaping plan approved by the Planning Commission and shall comply
with applicable landscape requirements of this Title.
(ii) Fencing and Security. Facilities shall be obstructed by a fence constructed
of cast concrete, masonry block or material of similar trength and
appearance, and shall be secured by locking gates of an appearance that is
compatible with the fence and with surrounding development.
(iii) Location, Size and Access Requirements. If identified as a conditional use
in a residential zone, conditional use Facilities shall not be located in any
park strip or front yard, shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from a habitable
structure, and shall not exceed twelve (12) feet horizontally and ten (10)
feet vertically above grade. In all other zones where identified as a
conditional use, Public Utility Facilities shall not be subject to minimum
size requirements, provided the other factors identified in this section are
considered and reasonable size requirements are made by the Planning
Commission. Facilities are not required to be located adjacent to a
dedicated street. If not located on a dedicated street, access to Facilities
shall be secured by an approved and dedicated easement.
(iv) Other Considerations. The Planning Commission shall consider, and may
condition approval upon, the following factors: compatibility with the
City’s General Plan; parcel size needs in light of thepurposes and needs of
the Facilities and the activities to be performed thereon; parking needs;
access considerations; vehicular and pedestrian traffic adjacent to the
Facilities or within the perimeter of the Facilities; equipment to be utilized
at the Facilities and its movement onto and within the Facilities; and
maintenance needs for the Facilities and adjacent improvements including
without limitation ongoing maintenance of landscaping and fencing.
Chapter 12-22 PRIOR NONCONFORMING USES
12-22-101 Purpose and Intent
12-22-102 Nonconforming Buildings and Structures
12-22-103 Construction Approved Prior to Enactment
12-22-104 Nonconforming Uses, Substitution, Extension
12-22-105 Change of Use Not Allowed
12-22-106 Cessation of Use
12-22-101 PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. This Chapter shall apply to the existing use of a building, structure or land lawfully
established at the time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance or any amendments
thereto which does not conform to the present regulations of the zone in which it is
located. Because Woods Cross is a community which has developed over a long
period of time, the regulations of this Chapter are to allow continued use of such
property or structure, while at the same time protecting existing conforming
development and furthering orderly development and improvement of the
community.
B. Uses of nonconforming buildings, structures or land which are compatible with
existing development, should be allowed to continue. Improvement for better
integration into surrounds should be sought as much as possible.
C. Uses of nonconforming buildings, structures or land which create a nuisance, or
detract from or are a hazard to the community or a neighborhood, should be
eliminated or brought into compliance with the present provisions of this Title.
12-22-102 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES
A. Ordinary Maintenance and Repair: A nonconforming building or structure may
be maintained or repaired so long as such work does not increase the nonconformity
of the building or structure.
B. Addition or Enlargement: A nonconforming building or structure which is
nonconforming due to height, lot coverage, setbacks, area requirements or
architectural design standards shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner,
except by approval of the City Council in consideration of the prior recommendation
of the Planning Commission. A request to expand a building or structure which does
not conform to height, lot coverage, setbacks, architectural design standards, or area
requirements shall be reviewed based upon the following criteria:
1. That granting of the expansion will not adversely impact the attainment of
the General Plan of the City;
2. That the expansion will improve the general appearance or safety of the
buildings or structure and the surrounding area.
3. That by expanding the building or structure, the character of the
neighborhood is not adversely impacted;
4. That the expansion will improve the area by providing additional or adequate
parking;
5. That any expansion will be adequately screened or buffered, if needed, so as
not to increase impacts to the adjoining properties; and
6. That the proposed expansion, alteration or change does not create new nonconformities.
C. Damage or Destruction: A nonconforming building or structure which is damaged or
partially destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity or act of nature or the
public enemy, may be restored. The occupancy or use of such building structure or part
thereof which existed at the time of such partial destruction may be continued or resumed
provided that such restoration is started within a period of one year and is diligently
prosecuted to completion within a period of two years. In the event such damage or
destruction exceeds three times the assessed value of such nonconforming building or
structure, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made, except in the case of residences or
accessory farm buildings, unless every portion of such building or structure is made to
conform to all regulations for new buildings in the zone in which it is located, as determined
by the Planning Director.
D. Moving Nonconforming Buildings: A nonconforming building or structure may only be
moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot if:
1. Approval is granted by the City Council in consideration of the prior
recommendation of the Planning Commission; or
2. Every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all the
regulations of the zone in which it is to be located.
12-22-103 Construction Approved Prior to Enactment
A building, structure, or part thereof which does not conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is situated, but for which a building permit was issued and construction started
prior to the enactment of this Title (or a substantially similar preceding provision), may be
completed in accordance with such plans, provided work is prosecuted continuously and without
delay. Such building shall be deemed to be nonconforming and shall be subject to the regulations
set forth herein.
12-22-104 Nonconforming Uses:
A. Right of Use:
1. The lawful nonconforming use of a building, structure or land existing at the
time the applicable zoning regulations became or becomes effective may be
continued.
2. A vacant building or structure may be occupied by a use for which the
building or structure was designed or intended if so occupied within a period
of one year after the intended use of the building or structure became
nonconforming.
`B. Enlarging, Altering, or Changing Nonconforming Uses:
1. No nonconforming use may be enlarged, altered or changed, and no
nonconforming use of land may occupy additional land, except as provided
in this Section.
a. Enlargement, Alteration or Change. A nonconforming use may not
be enlarged, altered or changed unless authorized by the City Council
in consideration of the prior recommendation of the Planning
Commission based upon the following criteria:
(1) That the expansion, alteration or change of the use would not
adversely impact the surrounding properties more than the
existing nonconforming use;
(2) That the proposed expansion, alteration or change will make
the building, structure or site more compatible with the
surroundings and existing zoning;
(3) That the site of the proposed expansion, alteration or change
of use conforms to all site development requirements as
physically possible, given existing site limitations; and
(4) That the proposed expansion, alteration or change does not
create new non-conformities.
b. Extension Beyond Original Lot or Tract. No expansion,
alteration or change of the nonconforming use shall be allowed which
would extend beyond the original lot or tract of land.
2. Public Hearing. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on any
proposed enlargement, alteration or change of a nonconforming use and shall
allow interested persons to be heard prior to making its findings and decision
with regard thereto. The City Council shall provide reasonable notice of the
public hearing at least 14 days before the date of the hearing pursuant to the
requirements of Section 10-9-103(2) of the Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as
amended.
12-22-105 Change of Use Not Allowed
Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, such a use shall not
thereafter be changed or returned to a nonconforming use.
12-22-106 Cessation of Use
A use shall be deemed to have ceased when it has been discontinued either temporarily or
permanently for a period of one year or more, whether or not with the intent to abandon said use,
subject to the following provisions:
A. Cessation of Use of Building Designated or Designed for Nonconforming Use.
Except for residential or accessory farm structure, a building or structure,
which was originally designed for a nonconforming use, shall not be put to a
nonconforming use again when such use has ceased for one year or more.
B. Cessation of use of Building Not Designed for Nonconforming Use. A building or
structure, which was not originally designed as a nonconforming use, shall not be put
to a nonconforming use again when such use has ceased for 6 months or more.
C. Cessation of use of Nonconforming Use of Land. A nonconforming use of land not
involving any building or structure (except minor structures such as fences, signs,
and buildings less than 400 square feet in area) shall not be resumed when such uses
has ceased for 3 months or more.
D. Cessation of Keeping of Nonconforming Animals. The keeping of nonconforming
animals shall not be resumed when such use has ceased for one
year.
CHAPTER 12-23 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRIAL AND OTHER USES
12-23-101 Purpose and Objectives
12-23-102 General
12-23-103 State Agency Notification
12-23-104 Performance Standards Review
12-23-105 Locations Where Determinations are to be made for
Enforcement of Performance Standards
12-23-106 Dangerous and Objectionable Elements
12-23-101 Purpose and Objectives
The following performance standards are intended to ensure
that all industries will provide necessary modern control methods
to protect the City from hazards and nuisances; to set objective,
quantitative standards for the maximum tolerated levels of
frequently hazardous or annoying emissions; and to protect any
industry from arbitrary exclusion or persecution based solely on
the characteristics of that type of industry's past uncontrolled
operation.
12-23-102 General
No land or building devoted to uses authorized by this
Chapter shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create
dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable fire,
explosive, or other hazard; noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor,
or other form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness, glare,
electrical, or other disturbance; liquid or solid refuse or waste;
or other substance, condition, or element in such a manner or in
such an amount as to affect adversely the surrounding area or
adjoining premises. The foregoing are hereinafter referred to as
"dangerous or objectionable elements."
12-23-103 State Agency Notification
The City Planner shall confirm to the Planning Commission
that the State Department of Environmental Quality is informed of
all applicants for conditional use permits for industrial uses.
12-23-104 Performance Standards Review
In addition to meeting other application requirements for
conditional use permit, parties seeking conditional use permit for
an industrial use shall include in the application a description
of the proposed machinery, products, and processes to be located
at the development. If, in its opinion, the proposed use may
cause the emission of dangerous or objectionable elements, the
Planning Commission may refer the application for investigation
and report to one or more expert consultants qualified to advise
as to whether a proposed use will conform to the applicable
performance standards specified in this Chapter. Such consultant
shall report as promptly as possible. A copy of such report shall
be promptly furnished to the applicant.
A. Ruling By Planning Commission. Within 20 days after the
Planning Commission has received the aforesaid application agreed
to by the applicant, the Planning Commission shall determine
whether reasonable measures are being employed to assure
compliance with the applicable performance standards and may
approve or disapprove a Conditional Use Permit or may modify the
proposed plans, construction specifications, device or operation.
(B) Conditional Compliance. Any permit so authorized and
issued shall show only that reasonable measures are being taken.
It shall not relieve the applicant of the responsibility of
meeting such standards when the facility is actually in operation;
and, in case of failure to perform in accordance with the
standards, whatever additional devices or modifications in process
shall be necessary to achieve full compliance with the standards
shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant.
(C) Continued Enforcement. The City Planner shall
investigate or cause to be investigated any purported violation or
performance standards; and, if necessary for such investigation,
may request that the City employ qualified experts. Should the
violation of performance standards threaten the public health,
safety, or welfare, the City Council may, after due notice and
hearing, order the offending facility to cease operation until
proper steps are taken to correct the conditions which cause the
violation. The services of any qualified experts, employed by the
City to advise in establishing a violation, shall be paid by the
violator if said violation is established in a hearing, otherwise
by the City. Operation of a facility ordered to cease operation
pursuant to this paragraph shall be a Class "B" misdemeanor for
each day of such use.
12-23-105 Locations Where Determinations Are to Be Made for
Enforcement of Performance Standards
The determination of the existence of dangerous and
objectionable elements may be made at any point, provided however,
that the measures having to do with noise, vibration, odors, or
glare, shall be taken at the property line of the establishment.
12-23-106 Dangerous and Objectionable Elements
(A) Noise. At points of measurement stated in Section 12-
23-105 of this Chapter, the maximum sound pressure level radiated
in each standard octave band by any use or facility (other than
transportation facilities or temporary construction work) shall
not exceed the values for octave bands lying within the several
frequency limits given in Table I, after applying the corrections
shown in Table II. The sound pressure level shall be measured
with a sound level meter and associated Octave Band Analyzer
conforming to standards prescribed by the American Standards
Association. (American Standards Sound Level Meters for
Measurement of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.3 - 1944, American
Standards Association, Inc., New York, N.Y., and American
Standards Specification for an Octave-Bank Filter Set for the
Analysis of Noise and Other Sounds, 224.10 - 1953, or latest
approved revision thereof, American Standards Association, Inc.,
N.Y., N.Y., shall be used).
TABLE I
Frequency Ranges Containing Standards Octave Band in Cycles Per
Second and Octave Bands Sound Pressure Level Limits in Decibels re
0.0002 dyne/cm2.
0 to 74, 69
75 to 149, 54
150 to 299, 47
300 to 599, 41
600 to 1,199, 37
1,200 to 2,399, 34
4,800 and above, 28
TABLE II
Type or Location of Operation Character of Noise.
1. Emission only between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
2. Noise source operated less than 5% of any one-hour period.
+5a
3. Property is not located in one of the Residential Districts
and is not within 500 feet of any Residential-District. +5a
4. Noise of Impulsive character, (hammering, etc.) +5a
5. Noise of periodic character (hum, screech, etc.). -5b
Correction in Decibels.
a. Apply one plus correction only.
b. Apply one minus correction only.
(B) Vibration. No vibration (other than from transportation
facilities or temporary construction work) shall be permitted
which is discernible without instruments at the point of
measurement specified in Section 12-23-105 of this Chapter.
(C) Odors. No emission of odorous gasses or other matter
shall be permitted in such quantities as to readily be detectable
when diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four of
clean air at point of measurement specified in Section 12-23-105
of this Chapter, or at points of greatest concentration, any
process involving creation or emission of any odors shall be
maintained if primary safeguard system should fail. (There is
hereby established as a guide in determining such quantifies of
offensive odor, Table III, "Odor Thresholds," in Chapter 5, Air
Pollution Abatement Manual, Copyright 1951, Manufacturing Chemists
Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., and said manual and/or table
as subsequently amended.)
(D) Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from
flood lights or from high temperature processes such as combustion
or welding or otherwise, shall be permitted to be visible at the
points of measurement specified in Section 12-23-105 of this
chapter. This restriction shall not apply to signs or lighting of
buildings or grounds for protection as otherwise permitted by the
provisions of this Ordinance.
(E) Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities involving,
and all storage of flammable and explosive materials, shall be
provided at any point with adequate safety devices against the
hazard of fire and explosion.
(F) Radioactivity or Electric Disturbances. No activities
shall be permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity at any
point, or electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation
of any equipment other than that of the creator of such
disturbance.
(G) Smoke. No emission shall be permitted of smoke or
gasses except in accordance with air pollution provisions of the
Utah State Department of Environmental Quality or any successor
agency.
(H) Fly Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gasses, and Other Forms of
Air Pollution. No emission shall be permitted except in
accordance with air pollution provisions of the Utah State
Department of Environmental Quality.
(I) Liquid or Solid Wastes. No discharge at any point into
public sewer, private sewage system, storm drains, or stream or
into the ground shall be permitted, except in accordance with the
standards approved by the Utah State Department of Environmental
Quality or standards equivalent to those approved by such
Department, or by other ordinances of the City. No materials or
wastes shall be deposited on any property in such form or manner
that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or
forces, and any wastes which might be attractive to rodents or
insects shall be stored outdoors only in closed containers.
CHAPTER 12-24 LANDSCAPE STANDARDS
12-24-101 Purpose
12-24-102 Landscaping Required
12-24-103 Parking Lot Screening
12-24-104 Parking Lot Trees
12-24-105 Landscaped Setbacks
12-24-106 Buffers
12-24-107 Required Internal Landscaping
12-24-108 Percentage of Ground Cover in Living Materials
12-24-109 Percentage of Tree Size
12-24-110 Irrigation
12-24-111 Assurances for Installation & Completion
12-24-112 Non-Conforming Uses and Development Plans
12-24-113 Prohibition of Elms
12-24-114 Limitations on Certain Trees Within 25' of Rights of Way
12-24-115 Screening of Loading Docks, etc.
12-24-116 Administrative Relief
12-24-101 Purpose
The purpose of the landscaping standards are to promote aesthetically
pleasing commercial, light industrial and business park developments; to
protect property values through preservation and planting of vegetation,
screening, and landscaping materials. Specifically, these standards are
intended to reduce excessive heat, glare, and accumulation of dust; to provide
privacy from noise and visual intrusions; and to prevent the erosion of soil
and excessive runoff of drainage water.
12-24-102 Landscaping Required
No plans for any building, structure, or change in land use or other
improvements shall be approved by the Planning Commission unless there shall
also have been submitted landscaped plans to the Planning Commission, which
plans are signed and stamped by a licensed, professional landscape architect.
Landscaping in accordance with the plans submitted must be installed within 30
days or otherwise approved by the City Planner as seasonal conditions may
dictate. In such cases, the owner/developers shall bond for such landscape
improvements to insure that installation is completed as submitted and
approved.
12-24-103 Parking Lot Screening
Open parking spaces, except in one-family and two-family residential
projects in any zone district, shall be screened from view from adjacent
properties and streets to an eventual minimum height of three (3) feet by the
use of berms and/or plantings. A minimum of two-thirds (2/3) of the affected
street frontage or property boundary--not counting intersecting driveways--must
have the required screen. Structures such as decorative walls or fences may be
approved if the Planning Commission finds that:
1 The structures avoid a blank and monotonous appearance by such
means as architectural articulation and the planting of vines, shrubs, or
trees, or
(A) The total use of berms and/or plantings is not physically feasible,
or
(B) The structures attractively compliment the use of berms and/or
plantings.
The maximum spacing of plants to achieve an acceptable screen and the maximum
acceptable grades for screening areas--such as sodded berms and planting beds--
shall be consistent with the requirements of this Chapter.
POLICIES.
I.The shrubs used as a parking lot screen shall substantially conform to
the types and spacings provided in Appendix A of this Chapter.
1. In general, the reference elevation for the base of the required
screen shall be the surface of the parking area space that is to be
screened.
2. The following maximum grades shall be conformed to in the parking
lot screen area:
(a) Sodded berms: 3:1 (3 feet horizontal: 1 foot vertical)
(b) Planting beds: 2:1
These standards may be applied to other planting areas, as well.
12-24-104 PARKING LOT TREES
One (1) tree of a type suitable for parking lots shall be provided for every
fifteen (15) open (not in garage) vehicular parking stalls in parking lots with
fifteen (15) or more stalls. The tree types and minimum planter sizes shall be
consistent with the requirements of this Chapter. The required trees may be
clustered but shall be located to divide and break up expanses of paving and
long rows of parking stalls and to create a canopy effect in the parking lot.
In order to be considered within the parking lot, the trees must be located in
planters that are bounded on at least three (3) sides by parking lot paving.
This means that only trees in landscaped "islands" or "fingers" can count
toward the parking lot tree requirement. Planters shall be of sufficient size
and design to accommodate the growth of the trees and to prevent damage to the
trees by vehicles.
POLICIES
(A)The trees used as the required parking lot trees shall substantially
conform to the types marked in Appendix A of this Chapter.
The City recognizes that trees in addition to those marked in
Appendix A may be approved in a parking area if special conditions
exist. For example:
(a) A relatively small proportion of deciduous ornamental trees
may be approved if a ratio of trees to parking spaces greater
than the minimum requirement is provided.
(b) Coniferous evergreen trees may be approved if such trees are
planted in areas which exceed the minimum recommended planter
size and if vehicular visibility is not a problem.
1. The minimum size of parking lot planters shall substantially
conform to the details provided in Appendix B, figures 1 and 2.
2. The required parking lot trees shall be located within the "parking
lot area" which is essentially where vehicles park and maneuver and
excludes other landscaping areas.
3. The City recognizes that parking lot trees have the greatest
beneficial impact in relatively large parking lots, such as in
shopping centers. The City recognizes that relatively small
parking lots or parking lot sub-areas (for example, a maximum of 30
parking stalls with one aisle) may not significantly benefit from
trees within the parking area. However, in such cases the required
parking lot trees should be provided adjacent to the parking area,
in conjunction with other required trees, to provide visual relief
and shading.
EXAMPLES
An example showing parking lot trees in an area determined to be the
"parking lot area" is provided in Figure #2.
12-24-105 LANDSCAPED SETBACKS
Required minimum landscaped setbacks are required in all zone districts.
One-family and two-family residential projects in any zone district are
excluded.
(B) Minimum Depth of Landscaped Setback.
1. Adjacent to an expressway or freeway on the City's Master Street
Plan--25'.
2. Adjacent to arterial on the City's Master Street Plan--20'.
3. Adjacent to any non-arterial street--10'.
4. Adjacent to a non-street boundary of the zone district-- no minimum
depth requirement, (however, must provide for required "non-street
boundary" trees discussed below or may need to provide "buffer"
requirements discussed in Section 12-24-106, if applicable).
(C) Minimum Number of Trees in Landscaped Setbacks and Non-street Boundaries.
1. Adjacent to an expressway, or freeway on the City's Master Street
Plan--A minimum of one (1) tree for every twenty feet (20') of
frontage of the property within the zone district.
2. Adjacent to an arterial on the City's Master Street Plan--A minimum
of one (1) tree for every twenty-five feet (25') of frontage of the
property within the zone district.
3. Adjacent to any non-arterial street--A minimum of one (1) tree for
every thirty feet (30') of frontage of the property within the zone
district.
4. Adjacent to any non-street (interior) boundary--A minimum of one
(1) tree for every thirty feet (30') of non-street (interior)
boundary of the property within the zone district. These trees do
not need to be located in a landscaped setback of a minimum size
but shall be in planters of sufficient size and design to
accommodate the growth of the trees and to prevent damage to the
trees by vehicles. The planter specifications shall be consistent
with the requirements of this Chapter.
5. These required landscaped setback and boundary trees may be
clustered along a particular frontage or boundary. The trees shall
be selected from the list of tree types that are commonly known to
grow in the area, listed in Appendix "A".
6. The required landscaped setback trees may be located in a
landscaped setback with a depth greater than the minimum required
depth; however, in any case the required trees shall be located
within fifty feet (50') of the street side property line. The
required boundary trees shall be located within fifty feet (50') of
the non-street (interior) boundary of the zone districts.
7. The required landscaped setback trees may be permitted to be
located in part or in total in the adjacent public right-of-way
area, if: (1) approved by the Planning Commission, (2) the
District Engineer approves the trees in the case of a State
Highway, and (3) no conflicts exist with utility easements.
8. The required landscaped setback trees shall be located in the
adjacent public right-of-way area or parkway if these trees cannot
be placed in the landscaped setback area due to the existing
development of the site. However, such trees are required only to
the extent that: (1) approval is granted by the Planning
Commission, (2) the District Engineer approves the trees in the
case of a State Highway, and (3) no conflicts exist within utility
easements.
9. Walls and fences which are 25% or more opaque in design shall be no
higher than three feet (3') above finish grade in required
landscaped setback. Opaque walls and fences higher than three feet
(such as noise barriers) must be located outside of the landscaped
setback to maintain a landscaped appearance along the street.
POLICIES
(A)The City recognizes the need for flexibility in the development of
some relatively small sites. On a lot with a net size (excluding adjacent
public streets) of less than one (1) acre, the landscaped setback may be
approved at less than required depth on up to one-half (1/2) of the street
frontage if the average depth of the landscaped setback complies with the
required depth.
1. The trees used as required landscaped setback trees may be any of
the types which are commonly known to grow in the City area (see
list in Appendix A).
Relief may be granted to the minimum number of trees in an arterial
street setback if the setback is planted with large deciduous shade
trees. The number of such trees, however, should not be less than
one tree per 40' of frontage.
2. Relief may be granted for retaining walls higher than three feet
(3') in a required landscaped setback where special grading
conditions exist. Such retaining walls shall be visually softened
by plantings of trees, shrubs and vines.
3. Relief may be granted to waive non-street (interior) boundary trees
if the subject boundary is located within a common parking lot
planned for two adjoining districts. Parking lot trees would be
required, however.
4. Public sidewalks may be permitted to "meander" into a required
landscaped setback area if landscaping is provided and maintained
in the right-of-way to adequately compensate for the loss of
landscaping in the setback area.
EXAMPLES
An example showing the landscaped setbacks and trees that may be required
in a project is provided in Figure #3.
A copy of the City's "Master Street Plan" is provided in the appendix.
12-24-106 BUFFERS
(B) Buffer Between Non-Residential and Residential Projects Separated By a
Non-Arterial Street
1. Where Required. Such a buffer is required along the streetside
property line in any non-residential project in any zone district
where such a project is separated from a residential district by a
non-arterial street. Non-arterial streets are those not designated
as arterial streets on the City's Master Street Plan. Public
alleys are considered non-arterial streets for the purposes of this
sub-section.
2. Design Standards. Such a buffer shall be a minimum of fifteen feet
(15') in depth. The minimum number of trees in such a buffer shall
be one (1) tree for every fifteen feet (15') of the frontage length
of the buffer. A minimum of one-third (1/3) of the trees shall be
evergreen trees. These requirements may effectively increase the
depth and number of trees of the "minimum required landscaped
setback".
This buffer area shall require a ground covering with a minimum of 75% in
living plant materials.
(C) Buffer Between: (1) Adjacent Non-Residential and Residential Projects
and (2) Adjacent Multi-Family Residential and Single-Family/Two-Family
Residential Projects.
Such a buffer is required in the following situations:
1. Along the common property line in any non-residential project in
any zone district where such a project is adjacent to any
residential zone district.
2. Along the common property line in any multi-family project (a
project with three or more dwelling units in one building) in any
zone where such a project is adjacent to a one-family or two-family
zone district.
(D) Design Standards
Such a buffer shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') in depth. The
minimum number of trees in such a buffer shall be one (1) tree for every
fifteen feet (15') of the length of the buffer. A minimum of one-third
(1/3) of the trees shall be evergreen trees.
This type of buffer is not required to consist of a minimum percentage in
ground covering by living materials. However, that portion of the buffer
area in a ground covering by non-living materials shall be covered with
bark, wood chips, rock, stone, or similar materials. The Planning
Commission may approve a buffer design of lesser standards where it is
shown that characteristics of the property make it unfeasible to meet the
standards set forth above.
(E) Policies
1. The trees used as required buffer trees may be selected from the
types which are commonly known to grow in the City area (see list
in Appendix A). A concentration of small ornamental trees with
open branching and foliage and relatively slow growth is
discouraged, however.
2. The City recognizes that the actual uses of the land may vary
greatly along a required buffer between a non-residential project
and a residential project. The storefronts, service docks, parking
areas, or landscaped spaces of a non-residential project may face
the dwelling entries, private patios, parking areas or landscaped
spaces of a residential project. The minimum standards of the
buffer may be approved to vary to reflect the varying interface of
the uses. For example, an opaque fence or wall may be required
between two properties if greater impacts are expected.
(F) Examples
An example of a required buffer is provided in Figure #4.
12-24-107 REQUIRED INTERNAL LANDSCAPING
(A) Purpose
"Internal" landscaping requirements are intended to augment the
"boundary" landscaping requirements (such as landscaped setbacks and
buffers) and parking lot landscaping requirements. The purpose of
"internal" landscaping is to visually soften the mass of buildings and to
visually separate building areas from parking areas. The City recognizes
that flexibility in the design of spaces and tree selection is needed.
This flexibility is needed because of: (1) the diversity of building
designs, (2) the possible limitations on plant selections due to building
foundation problems posed by the root growth of some trees, and (3)
building foundation problems posed by the irrigation of expansive soils.
These requirements do not apply to one-family and two-family residential
projects in any zone district.
1. Requirements for multi-family projects (a project with three or
more dwelling units in one building) in any zone district.
(a) Minimum internal landscaping area. A minimum of fifteen
percent (15%) of the site's net area (site's area excluding
adjacent public streets).
(b) Minimum internal landscaping area. A minimum of one (1) tree
for every 500 square feet of the required minimum internal
landscaping area.
2. Requirements for non-residential projects in any zone district:
(a) Minimum internal landscaping area. A minimum of five percent
(5%) of the site's net area (site's area excluding adjacent
public streets).
(b) Minimum number of trees in the internal landscaping area. A
minimum of one (1) tree for every 500 square feet of the
required minimum internal landscaping area.
Up to one half (1/2) of the required trees may be substituted by
shrubs adjacent to retail storefronts where the view of wall signs
may be obstructed. Ten (10) shrubs with a minimum container size
of five (5) gallons shall be provided for each tree that is
replaced.
3. Standards for the minimum internal landscaping area and minimum
number of trees:
Location of the minimum area to be credited toward the minimum
internal landscaping area requirement, a landscaping area shall be
located as follows:
(a) Adjacent to those building elevations which form the major
public views of the project from adjacent streets and
properties and to the users of the project, or
(b) Within a plaza or courtyard between buildings or portions of
buildings, or
(c) In a space provided to separate building areas from parking
spaces areas, or
(d) In a similar location in which substantially conforms to the
stated purpose of the required internal landscaping area (see
above), if approved by the Planning Commission.
The location of spaces credited toward the minimum internal
landscaping area requirement shall be consistent with the
requirements of this Chapter.
The minimum internal landscaping area and its minimum number
of trees may not consist of spaces or trees which are
proposed to meet the minimum requirements of other sections
of this Chapter--such as landscaped setbacks, buffers, or
parking lot trees.
(B) Design Standards.
The minimum required internal landscaping area shall consist of a minimum
of fifty percent (50%) in ground covering by living grass or other plant
materials. This percentage provides flexibility where plants and their
irrigation should be limited next to building foundations.
The intent of the internal landscaping area is to provide relief from
structures and hard surfaces in a project through the use of plantings.
Therefore, sidewalks which provide basic pedestrian circulation only
shall not be credited toward the minimum internal landscaping area
requirement. paved plazas may be credited to a maximum of fifty percent
(50%) of the required internal landscaping area if such plazas have trees
which provide visual relief to those building elevations which form the
major public views of the project.
To provide for flexibility of design in the minimum internal landscaping
area, the developer may select the types of and the planting spaces
between the required trees. However, the trees shall be selected from
the tree types that are commonly known to grow in the City area, listed
in Appendix "A". The planting spacing should allow for the growth
characteristics of the trees without adversely affecting the maintenance
of structures, walks, or drives.
The minimum planting sizes of trees shall comply with the specifications
provided in Section 12-24-109.
(C) Policies
1. Parking lot landscaped spaces and tree planters with a ground
covering by living materials may be approved by the Planning
Commission to be credited to a maximum of one-half of the required
internal landscaping area if the following conditions exist:
The provided number of trees meets the required number of
parking lot trees and internal landscaping area trees.
These landscaped spaces or tree planters serve the purpose of
providing desirable pedestrian oriented landscaped spaces
within the interior of the project or visually softening the
mass of the buildings.
The Planning Commission can justify such a credit because parking
lot planters are not otherwise required to have a ground covering
by living materials.
2. That portion of a landscaped setback which is in excess of the
minimum depth may be approved by the Planning commission to be
credited toward the required internal landscaping area. However,
such portion should be within 50 feet of the project's buildings
and should have trees which provide visual relief to those building
elevations which form the major public views of the project.
3. Each building area within a development plan (with multiple
building areas) is not required to meet the 5% internal landscaping
requirement, as long as the entire development plan complies with
the internal landscaping requirement. The internal landscaping
should be generally distributed among the building areas with an
emphasis near those building elevations which form the major public
views of the project.
(D) Examples
1. An example of "internal" landscaping and trees in a project is
provided in Figure #5.
12-24-108 PERCENTAGE OF GROUND COVER IN LIVING MATERIALS
Unless otherwise specified, any required landscape area--such as a
"minimum landscaped setback"--shall consist of a minimum of seventy-five
percent (75%) in ground covering by living grass or other plant materials. The
minimum planting sizes and spacings of shrubs and ground covers to meet a
ground covering requirement shall be consistent with requirements at this
Chapter. The foliage crown of trees shall not be used in the seventy-five
percent (75%) or other required percentage calculation. The remaining twentyfive
percent (25%) of the required landscape area may be covered with bark,
wood chips, rock, stone, or other similar materials acceptable to the Planning
Commission.
Policies
(A)Plantings of shrubs and ground covers to be considered a "ground cover
of living materials" shall substantially comply with the planting sizes and
spacings in Appendix A of this Chapter.
1. The spacing between two plants with different spacing requirements
shall be an approximate average of two spacing requirements.
2. Wildflowers, where proposed to fulfill a ground covering
requirement, should be combined with native grasses. The sole use
of wildflowers in a minimum required area is discouraged,
especially where a relatively low level of irrigation is proposed,
because of the relatively high chance of bare areas.
Specifications should be provided as to how the seeds are to be
planted and the amount of grass seeds to be used (such as ounces
per 1000 square feet or pounds per acre).
12-24-109 PERCENTAGE OF TREE SIZES
The total number of trees required per site shall have the following
percentage of tree sizes.
(A)20% large trees and shrubs in a combination of deciduous trees with a
caliper greater than 3 inches and evergreen trees with a height greater than 8
feet.
(1) 50% medium trees and shrubs in a combination of deciduous trees
with a caliper of 2 inches to 3 inches and evergreen trees to a
height from 5 to 8 feet.
(2) 30% small trees and shrubs in a combination of deciduous trees with
a caliper of 1-1/2 inches to 2 inches and evergreen trees to a
height of 4 feet.
12-24-110 IRRIGATION
All required landscaped areas shall have an automatic subsurface
sprinkler irrigation system installed. Where City culinary water is being used
for irrigation purposes, back flow devices shall be installed according to the
City requirements.
12-24-111 ASSURANCES FOR INSTALLATION AND COMPLETION
Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any structure
where landscaping is required, except when a Certificate of Occupancy is
obtained by providing acceptable assurance to the City guaranteeing the
completion of such landscaping, all work as indicated on the landscaping plan
shall be inspected and approved by the City Planner.
At the time of inspection, the City Planner shall check the quantities
and locations of landscape materials. At the time of such inspection, the
owner shall warrant that the completed landscaping complies with the approved
landscape plan. Such warranty shall include the quantities, locations, species
and sizes of plants and other landscape materials on the approved landscape
plan. In the event that an inspection is not conducted by the City Planner
prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy because acceptable
assurance has been provided to the City guaranteeing the completion of such
landscaping, such inspection shall be done by the City Planner subsequent to
the installation of such landscaping but prior to the release or expiration of
the acceptable assurance.
A landowner may obtain a Certificate of Occupancy for a structure prior
to the completion of required landscaping work if the completion is not
possible due to seasonal or weather conditions and if the owner submits the
necessary assurances with the City Planner for the completion of the
landscaping. The acceptable assurance guaranteeing the completion of the
landscaping may be an irrevocable letter of credit, cash bond, or satisfactory
subdivision bond and shall be equal to the cost of the landscaping work and
shall be accompanied by a written assurance that such landscaping will be
completed to the satisfaction of the City Planner within a specified period of
time not to exceed nine (9) months from the date of occupancy.
Policies
(A)The City must approve the form of a financial assurance for the
installation and completion of landscaping.
1. Where seeding is permitted, a letter of credit or bond shall not be
released until the seeding is considered to be established in a
healthy state by the City Planner.
2. Examples of the Letter of Credit and Subdivision Bond forms are
available at the City offices.
12-24-112 NON-CONFORMING USES AND DEVELOPMENT PLANS
(A) Purpose and Intent
Within the districts created by the adoption of this Chapter, or by the
adoption of amendments subsequent to this Chapter, there may exist
developments of land (including parking areas and landscaping) which were
legal prior to the adoption or amendment of this Chapter, but which under
the terms of this Chapter or its amendments, are now prohibited,
restricted or regulated. It is the intent of this Chapter to permit
these non-conformities to continue until they are voluntarily removed or
brought into compliance in conjunction with a proposed change in the
development. It is intended that these non-conformities will not be
enlarged, expanded, or increased, except as provided in this Title.
It is recognized that conformance with landscaping requirements may have
special problems related to the existing improvements and the scale of a
proposed change to a project.
(B) Continuation
Landscaping of parking spaces not in conformity with the requirements of
this Chapter, where such landscaping of parking spaces lawfully existed
at the time such requirements became effective, may be continued except
as otherwise provided in this Title.
(C) Extension
Non-conforming landscaping of parking spaces shall not be enlarged,
expanded, extended or increased, except as provided in this Chapter.
(D) Proposals Which Require Conformance
1. Non-conforming in Terms of Off-Street Parking
Adequate off-street parking is necessary for the general safety and
convenience of City residents and to avoid congestion on public
streets.
Required parking spaces shall be provided in conjunction with any
addition of building floor area or a change of use which requires
additional parking spaces.
2. Non-conforming in Terms of Landscaping
Landscaping is important in improving the overall appearance of the
City and increasing the compatibility of different land uses. It
is recognized that landscaping is difficult to install in
conjunction with relatively-small increments of change in a
development project (such as relatively-small building additions or
changes of use) for the following reasons: (1) the landscaping
elements of a development project should be planned in a
comprehensive and coordinated manner which is not feasible to
implement with relatively-small increments of change, (2) nonconformities
related to landscaping are difficult to resolve where
the existing improvements limit the potential for a comprehensive
landscaping plan to be implemented, and (3) fragmented ownership in
a development project can further reduce the potential for a
comprehensive landscaping plan to be implemented with relativelysmall
increments of change.
The existing non-conforming landscaping of a development project is
permitted to continue until one of the following changes occurs:
1. Any new construction or addition of building floor area
consisting of 50% or more of the existing gross
building floor area of the development project on the
subject lot, or
2. Any change from a residential use to a non-residential
use (or vice versa) consisting of 50% or more of the
existing gross building floor area of the development
project on the subject lot.
All required landscaping shall be provided in conjunction with
either of the two changes described above.
All required landscaping shall be provided in conjunction with any
new development of a vacant lot or with the redevelopment
(demolition and new construction) of a lot.
(E) Policies
1. Development proposals which constitute a relatively-large increment
of change (i.e. 50% or more of the existing building floor area)
should allow for non-conformities due to landscaping to be
eliminated or at least minimized. "Relief" may be appropriate
where the existing development of the site does not allow for all
of the current landscape requirements to be met. In reviewing a
request for "Relief", the Planning Commission (or other Planning
Department designee) has the authority to evaluate whatever the
beneficial aspects resulting from a proposed change outweigh the
beneficial aspects of the existing development.
2. The previous approval of a development plan--or approved sketch
plan/concept plan--which is not in conformity with current
landscape requirements (but which was in conformity with the
requirements in effect at the time of approval) shall remain valid,
unless the following change occurs:
The addition or relocation of building floor area consisting
of 50% or more of the existing gross building floor area
currently approved on the development plan for the subject
development project.
All current landscaping requirements shall be met if the above
change is proposed.
A proposed change consisting of less floor area than described
above shall not require the development plan be revised to conform
with current landscape requirements.
12-24-113 Prohibition Of Elms
The planting of elms is prohibited because most elms possess more
negative qualities than positive qualities. The negative qualities
include disease proneness, weak branches, suckering, and uncontrollable
spread of seeds. These negative qualities lead to excessively high
public and private maintenance costs.
12-24-114 Limitations On Certain Trees Within 25' Of Rights Of Way
The planting of Box Elder, Salix and most Populous trees are limited near
rights-of-way because of their invasive roots which cause problems with
utilities and streets and partly because of their weak branches.
12-24-115 Screening Of Loading Docks, Vehicle Repair Bays And Vehicle
Fueling Areas From View From Adjacent Properties And Streets
Such required screening may not be necessary in all land use situations.
For example, it is not necessary to screen a loading dock on one
industrial property in favor of the view from a loading dock on an
adjacent industrial property, if there are no other public views of the
loading dock.
12-24-116 Administrative Relief
(A) Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Section is to provide for the
flexibility and the applications of regulations where a standard is
inapplicable or inappropriate to a specific use or design proposal. The
City recognizes the specific landscape requirements in this Chapter
cannot and do not anticipate all possible landscape situations. In
addition, the City recognizes that there may be landscape proposes which
conform to the purpose, intent, and objectives of the landscape
regulations that were not anticipated in the specific regulations. In
addition, the City recognizes that a proposed development of a relatively
small commercial or industrial lot which was created prior to the current
landscape requirements, such as lots of one acre or less may present
unusual difficulties in complying with the current requirements.
(B) Application. A written request for administrative relief shall be
submitted in conjunction with the development proposal pursuant to the
Zoning Ordinance, such as a site plan or conditional use permit. The
written request shall include a justification in terms of the findings
necessary to grant administrative relief.
(C) Findings Necessary to Grant Administrative Relief. The Planning
Commission must make all of the following findings in order to grant
administrative relief:
1. The strict application of the regulation in question is
unreasonable given the development proposal or the measures
proposed by the applicant, or that the property has extraordinary
or exceptional physical conditions that do not generally exist in
nearby properties in the same zoning district and such conditions
will not allow reasonable use of the property in its current zone
in the absence of relief.
2. The intent of the zoning chapter and the specific regulation in
question is preserved.
3. The granting of administrative relief will not result in an adverse
impact on surrounding properties.
(D) Appeal. A decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the
City Council within 10 days after the decision. The appeal shall be
filed in accordance with the requirements of applications to the City
Planner and shall include a written statement of the grounds of the
appeal.
The reasonable development of a site may require the granting of relief
to some or all of the requirements. Although all the categories of
landscape requirements are considered important, the Planning Commission
generally assigns the following priorities for compliance with landscape
requirements:
1. Adjacent residential uses should be buffered.
2. An attractive appearance of the project should be provided along
adjacent streets by landscaped setbacks and trees.
3. The building elevations and parking areas which form the major
public views of the project should be visually softened and
enhanced by trees and other plantings.
CHAPTER 12-25 SWIMMING POOLS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
12-25-101 Definitions
12-25-102 Private Pools and Use
12-25-103 Semi-Private Pools and Use
12-25-104 Electrical
12-25-101 Definitions
SWIMMING POOL. Any constructed pool used for bathing or swimming,
which is over 24 inches in depth, or with a surface area exceeding
250 square feet.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL. Any constructed pool which is used or
intended to be used as a swimming pool in connection with and
continuous to a single family residence and available only to the
family of the household and their private guests.
SEMI-PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL. Any constructed pool which is used or
intended to be used as a swimming pool in connection with a
neighborhood recreational facility.
12-25-102 Private Pools And Use
Private swimming pool uses shall be allowed, but such use
shall be subject to the following provisions:
(A) Setback requirements for swimming pools not completely
enclosed within a building having solid walls shall be as follows:
(1) The minimum side yard shall be 6 feet to the
closest edge of the pool.
(2) The minimum rear yard for all pools shall be 6
feet.
(3) The minimum depth of the front yard for all fences
enclosing swimming pools shall be 30 feet.
(B) Setback requirements of buildings having solid walls
which completely enclose swimming pool shall be the same as
required for accessory buildings.
(C) All swimming pools not completely enclosed within a
building having solid walls shall be completely surrounded by a
solid or chain link slatted fence or walls having a height of at
least 6 feet. There shall be no openings, except for gates which
shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices.
Such gates shall be securely locked when pool is not in use by
owner-permitted persons.
(D) Private swimming pools shall have no direct connection
to the City culinary water system or to the sewer system of the
City.
12-25-103 Semi-Private Pools And Use
The Planning Commission may permit, temporarily or
permanently, the use of land in any zone for semi-private swimming
pools or recreational facilities, provided that in such cases all
of the following conditions are met:
(A) The facilities shall be owned and maintained by the
members of a swimming pool group, and a minimum of 75 percent of
the membership shall be residents of the neighborhood or general
area in which the recreational facility is located.
(B) The area to be used for recreational purposes shall be
of sufficient size to accommodate all proposed facilities,
together with off-street parking, where required by the Planning
Commission, of sufficient size to satisfy the needs of the area.
(C) The area to be developed into a recreational area shall
be of such size and shape as to cause no undue infringement upon
the privacy of abutting residential areas and shall be in keeping
with the design of the neighborhood in which the recreational area
is to be situated.
(D) Unless completely enclosed within a building having
solid walls, a solid wall or substantial fence shall be required
around the entire recreation area of a height of not less than 6
feet. The fence across the front of the property shall be
constructed no nearer to the front property line than the required
front yard setback.
(E) Under no conditions shall any charge be made for the use
of any of the facilities in the recreational area.
(F) Under no conditions shall any type of retail or business
facilities, including vending machines, be permitted in the
recreational area except those specifically approved by the
Planning Commission.
(G) Club houses or any type of nighttime indoor facilities
shall not be permitted, except in planned unit developments or
condominium projects as approved by the Planning Commission.
(H) Before authorizing a recreational facility, complete
plans for the development of the area shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission. Together with the plans, there shall be
submitted a detailed outline showing how the are is to be financed
and maintained. The Planning Commission may require a bond by the
owners to guarantee performance of the regulations placed as
conditions upon which the area is approved. If any of the
requirements are not complied with, the authorization shall be
void.
(I) The Planning Commission shall notify owners of all
abutting properties, and present the proposal at a public meeting,
after which the Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval
of the application.
(J) The Planning Commission may, in its sole discretion,
place whatever additional conditions or restrictions it may deem
necessary to protect the character of the district and to insure
the proper development and maintenance of such a recreational
area, including the plans for disposition or re-use of the
property if the recreational area is not maintained in the manner
agreed upon or is abandoned by the developers.
(K) The minimum side and rear yard setbacks of semi-private
swimming pools not completely enclosed within a building having
solid walls shall be 15 feet from property lines.
(L) Setback requirements of buildings having solid walls
which fully enclosed semi-private swimming pools shall be the same
as required for accessory buildings.
12-25-104 Electrical
(A) Overhead Conductor Clearances. The following parts of
swimming pools shall not be placed under existing service-drop
conductors or any other open overhead wiring, nor shall such
wiring be installed above the following:
(1) Swimming Pool and the area extending 10 feet
horizontally from the inside of the walls of the
pool.
(2) Diving structures.
(3) Observation stands, towers, or platforms.
(B) Underground Conductor Clearances.
(1) Distribution lines over 800 volts - 10 feet
horizontal separation between conductor and closest
edge of pool.
(2) Service lines under 600 volts - 5 feet horizontal
separation between conductor and closest edge of
pool.
CHAPTER 12-26 AIRPORT PROTECTIVE AREA
12-26-101 Purpose
12-26-102 Airport Zones
12-26-103 Airport Zone Height Limitations
12-26-104 Use Restrictions
12-26-105 Non-Conforming Uses
12-26-106 Permits
12-26-107 Obstruction, Marking & Lighting
12-26-108 Variances
12-26-109 Conflicting Regulations
12-26-110 Enforcement
12-26-111 Warnings and Disclaimers of Liability
12-26-112 Penalties
12-26-101 Purpose
These provisions are established to restrain influences which
are adverse to the proper and safe conduct of aircraft operations
in the vicinity of airports, to prevent creation of conditions
hazardous to aircraft operations and to encourage development
which is compatible with airport use within the intent and purpose
of this Title. To this end, the airport protective area is
intended to incorporate the purposes and intent of this Chapter
with other regulations duly established by the City.
Nevertheless, the City Council recognizes the concerns of owners
of property within the airport protective area hereinafter set
forth regarding the use of their properties, and does not intend
by the restrictions herein provided to impose restrictions not
required in the interest of protecting the safety and welfare of
the public. To this end, variances from the requirements of this
Chapter may be allowed where not contrary to the public interest
and safety and where the same will not create undue hazards to air
navigation.
12-26-102 Airport Zones
In order to carry out the provisions of this Chapter, there
are created and established certain zones in the airport
protective area which includes all the land lying beneath the
approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and
conical surfaces as they apply to the Skypark Airport. Such zones
are shown on the Skypark Zone Map. The various zones are hereby
established and defined as follows:
A. Utility runway visual approach/departure zone. The
inner edge of this approach/departure zone coincides with the
width of the primary runway surface and is 250 feet wide. The
approach/departure zone expands outward uniformly to a width of
1250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5000 feet from the primary
surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line
of the runway.
(B) Transitional Zone. The transitional zones are the areas
beneath the transitional surfaces.
(C) Horizontal Zone. The Horizontal Zone is established by
swinging arcs of 5000 feet radii from the center of each end of
the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent
arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The Horizontal Zone
does not include the approach and transitional zone.
(D) Conical Zone. The Conical Zone is established as the
area that commences at the periphery of the Horizontal Zone and
extends outward there from a horizontal distance of 4000 feet.
12-26-103 Airport Zone Height Limitations
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no structure
shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no trees shall be
allowed to grow in any airport zone established by this Chapter to
a height in excess of the applicable height limitations herein
established for such zones. Such applicable height limitations
are hereby established for each airport zone as follows:
(A) Utility Runway Visual Approach/Departure Zone. Slopes
20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and
at the same elevation as the primary surface in extending to a
horizontal distance of 5000 feet along the extended runway center
line.
(B) Transitional Zone. Slope 7 feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a
height of 150 feet above the airport elevation. In addition to
the foregoing, there are established height limitations, sloping 7
feet outward for each foot upward, beginning at the sides of and
at the same elevation as the approach surface and extending to
where they intersect the conical surface.
(C) Horizontal Zone. Established at 150 feet above the
airport elevation.
(D) Conical Zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at
150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of
350 feet above the airport elevation.
12-26-104 Use Restrictions
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, no use
may be made of land or water within any zone established by this
Chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communications between the airport
and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between
airport lights and others, resulting in glare to the eyes of the
pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the
airport, create birds strike hazards, or otherwise in any way
endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of
aircraft intending to use the airport.
12-26-105 Non-Conforming Uses
(A) Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed
by this Chapter shall not be construed to require the removal,
lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure not
conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this
Chapter, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming
use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change
in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure,
the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance, and is diligently prosecuted.
(B) Marking and Lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding
provisions of this Section, the owner of any existing nonconforming
structure or tree is hereby required to permit the
installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers
and lights and as shall be deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission after consultation with the airport manager, to
indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport the presence of such airport obstructions. Such markers
and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the
expense of the airport management.
12-26-106 Permits
(A) Existing Uses. No building or conditional use permit
shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of
an obstruction or permit non-conforming use or structure to become
a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective
date of this Ordinance or any amendments thereto or than it is
when the application for a permit is made.
(B) Non-Conforming Use is Abandoned or Destroyed. Whenever
the City Planner determines that a non-conforming structure has
been abandoned, or more than 80 per cent torn down, physically
deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would
allow such structure to exceed the applicable height limit or
otherwise deviate from the current zoning regulations.
12-26-107 Obstruction, Marking & Lighting
Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed
advisable to effectuate the purposes of this Chapter and be
reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require
the owner of the structure or tree in question to install,
operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, any markings and
lights as may be necessary.
12-26-108 Variances
Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure or permit the growth of any tree not in accordance with
the regulations of this Chapter, may apply to the Board of
Adjustment for a variance from such regulation. The application
for variance shall be accompanied by determination from the
Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal
on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe,
efficient use of navigable air space. Such variances may be
allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or
enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary
hardship, and relief granted will not be contrary to the public
interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do
substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of
this Chapter. Additionally, no application for variance to the
requirements of this Chapter may be considered by the Board of
Adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to
the airport manager for advice as to the aeronautical effects of
the variance. If the airport manager does not respond to the
application within 15 days after receipt, the Board of Adjustment
may act on its own to grant or deny said application.
12-26-109 Conflicting Regulations
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations
or limitations prescribed in this Chapter and any other laws or
regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be
with respect to the height of structures or trees, and the use of
land or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall govern and prevail.
12-26-110 Enforcement
It shall be the duty of the City Planner to administer and
enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for
permits and variances shall be made to the City upon a form
published for that purpose. Applications required by this Chapter
to be submitted to the City shall be considered in a timely manner
and granted or denied. An application for action by the Board of
Adjustment shall be submitted to and forthwith transmitted by the
City Planner.
12-26-111 Warnings And Disclaimers Of Liability
The degree of flight protection adjacent to airports provided
by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes
and is based on FAA regulations and scientific and engineering
considerations. This Ordinance does not imply that flights either
within or outside the restricted areas specified in this Chapter
will be safe or free from flight or other hazards. Furthermore,
this Chapter shall not be construed to create liability on the
part of the City, or any officer or employee thereof that may
result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
12-26-112 Penalties
Each violation of this Chapter or any regulation, order, or
ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a Class C
misdemeanor and may be punishable as provided by law, and each day
a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
CHAPTER 12-27 HOME OCCUPATIONS
12-27-101 Purpose
12-27-102 Minor Home Occupations
12-27-103 Major Home Occupations
12-27-104 Special Requirements for Child Day Care, Preschool,
Dance Studio or any other Group Classes
12-27-105 Non Compliance
12-27-106 Appeal
12-27-107 Business License Required
12-27-101 Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to ensure
that home occupations remain incidental and accessory
uses within the dwelling or on the dwelling site and
that any coincidental nuisance remains within the
dwelling or on the dwelling site.
12-27-102 Minor Home Occupations. Uses classified as minor shall
be permitted in all zones upon review and approval by
the Community Development Director. The following
regulations shall apply to all minor home occupations.
(A) The home occupation shall be carried on entirely
by persons residing in the dwelling unit wherein
the occupation is conducted. Persons who are not
bona fide residents of the premises shall not be
employed on said premises.
(B) The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary
to the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and the
appearance of the structure shall not be altered
or the occupation within the residence be
conducted in a manner that would cause the
premises to differ from its residential character.
This would include but is not limited to the
following: colors, material, construcion,
lighting, signs, or the emission of sounds,
vibrations or odors.
(C) No more than 20 percent of the gross floor area of
the dwelling may be used for the home occupation.
(D) There shall be no advertising, display, signs, or
other indications of a home occupation on the
premise.
(E) There shall not be conducted on the premises the
business of selling stocks of merchandise,
supplies, or products on display. However,
provided that orders previously made by telephone
or at a sales party may be filled on the premises.
That is, direct sales of products off display
shelves or racks is not allowed, but a person may
pick up an order placed earlier as described
above.
(F) No storage or display of goods shall be visible
from outside the structure.
(G) The home occupation shall not alter the
residential character of the neighborhood,
including but not limited to radio and television
reception, color design, materials, construction,
lighting, odors, sounds, noise or vibrations.
(H) A home occupation shall not create greater vehicle
or pedestrian traffic than normal for the zone
district in which it is located.
(I) Parties for the purpose of selling merchandise or
taking orders shall not be held more than four
times each month.
(J) The use shall not require additional off-street
parking above that amount already requires by the
provisions of this Title.
(K) Shall not use materials or equipment not
recognized as being part of the normal practices
of owning and maintaining a residence.
(L) Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to
the contrary, garage, basement, yard, or other
similar sales shall be permitted not more than
twice each year, and each sale shall be permitted
not more than twice each year, and each sale not
last more than two (2) consecutive days.
(M) The use shall not require deliveries from
commercial suppliers to the minor home occupation
nor deliveries from the home occupation.
(N) Permitted minor home occupations may include, but
are not necessarily limited to, the following:
(1) Artists and sculptors;
(2) Authors and composers;
(3) Home crafts for sale off-sites;
(4) Office facility of clergy;
(5) Office facility of a salesman, sales
representative, or manufactuer’s representative;
(6) Professional office facilities
(7) Individual tutoring;
(8) Preserving and home cooking for sale off-site;
(9) Telephone solicitation work.
(O) The following uses by the nature of the investment
or operation have a pronounced tendency once
started to increase beyond the limits permitted
for home occupations and thereby impair the use ad
value of a residentially zoned area for
residential purposes. Therefore, the uses
specified below shall not be permitted as minor
home occupations:
(1) All uses prohibited as major haome
occupations;
(2) Minor or major auto repair;
(3) Barber shop;
(4) Woodworking;
(5) Dance instruction;
(6) Dental offices;
(7) Medical offices;
(8) Painting of vehicles, trailers, or boats;
(9) Photo developing, photo studios;
(10) Private schools with organized classes;
(11) Television repair;
(12) Upholstering;
(13) Beauty parlors;
(14) Massage parlors;
(15) Small engine repairs;
(16) Welding shop;
(17) Daycare;
(18) Other similar uses.
12-27-103 Major Home Occupations. To assure compliance with the
provisions of this Title, and to protect the character
of residential neighborhoods within Woods Cross City, a
Conditional Use Permit shall be obtained from the
Planning Commission before any part of a dwelling unit
in a residential zone may be used for uses classified
as major home occupations.
(A) The home occupation shall be carried on entirely
by persons residing in the dwelling unit wherein
the occupation is conducted. Persons who are not
bona fide residents of the premises shall not be
employed on said premises.
(B) The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes,
and the appearance of the structure shall not be
altered or the occupation within the residence be
conducted in a manner that would cause the premises
to differ from its residential character. This
would include but is not limited to the following:
colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs,
or the emission of sounds, vibrations or odors.
(C) No more than 20 percent of the gross floor area of
the dwelling may be used for home occupation.
Accessory buildings as allowed in the zone district
may be used for home occupation as permitted.
(D) There shall be no signs present on the property.
(E) There shall be no exterior storage on the premises
of material used in the home occupation nor of any
explosive material.
(F) The home occupation shall not alter the residential
character of the premises or unreasonably disturb
the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, including
but not limited to radio and television reception,
color, design, materials, construction, lighting,
odors, sounds, noise or vibrations.
(G) A home occupation, including studios or rooms for
instruction, shall provide additional off-street
parking area reasonably adequate to accommodate
needs created by the home occupation as determined
by the Planning Commission.
(H) Deliveries from commercial suppliers may not be
made more than once each week, and the deliveries
shall not restrict traffic circulation.
(I) Parties for the purpose of selling merchandise or
taking orders shall not be held more often than
four times each month.
(J) Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to
the contrary, garage, basement, yard, or other
similar sales shall be permitted not more than
twice a year, and each sale shall not last more
than two (2) consecutive days.
(K) The allowable number and size of vehicles and
equipment used by the home occupation shall be as
determined by the Planning Commission. Only one
(1) vehicle over twenty-two feet(22’) in length
including trailers shall not be parked on the
street nor within a front or side yard setback
abutting a street.
(L) Major home occupations may include but are not
necessarily limited to the following:
(1) Any use allowed as a minor home occupation;
(2) Single-chair beauty parlors and barber shops;
(3) Photo studios and developing
(4) Organized classes (limits shall be placed on
the number of students and/or the number of
vehicles transporting students to prevent
congestion);
(5) Television and other electrical repairs
excluding automobiles, motorcycles, and
snowmobiles;
(6) Small engine repairs, excluding automobiles,
motorcycles, and snowmobiles;
(7) Upholstering;
(8) Dressmaking;
(9) Woodworking;
(10) Preschools;
(11) Contractors;
(12) Ceramics (kilns smaller than six (6) cubic
feet);
(13) Carpet or upholstery cleaning;
(14) Gun repair;
(15) Plant nurseries;
(16) Pest or weed control service;
(17) Massage therapy; and
(18) Daycare.
(M) The following uses, by the nature of the investment
or operation, have a pronounced tendency once
started to increase beyond the limits permitted for
home occupations and thereby impair the use and
value of a residentially zoned area for residential
purposes and are more suited to commercial or
business districts. Therefore, the uses specified
below are not ordinarily allowed as home
occupations:
(1) Minor or major auto repair, painting of
vehicles, trailers, or boats;
(2) Funeral chapel or home;
(3) Gift shops;
(4) Medical or dental clinic; and
(5) Welding or machine shop.
12-27-104 Special Requirements for Child Day Care, Preschool,
Dance Studio or any Other Group Classes
Prior to the issuance of a Woods Cross City
Business License and during operation of child
daycare, preschool, dance studio, or other group
classes as a home occupation, the following
conditions shall apply in addition to the
requirements of Section 12-27-103.
(A) A copy of and Utah State Agency license, permit of
approval, if required, shall be provided to Woods
Cross City.
(B) A copy of the Fire Marshall Approval shall be
provided to Woods Cross City.
(C) If exterior play areas are used they shall be
fenced. The fence shall be a minimum of 6 feet
high and have a self-closing, self-latching gate;
openings in the fence shall not be large enough to
allow a 4” sphere to pass through. Field fence or
barbed wire shall not be sufficient to serve this
purpose.
(D) A minimum of 35 square feet of floor space shall be
required for each child or student enrolled. The
area shall be wholly within the primary structure
on the premises and shall not exceed the equivalent
of 30% of the finished living space to a maximum of
300 square feet. Areas of unfinished construction
cannot be used in these calculations.
(E) Children shall not be allowed in areas of the home
with unfinished construction.
(F) Children shall be supervised at all times.
12-27-105 Non-Compliance.
Any Home Occupation Permit may be revoked by the Planning
Commission upon violation of any requirements of this
Chapter, or upon failure to comply with any of the
conditions or limitations of the permit, unless such
violations are satisfactorily corrected within three (3)
days of receipt of written notice thereof. A permit may
be revoked for repeated violations of the requirements of
this Chapter notwithstanding compliance to the violation
notice.
12-27-106 Appeal.
In the event of denial of a Major Home Occupation permit
or of the revocation thereof, or objections to the
limitations placed thereon, appeal may be made to the
City Council in accordance with the provisions of this
title. In the event of denial of a Minor Home Occupation
permit or objections to the limitations placed thereon,
appeal may be made to the Planning Commission in
accordance with the provisions of this title.
12-27-107 Business License Required.
A Home Occupation permit is not a business license, and
the granting of said permit shall not relieve permittee
of any other license requirements of the city of any
public agency.
CHAPTER 12-28 RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR HANDICAPPED &
ELDERLY PERSONS
12-28-101 Definitions
12-28-102 Approval in R-2 and R-4 Zones
12-28-103 Approval in A-1, R-1-8, and R-1-10 Zones
12-28-104 Termination
12-28-105 Discrimination
12-28-101 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter:
A. "Handicapped Person" means a person who has a severe,
chronic disability attributable to mental or physical impairment
or to a combination of mental and physical impairments, which is
likely to continue indefinitely, and which results in a
substantial functional limitation in three or more of the
following areas of major life activity: self-care, receptive and
expressive language, learning, mobility, self-direction, capacity
for independent living, or economic self-sufficiency; and who
requires a combination or sequence of special inter-disciplinary
or generic care, treatment, or other services that are
individually planned and coordinated to allow the person to
function in, and contribute to, a residential neighborhood.
(B) "Residential Facility for Handicapped Persons" means a
single-family or multiple-family dwelling unit, consistent with
existing zoning of the desired location, that is occupied on a
24-hour per day basis by eight or fewer handicapped persons in a
family-type arrangement under the supervision of a house, family
or manager, and that conforms to all applicable standards and
requirements of the Department of Human Services and is operated
by or operated under contract with that Department.
(C) "Elderly Person" means a person who is sixty years of
age or older, who desires or needs to live with other elderly
persons in a group setting, but who is capable of living
independently.
(D) "Residential Facility for Elderly Persons" means a
single-family or multiple-family dwelling unit that:
(1) is not operated as a business, and that is owned by
one of the residents or by an immediate family member of one of
the residents, or by an eleemosynary, charitable, or beneficial
organization, including a facility for which a title has been
placed in trust for a resident;
(2) is consistent with existing zoning of the desired
location;
(3) is occupied on a 24-hour per day basis by eight or
fewer elderly persons in a family-type arrangement;
(4) is in conformance with the applicable standards of
the Department of Human Services and is licensed and inspected by
that Department;
(5) does not include a health care facility as defined
by Section 26-21-2 of the Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended;
(6) is not considered a business because a fee is
charged for food or for actual and necessary costs of operation
and maintenance of the facility. However, administrative costs or
salaries may not be charged by an owner in excess of 15 percent of
that fee. The person charging a fee must keep a record of all
expenses and costs related to the fee and that record shall be
available for inspection by any resident of the facility, the
Department of Human Services, and City building officials.
12-28-102 Approval In R-2 And R-4 Zones.
Application for a residential facility for handicapped
persons or a residential facility for elderly persons shall be
allowed as permitted uses in the R-2 and R-4 zones. The Planning
Commission shall require a site plan for all proposed residential
facilities for handicapped persons or elderly persons in these
zones. Site plan approval shall be granted by the Planning
Commission and any permit issued therefor upon the application
demonstrating that it meets the following requirements:
(A) The facility meets all City building, safety, and health
ordinances applicable to a similar dwelling, and complies with the
requirements and regulations of the Utah Department of Social
Services pertaining to residential facilities for the handicapped
or the elderly.
(B) The operator of the facility provides assurance that the
residents of the facilities will be properly supervised on a 24-
hour basis.
(C) The operator of the facility establishes a Community
Advisory Committee through which all complaints and concerns of
neighbors may be addressed. The Committee shall consist of five
members, two of whom shall be the City Building Inspector and a
representative of the Utah State Department of Social Services.
Meetings of the Community Advisory Committee may be called by
consent of a majority of the Committee members. Notice of
meetings shall be provided in writing to all Committee members at
least 24 hours in advance.
(D) The operator of the facility provides adequate offstreet
parking space.
(E) The facility is capable of use as a residential facility
for handicapped persons or a residential facility for elderly
persons without structural or landscaping alterations that would
change the structure's residential character.
(F) No residential facility for handicapped persons or
residential facility for elderly persons be established or
maintained within three-quarters mile of another residential
facility for handicapped persons or residential facility for
elderly persons.
(G) No person being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse be
placed in a residential facility for handicapped persons or a
residential facility for elderly persons.
(H) No person who is violent be placed in a residential
facility for handicapped persons or a residential facility for
elderly persons.
(I) Placement in a residential facility for handicapped
persons or a residential facility for elderly persons be on a
strictly voluntary basis and not a part of, or in lieu of,
confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional
facility.
12-28-103 Approval In A-1, R-1-8, And R-1-10 Zones
An application for a residential facility for handicapped
persons or a residential facility for elderly persons in the A-1,
R-1-8, and R-1-10 Zones shall follow the procedures for
conditional use permits. (See Chapter 18) A conditional use
permit for a residential facility for handicapped persons or a
residential facility for elderly persons shall be granted by the
Planning Commission and a permit issued therefor upon the
application demonstrating that the facility will meet the
following conditions:
(A) The facility meets all City building, safety, and health
Ordinances applicable to similar dwellings, and complies with the
requirements and regulations of the Utah Department of Social
Services pertaining to residential facilities for the handicapped
or residential facilities for the elderly.
(B) Is capable of use as a residential facility for
handicapped persons or a residential facility for elderly persons
without structural or landscaping alterations that would change
the structure's residential character.
(C) Conforms to the City's criteria, adopted by ordinance,
governing residential facilities for handicapped persons or
residential facilities for elderly persons in areas zoned to
permit exclusively single-family dwellings.
(D) The operator of the facility provides assurances that
the residents of the facility will be properly supervised on a 24-
hour basis.
(E) The operator of the facility establishes a Community
Advisory Committee through which all complaints and concerns of
neighbors may be addressed. The Committee shall consist of five
members, two of whom shall be the City Building Inspector and a
representative of the Utah Department of Social Services.
Meetings of the Community Advisory Committee may be called by
consent of a majority of the Committee members. Notice of
meetings shall be provided in writing to all Committee members at
least 24 hours in advance.
(F) The operator of the facility provides adequate offstreet
parking, as determined by review of the Planning
Commission.
(G) No residential facility for handicapped persons or
elderly persons shall be established or maintained within threequarters
mile of another such facility.
(H) No person being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse be
placed in a residential facility for handicapped persons or a
residential facility for elderly persons.
(I) No person who is violent be placed in a residential
facility for handicapped persons or a residential facility for
elderly persons.
(J) Placement in a residential facility for handicapped
persons or a residential facility for elderly persons be on a
strictly voluntary basis and not a part of, or in lieu of,
confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional
facility; and
(K) Prior to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit for a
residential facility for handicapped persons or a residential
facility for elderly persons to be located on any property within
an A-1, R-1-8, or R-1-10 Zone in the City, the Planning Commission
shall hold a public hearing, written notice of the date, time and
place of which shall be mailed by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the owners of all property located within 300 feet of
the subject property.
12-28-104 Termination
A permit for a residential facility for handicapped persons
or a residential facility for elderly persons under this Chapter
is non-transferable and terminates if the structure is devoted to
a use other than as a residential facility for handicapped persons
or a residential facility for elderly persons or if the structure
fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance.
12-28-105 Discrimination
It shall be the policy of the City and the purpose of this
Ordinance to prohibit discrimination against handicapped persons
or elderly persons and against residential facilities for
handicapped persons or residential facilities for elderly persons.
The decision of the City and/or its Planning Commission regarding
an application for a permit by a residential facility for
handicapped persons or a residential facility for elderly person
shall be based on legitimate land use criteria and not on the
handicapping conditions, or the age of the facility's residents.
CHAPTER 12-29 AMENDMENTS
12-29-101 Amendments
12-29-102 Initiation of Amendment
12-29-103 Content of Application
12-29-104 Fees
12-29-105 Planning Commission Review
12-29-106 Public Hearing
12-29-107 City Council Action
12-29-108 Compliance and Expiration
12-29-109 Disapproval of Zoning Amendment Application
12-29-101 Amendments
The City Council may, from time to time, amend the
regulations of this Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map; but all
proposed amendments shall be first submitted to the Planning
Commission for its recommendation which shall be returned to the
City Council for its consideration within 30 days. All such
amendments must also be preceded by a duly noticed public hearing
as required below.
12-29-102 Initiation Of Amendment
An amendment to this Ordinance or Official Zoning Map may be
initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission, or the owner
of the property to be rezoned. An application for amendment shall
be submitted to the City Planner for consideration by the Planning
Commission. The City Planner shall review the application to
verify that all of the information required by this Ordinance is
included.
12-29-103 Content Of Application
Without in any way limiting the right to file additional
material, all applications for amendments to this Ordinance shall
contain at least the following:
A. Name and address of the applicant and the name and
address of every person or company that the applicant represents.
(B) If the proposed amendment would require a change in the
zoning map, the application shall include an accurate property map
showing all areas which would be affected by the proposed
amendment, all abutting properties, and the present and proposed
zoning classifications; and the application shall also include an
accurate legal description of the area to be rezoned and
approximate common address.
(C) If the proposed amendment would require a change in the
text of the Ordinance, the application shall include the chapter
and section, and a draft of the proposed wording that is desired.
(D) A detailed statement of the reasons and justification
for the amendment.
12-29-104 Fees
The application for amendment shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee, as specified in the City's schedule of fees from
time to time by the City Council, except that any application
initiated by the City shall not require a fee to be paid.
12-29-105 Planning Commission Review
Applications for amendments to this Ordinance, regardless of
how or by whom initiated, shall receive consideration by the
Planning Commission before any final action may be taken. Each
such application or amendment shall be studied and examined by the
Planning Commission which shall certify its recommendations
thereon to the City Council. The Planning Commission shall refer
each such application or proposal, together with its
recommendations, to the City Council within 30 days from the date
it was received for consideration. Failure of the Planning
Commission to make its recommendations within the specified time
shall constitute its approval of the proposal unless an extension
of time is granted by the City Council.
The Planning Commission shall recommend adoption of the
amendment only where it finds that the proposed amendment is in
accord with the City's Master Plan, or that changed conditions
make the proposed amendment necessary to fulfill the purposes of
this Ordinance.
12-29-106 Public Hearing
No amendment to this Ordinance shall become effective until
after a public hearing has been held with relation thereto, at
which hearing interested parties and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall follow applicable state law.
12-29-107 City Council Action
The City Council shall examine the application, the
recommendation of the Planning Commission and any other relevant
information presented, after which it shall either deny or adopt
the amendment.
No material change in or departure from the text or maps as
certified by the Planning Commission shall be made after a public
hearing unless such change or departure be first resubmitted to
the Planning Commission for its consideration and recommendation.
Such changes not heard at the public hearing shall be considered
as new proposals, subject to all the regulations as stated herein.
After all requirements have been complied with for the
consideration of an amendment to the zoning regulations and map,
including the holding of a public hearing, if the City Council
allows the amendment, the Zoning Ordinance shall be amended
accordingly.
12-29-108 Compliance And Expiration
Any real property located within the boundaries of Woods
Cross City may be rezoned upon majority approval of the members of
the Woods Cross City Council upon such conditions as the City
Council shall impose with respect to timing for commencement of
actual construction or the actual occupancy and utilization for
the use of the proposed development (excluding single-family
residential development) or establishment upon said rezoned real
property.
If, however, the conditions imposed by the City Council
regarding the timing for commencement of actual construction of
the actual occupancy and utilization of the proposed development
(excluding single-family residential development) or establishment
are not completely fulfilled, effected and satisfied within 18
months from the date of City Council approval, then the property's
zoning classification and zone district shall automatically, and
without further notice or hearings thereon, revert to its prior
zoning classification and zone district.
In all instances of such rezoning, all documents required to
effect the rezoning shall be prepared, executed and filed as
directed by the City Council, but in all instances, the recorded
documents concerning said rezoned real property shall contain a
recitation of all conditions imposed by the City Council with
respect to timing for commencement of actual construction or the
actual occupancy and utilization for the proposed development or
establishment, including notice that if all of said conditions are
not completely fulfilled, effected and satisfied within 18 months
from the date of City Council approval, then said real property's
zoning classification and zone district shall automatically, and
without further notice or hearings thereon, revert to its prior
zoning classification and zone district.
For the purposes of this Section, "Commencement of Actual
Construction" is defined as either the City inspected and approved
completion of all off-site improvements, or the City inspected and
approved completion of construction of all footings of the
proposed development or establishment upon the rezoned real
property.
12-29-109 Disapproval Of Zoning Amendment Application
Disapproval of an application to amend the zoning map shall
preclude the filing of another application to amend the zoning map
to reclassify the same parcel of property, or any portion thereof,
to the same zone classification within one year of the date of the
final disapproval of the application unless the Planning
Commission finds that there has been a substantial change in the
circumstances to merit consideration of a second application prior
to the expiration of one year.
1
CHAPTER 12-30 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
12-30-010 Purpose
12-30-020 Definitions
12-30-030 Wireless Telecommunications Services Facilities
12-30-040 Development Master Plan Required
12-30-050 Permitted Use
12-30-060 Conditional Use
12-30-070 Facility Types
12-30-080 Area Limitations for Wall and Roof Mounted Antennas
12-30-090 Additional Conditional Use Requirements
12-30-100 Accessory Buildings to Antenna Structures
12-30-110 Antennas and Mounting Structures on or Over a Public Right-of-Way
12-30-120 Amateur Radio Services
12-30-130 Non-Maintained or Abandoned Facilities
12-30-140 Other Types of Antennas
12-30-010 Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to address planning issues brought on by the rapid growth in
demand for wireless telecommunications services facilities. This Chapter distinguishes wireless
telecommunications services from other broadcasting type telecommunication technologies and
establishes provisions that deal with issues of demand, visual mitigation, noise, engineering,
residential impacts, health, safety and facility siting. This Chapter also addresses issues of
residential impact with reference to Amateur Radio. It is not the purpose of this Chapter to
address other types of business and commercial wireless telecommunication. Any wireless
telecommunications transmission facilities not requiring the external installation of antennas or
peripheral equipment to serve their purposes shall not be affected by this Chapter.
12-30-020 Definitions.
The following definitions are specific to this Chapter.
(a) “Amateur Radio Services” means those not-for-profit radio services governed by
the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, Part 97 of Title 47 relating to the Federal Communications
Commission.
(b) “Antenna” means a transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications
that radiates or captures radio signals.
(c) “Antenna Support Structures” means the mechanical devices by which antennas
are attached to towers or buildings.
(d) “Colinear” or rigid “whip” antenna means an antenna that is cylindrical in shape,
omnidirectional in transmission and reception, and may vary in size depending upon the
2
frequency and gain for which it is designed.
(e) “Co-location” means the construction of towers designed to permit more than one
user to attach antennas for permitted purposes.
(f) “Institutional Radio” means equipment used primarily for the transmission,
reception or transfer of voice or data through radio wave (wireless) transmission for institutional
use. These institutional uses include, but are not limited to: churches, well sites, water tanks, City
parks, City buildings (fire, police, City Hall, public works), public schools, and quasi-public
schools.
(g) “Lattice tower” means a self-supporting multiple sided, open steel frame structure
used to support telecommunications equipment.
(h) “Monopole” means a single cylindrical steel or wooden pole that acts as the
support for antenna structures and antennas.
(i) “Public Use” means a publically-owned structure or use such as a city park, city
building (fire, police, city hall, etc.), public school, a well site, a water tank, or similar uses or
structures.
(j) “Quasi-public Use” means a structure or use such as facilities owned or operated
by a community association, upon a street lamp or other lighting poles, electric power poles not
exceeding thirty (30) feet in height, and similar uses and structures.
(k) “Roof mounted antenna” means an antenna or series of individual antennas
mounted on a roof, mechanical room or penthouse of a building.
(l) “Small Wireless Facilities” Means wireless facilities and any support structure for
the Small Wireless Facility(ies) that do not exceed the volume limitations for small wireless
antennas and associated equipment in the First Amendment to Nationwide Programmatic
Agreement for the Collocation of Wireless Antennas adopted by the Federal Communications
Commission.1
(m) “Wall mounted antenna” means an antenna or series of individual antennas
mounted against the vertical wall of a building.
(n) “Wireless Telecommunications Services” means “Cellular” or “PCS” (Personal
Communications System) facilities used primarily for the transmission, reception or transfer of
voice or data through radio wave (wireless) transmissions which can be integrated with the
public switched network. Such sites typically require the construction of transmission support
1 See the Programmatic Agreement for specifics on the size and volume of equipment. Generally, the applicable
size and volume limitations are: (a) an individual antenna must fit within an enclosure that is no more than three
cubic feet in volume; (b) all antennas on the structure must in aggregate fit within enclosures that total no more than
six cubic feet in volume; (c) other equipment associated with the structure may not cumulatively exceed 28 cubic
feet for non-pole structures supporting fewer than 3 providers, 21 cubic feet for pole structures, and for structures
supporting 3 or more providers, 35 and 28 cubic feet respectively.
3
structures to which antennas are attached and one or more unmanned accessory buildings to
house equipment.
12-30-030 Wireless Telecommunications Services Facilities.
The requirements of this Chapter apply to commercial radio services such as “cellular” or “PCS”
(Personal Communications System) communications and paging systems which can be
integrated with a variety of competing networks, unless otherwise specifically exempted. All
facilities shall comply with the following regulations and all other ordinances of the City,
including building permit regulations and requirements, and any pertinent regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
12-30-040 Development Master Plan Required.
A site location Development Master Plan shall be submitted by each company desiring
placement of wireless telecommunication services facilities. The Development Master Plan shall
be submitted and approved by the Planning Commission prior to the processing of any permits
for permitted or conditional use locations. Future amendments to each company’s Development
Master Plan shall be submitted and reviewed by the Planning Commission prior to approval of
additional facility locations. The Development Master Plan shall show approximate locations of
future facilities, and provide specific locations when possible, but are not required to detail the
specific type (i.e., pole, roof, wall mount) of antenna. In addition, the Development Master Plan
shall show the service area within Woods Cross City and the approximate location of any other
tower locations in communities adjoining Woods Cross City.
12-30-050 Permitted Use.
Antennas to be located on monopoles, as allowed herein, may be allowed as a permitted use if
co-located on a monopole site that has been previously approved by conditional use permit,
provided that the company desiring to co-locate agrees in writing to abide by all the conditions
and terms in the original conditional use permit.
12-30-060 Prohibition in Residential Zones -- Conditional Uses In Residential and
Other Zones.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, wireless telecommunication facilities
are prohibited in residential zones.
(b) Small Wireless Facilities may be allowed as a conditional use in a residential zone if
located upon or within a public or quasi-public structure.
(c) Wireless telecommunications facilities that employ effective stealth-type techniques
and designs that match or compliment the structure on which the facility is deployed may be
allowed as a conditional use in a residential zone if located on a public structure, and are
otherwise shielded from public view by creative use of screens, landscaping, etc..
4
(d) In all non-residential zones, wireless telecommunications facilities may be allowed as
a conditional use, exclusive of amateur radio facilities governed by Section 12-30-120.
12-30-070 Facility Types.
Commercial wireless telecommunications services facilities are characterized by the type or
location of the antenna structure. There are four general types of such antenna structures: wall
mounted antennas; roof mounted antennas; monopoles with antennas and antenna support
structure; and lattice towers. Standards for the installation of each type of antenna are as follows:
(a) Wall Mounted Antenna. The following provisions apply to wall mounted
antennas:
(1) Wall mounted antennas shall not extend above the wall line of the building
or extend more than four (4) feet horizontally from the face of the building.
(2) Antennas, equipment and the supporting structure shall be painted to
match the color of the building or structure or the background against which they are
most commonly seen. Antennas and the supporting structures on buildings should be
architecturally compatible with the building.
(3) Antennas mounted directly on existing parapet walls, penthouses, or
mechanical equipment rooms, with no portion of the antenna extending above the
roofline of such structures, shall be considered a wall mounted antenna.
(b) Roof Mounted Antenna. The following provisions apply to roof mounted
antennas:
(1) Roof mounted antennas shall be allowed on top of existing penthouses or
mechanical equipment rooms provided the antennas and antenna support structures are
enclosed by a structure that creates a visual screen. The screening structure, antennas and
antenna mounting structures shall not extend more than eight (8) feet above the existing
roofline of the penthouse or mechanical equipment room.
(2) For antennas not mounted on a penthouse or mechanical equipment room,
the antennas shall be mounted at least five (5) feet from the exterior wall of a building.
For antennas mounted between five (5) and ten (10) feet from the exterior wall, the
maximum height of a roof mounted antenna is directly proportional to the distance the
antenna is set back from the exterior wall up to a maximum height of ten (10) feet above
the roofline of the building to which the antenna is attached. Antennas shall be mounted
at least five (5) and ten (10) feet behind a parapet wall. For antennas mounted between
five (5) and ten (10) feet behind a parapet wall, the maximum height of the antenna is
directly proportional to the distance the antenna is set back from the wall up to a
maximum of ten (10) feet as measured from the top of the parapet wall. The antennas
5
shall not extend more than fifteen (15) feet above the roofline of the building itself unless
approved as a conditional use.
(3) Roof mounted antennas are permitted only on a flat roof and shall be
screened, constructed and/or colored to match the structure to which they are attached.
(c) Monopole Antennas. The following provisions apply to monopole antennas:
(1) For purposes of this Chapter, there shall be two divisions of monopoles:
monopoles with antennas and antenna support structures less than two feet in width; and
monopoles with antennas and antenna support structures two feet in width and greater.
Both antenna types shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(A) The height limit of single user monopoles shall be limited to sixty
(60) feet. The height limit of multiple user monopoles shall be limited to one
hundred (100) feet. A separate conditional use permit shall be required for each
pole location.
(B) Facilities to be co-located upon an existing pole shall be
considered a permitted use, provided that the initial pole installation received a
conditional use permit. The new facility shall comply with all other provisions
relating to site development, landscaping, security, etc., as provided herein.
(C) Monopoles shall be allowed only in rear yard areas and shall not be
located in a required landscaped area, buffer area or required parking area.
(D) Monopoles shall be fenced with a six (6) foot solid vinyl fence or
other fencing as approved or required by the Planning Commission. There shall
be no climbing pegs located on the lower twenty (20) feet of the monopole.
(E) The electronic cabinetry and subject enclosure shall not exceed
twenty-five (25) feet by twenty-five (25) feet by ten (10) feet tall.
(F) Monopoles and electronic cabinetry shall be located to obtain the
highest amount of visual screening, such as behind built structures, and screened
with mature trees and shrubbery. Each application shall be accompanied by a
Screening Plan.
(G) Each co-locator shall place electronic cabinetry with one shared
wall to the original electronic cabinetry enclosure for efficient space utilization.
Where the location is limited, as in a commercial district, the first locator will be
required to build housing that can adequately contain all co-locator’s electronic
cabinetry. Where the location is residential in character or the site is not
conducive to landscaping, the electronic cabinetry shall be encased in a structure
emulating a small residential building, with gabled roof and durable exterior
materials. All companies utilizing such cabinetry shall be responsible for
removing any graffiti on the structure or correcting any vandalism to the structure
6
within seventy-two (72) hours of notification.
(H) There shall be no lighting on towers unless required by the FAA.
Any other lighting shall be oriented inward so as not to project onto surrounding
property.
(2) For monopoles with antennas and antenna support structures less than two
feet in width, the total antenna structure attached to a monopole shall not exceed two (2)
feet in width and the maximum height of such array shall not exceed ten (10) feet. Such
monopoles may be allowed only in the I-1 Light Industrial and I-2 Industrial Zones. No
such monopoles shall be located within 200 feet of a residential zone or area designated
for future residential development in the City’s General Plan.
(3) For monopoles with antennas and antenna support structures two feet in
width and greater, the maximum visible width of antennas and antenna mounting
structures attached shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height or thirteen (13) feet in width
as viewed looking directly at the monopole at the same elevation as the antennas and
antenna mounting structure. Such monopoles may be allowed only in the I-1 Light
Industrial and I-2 Industrial Zones. No such monopole shall be located within 350 feet of
a residential zone or area designated for future residential development in the City
General Plan, nor closer than 250 feet from a major collector street or 500 feet from a
major arterial street. In addition no such monopole shall be located less than one and onehalf
(1½) times the tower height from any other City street or residential dwelling.
(d) Lattice Tower. Lattice towers are not permitted for wireless telecommunications
services facilities.
12-30-080 Area Limitations for Wall and Roof Mounted Antennas.
A combination of both roof and wall mounted antennas may be allowed on a building. The total
area for all wall and roof mounted antennas and supporting structures combined shall not exceed
forty (40) square feet for each exterior wall of the building or a total of one hundred sixty (160)
square feet per building per carrier. A maximum of four (4) walls may be occupied by cellular
antennas. The total area shall be the sum of the area of each individual antenna face and the
visible portion of the supporting structure as viewed when looking directly at the face of the
building. The total area for a roof mounted antenna shall apply to the closest exterior wall. Up to
three (3) carriers may utilize each building side for a maximum of four (4) sides. Each carrier
shall obtain a separate conditional use permit.
12-30-090 Additional Conditional Use Requirements.
In addition to conditional use standards outlined in this Title, the following shall be considered
by the Planning Commission in evaluating a conditional use application for the location of a
wireless telecommunication facility:
(a) Compatibility of the proposed structure with the height and mass of existing
buildings and utility structures.
7
(b) Whether co-location of the antenna on other existing structures in the same
vicinity such as other towers, buildings, water towers, utility poles, athletic field lights, parking
lot lights, etc., is possible without significantly impacting antenna transmission or reception.
(c) The location of the antenna in relation to existing vegetation, topography and
buildings to obtain the best visual screening.
(d) Whether the spacing between monopoles creates quantifiable detrimental impacts
to adjoining properties.
(e) The Planning Commission may reduce the required setback from a residential
zone if practical difficulties are demonstrated by the applicant (i.e., City Park location, public
buildings, etc.) or upon detailed demonstration by the applicant that the proposed facility can be
effectively screened from the view of nearby sensitive land uses, provided that no pole may be
permitted closer than one and one-half (1½) times the height of the pole to any residential
dwelling.
(f) Compliance with provisions of this Title regarding the Airport Protective Area,
the Uniform Building Code, regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and other
applicable Federal, State and City regulations.
(g) Other safety, functional and aesthetic elements of the proposal including without
limitation the following:
(1) design and construction characteristics that minimize the visual impact to the
extent possible through design, screening and siting;
(2) the removal or modification of site landscaping and the provision of
replacement landscaping elements;
(3) efforts to ensure that the facilities do not increase the height of the existing,
approved facility;
(4) for façade-mounted facilities, the antenna and associated equipment
incorporates stealth-type design features, is of a scale and design compatible with the
building, is mounted to a building facade and does not project beyond 12 inches from the
face of the building;
(5) how the facilities will blend with and/or complement the color, design and/or
character of the surrounding context, whether natural backdrop, building or existing
facility;
(6) the exclusion of exterior, artificial lighting unless required for safety purposes
by State or Federal Law;
(7) ground equipment and vertical elements have been screened/buffered using
8
landscaping and fencing to the extent possible;
(8) the facility incorporates stealth/aesthetic designs such as public art, clock
towers, flag poles or other appropriate visual forms, if possible;
(9) design and construction elements that ensure the absence of guy wires;
(10) signage is limited to warning and informational signs; and
(11) design and construction considerations that discourage unauthorized access.
12-30-100 Accessory Buildings to Antenna Structures.
Accessory buildings to antenna structures shall comply with the required setback, height and
landscaping requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. Where required by
applicable City Zoning Ordinances, all power lines on the lot leading to the accessory building(s)
and antenna structure shall be underground.
12-30-110 Antennas and Mounting Structures on or Over a Public Right-of-Way.
Antennas and mounting structures are not permitted to encroach on or over the public sidewalk
or on or over a public right-of-way, except as may be expressly provided in a Franchise
Agreement.
12-30-120 Amateur Radio Services.
Amateur radio services are licensed and protected by the Federal Communications Act and Part
97 of Title 47 of the U. S. Code of Federal Regulations regarding Amateur Radio Services. It is
not the purpose of this Chapter to limit Amateur Radio Services, but to guide the installation of
such facilities with regard to issues of visual mitigation, residential impacts, health, safety and
facility siting. Amateur radio services are permitted in all zones of the City with the following
restrictions:
(a) Height. Amateur radio station antenna towers may not exceed sixty-five (65) feet
in height.
(b) Siting. Towers and antennas shall be limited to rear yards. Antenna towers shall
be sited such that the tower is no closer to a neighboring dwelling than the height of the tower
plus five (5) feet; guy wires shall not be closer than five (5) feet from the property line on any
side. Towers shall be installed to withstand wind forces of up to one hundred (100) miles per
hour.
(c) Quantity. The average size of R-1-8 and R-1-10 City lots and the proximity to
other dwellings limits the number of 65-foot towers to no more than one per lot. Additional 65-
foot towers may be permitted on larger lots with due consideration given to visual impact on the
surrounding area.
9
(d) Size. Any station antenna for amateur radio services greater than twelve (12) feet
tall with antenna and support structure exceeding ten (10) square feet in surface area, must apply
for a building permit for installation after receiving Community Development approval in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.
(e) Special Exception. Any person desiring to erect a tower or structures in excess of
the above limitations for amateur radio services in accordance with Part 97 of Title 47 of the
Code of Federal Regulations regarding Amateur Radio Service may apply for a special exception
to the Board of Adjustment for reasonable accommodation from the provisions of this Section.
The Board of Adjustment shall determine what, if any, reasonable accommodations can be made
for such structures as requested to constitute the minimum practicable regulation to accomplish
the City’s legitimate purposes. The Board of Adjustments shall comply with the procedural
requirements set forth in Chapter 4 of this Title regarding special exceptions and shall prepare
written findings and conclusions regarding its decision. Any applicant wishing to apply for an
exception to the restrictions set forth herein shall specify the details and dimensions of the
proposed antenna and its supporting structures and shall further specify why the applicant
contends that such a location, design and height are necessary to accommodate reasonably, the
amateur radio communication.
12-30-130 Non-Maintained or Abandoned Facilities.
The City may require each non-maintained or abandoned commercial wireless
telecommunications antenna supporting tower, antenna mounting structure, antenna(s) and any
other antenna, communications facility or communications equipment regulated herein to be
removed from the building or premise, at the permittee’s expense, when such equipment has not
been repaired or put into use by the owner, person having control, or person receiving benefit of
such structure within thirty (30) calendar days after notice of non-maintenance or abandonment
is given to the owner, person having control, or person receiving the benefit of such structure.
For purposes of this Section, “abandoned” shall mean any facility or supporting tower, antenna
mounting structure, and antenna(s) which has not been used for a continuous period of one (1)
year.
12-30-140 Other Types of Antennas.
Antennas, communications facilities or communications equipment not defined or regulated by
this Chapter are conditional uses in all non-residential zones within the City.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
CHAPTER 31
LEGACY GATEWAY ZONE
12-31-010 Purpose
12-31-020 Conflicts
12-31-030 Definitions
12-31-040 Core Commercial District: Permitted and Conditional Uses
12-31-050 Neighborhood/Mixed Use District: Permitted and Conditional Uses
12-31-060 Dimensional Standards
12-31-070 Density
12-31-080 Project Master Plan
12-31-090 Master Development Guidelines
12-31-100 Common Area Management Plan
12-31-110 Design Guidelines
12-31-120 Alternative Approval Process; Development Agreements
12-31-010 Purpose
The purposes of the Legacy Gateway Zone are to:
(a) Provide standards for development of areas in proximity to the commuter rail
station, the proposed Legacy Highway Interchange, and the connecting transportation
corridors along 500 South and Redwood Road, that will encourage the creation of an
architecturally unique, vibrant commercial and mixed use district reflective of Woods
Cross’s unique geographic location and will interface with the natural shoreland
environment surrounding the Legacy Parkway and the Great Salt Lake;
(b) Provide for development of a Core Commercial District around the Legacy
Intersection as identified in the General Plan consisting of more intense regional and
community commercial uses at the Intersection which decrease in intensity further from the
Intersection. The Core Commercial District will also incorporate a blend of compatible
mixed uses in close proximity to one another to provide a blend of retail, service, office,
and dining uses; and to facilitate safe, attractive, and convenient pedestrian circulation and
minimize conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles;
(c) Provide for development of a Neighborhood/Mixed Use District(s) with mixed
uses that draw people to the area and support the uses of the Core Commercial District by
providing a transition from the Core Commercial District to lower density residential
development;
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
(d) Provide open spaces, connections, and integrated landscaping, furnishings
and lighting to encourage and promote the creation of destination centers as well as to
encourage and promote an integrated, traffic- and pedestrian-friendly development design;
(e) Provide design flexibility and efficiency in land use and the siting of buildings,
services and infrastructure, including the opportunity to increase building height and/or
density and reduce pavement areas where appropriate;
(f) Facilitate vehicle traffic in and out of the Legacy Gateway Zone from major
roadways while preserving the pedestrian-friendly character of the Legacy Gateway Zone
by establishing convenient and logical vehicular circulation paths with properly spaced and
signalized intersections; create attractive streetscapes that facilitate vehicular and
pedestrian travel while maintaining thoroughfare separation from the pedestrian zones.
(g) Prior to construction, require the adoption of Master Development Guidelines
(“MDG”), a Common Area Management Plan (“CAMP”) to provide for the maintenance of
common areas and open spaces within the Core Commercial District, and Site
Architectural Review Committees (“SARC”) to encourage and facilitate the equitable
allocation of costs for construction of common areas, infrastructure and the maintenance of
these improvements among the property owners in the zone district.
(h) Pursuant to the authority of Utah Code Ann. § 10-9a-102(2), provide an
alternative approval and regulatory method for projects that are at least 10 acres in size
within the Legacy Gateway Zone allowing such projects to be approved and regulated by
the terms of a development agreement including an approved project master plan and
specific development standards, which development agreement shall be approved by the
City Council pursuant to the authority of Utah Code Ann. § 10-9a-502 after
recommendation by the Planning Commission and after a public hearing; and
(i) Enable the City to identify certain Development Standards that must be
applied to projects within the Legacy Gateway zone, including those covered by a
development agreement, while providing flexibility for projects covered by a development
agreement to vary certain Development Standards that otherwise would be applicable to
projects not covered by a development agreement where sufficient justification or
consideration is given to alter generally applicable standards and where the overall
purposes of the Legacy Gateway zone are achieved.
12-31-020 Conflicts
This Chapter provides additional provisions to those set forth in the other Chapters
of this Zoning Ordinance. In the event of conflict between other provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall apply. Other than approval
of a zone change which is governed by City Ordinance, no other actions are required to
effectuate a zone change to a Legacy Gateway zone.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
12-31-030 Definitions
The following definitions shall have the meaning set forth below:
(a) Common Area Management Plan (CAMP) – proposed standards submitted
by a developer for the purpose of governing the maintenance of open spaces, landscaping,
and common areas.
(b) Core Commercial District – An area of higher-intensity development adjacent
to and within close proximity to the Legacy Interchange, as shown on the City’s General
Plan and Zoning Map , containing regional, and community retail uses, hotels, multi-story
offices, and other employee/consumer-intensive uses. The Core Commercial District
provides for a vibrant, mixed use environment.
(c) Development Standard – any standard, requirement, rule, regulation,
supplementary regulation, code provision, covenant, design or architectural guideline,
engineering standard or specification, setback, buffer, building height or volume limitation,
yard requirement, lot width or depth specification, parking, loading, access or parking lot
design requirement, road or right-of-way specification, standard for lighting, signage,
fencing, or walls, landscaping requirement or specification, sidewalk or trail requirement or
specification or other standard, requirement or specification that affects the design, form,
location, placement or configuration of any improvement to real property, including private
development land and public property or rights-of-ways.
(d) Hotel - a building featuring interior hallways that connect multiple rooms
designed for or occupied as the temporary abiding place of individuals who are, for
compensation, lodged, with or without meals. For purposes of this Chapter, “hotel” does
not include otherwise qualifying structures where the average duration of occupancy
exceeds thirty (30) consecutive days.
(e) Legacy Intersection – The intersection of 500 South and Redwood Road has
been designated by the City as the “Legacy Intersection” with the expectation that it will
become the focal point of the Core Commercial District,
(f) Master DevelopmentGuidelines (MDG) – proposed standards submitted by a
developer for the purpose of governing elements of design such as architectural controls,
open spaces, buildings, structures, landscaping, lighting, signs and other similar external
improvements.
(g) Neighborhood/Mixed Use District – The areas, contiguous to the Core
Commercial District, containing mixed uses that draw people to the area and support the
uses of the Core Commercial District by providing a transition from the Core Commercial
District to moderately lower density residential development; Uses within the
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
Neighborhood/Mixed Use District are to support the overall theme and design of the
Northwest Quadrant and to provide transitions between disparate uses and to compliment
the other uses within the Core Commercial District as more specifically identified on the
General Land Use Plan of the City.
(h) Project Master Plan (PMP) – a document displaying a conceptual plan for all
phases of development, both existing and projected, with respect to a proposed
development project.
(i) Square Footage – The floor area as measured from the inside perimeter of
the exterior walls of the building under consideration. The square footage limitations used
in this Chapter apply to the main floor footprint of structures that house the applicable uses.
12-31-040 Core Commercial District: Permitted and Conditional Uses
(a) Permitted Uses in the Core Commercial District include:
(1) Business services (banks, financial institutions, and related uses)
(2) Fitness, recreation & entertainment facilities up to 75,000 square feet
in size
(3) Hotels up to 65,000 square feet in size
(4) Medical/dental offices and clinics up to 65,000 square feet in size
(5) Professional and business offices
(6) Restaurant (traditional sit-down)
(7) Retail sales up to 50,000 square feet per individual tenant use, with all
merchandise displayed and stored inside a building
(8) Theaters up to 75,000 square feet in size
(b) Conditional Uses include:
(1) Automotive wholesale and retail sales
(2) Fitness, recreation & entertainment facilities over 75,000 square feet
in size
(3) Hospitals, inpatient and/or outpatient medical facilities
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
(4) Hotels over 65,000 square feet in size
(5) Medical/dental offices and clinics over 65,000 square feet in size
(6) Mixed-use development incorporating any uses listed herein as
permitted uses
(7) Recreational vehicle sales
(8) Retail sales over 50,000 square feet per individual tenant use,
(9) Theaters over 75,000 square feet in size
(10) Transportation hubs and transit/commuter and related facilities, but
not including outside storage, train yards, warehousing, storage,
switching, maintenance shops
(11) Public and quasi-public uses, and Public Utility Facilities as described
in this title
12-31-050 Neighborhood/Mixed Use District: Permitted and Conditional Uses
(a) Permitted Uses in the Neighborhood/Mixed Use District include:
(1) Business services (banks, financial institutions, and related uses)
(2) Convenience retail
(3) Fast food establishments without drive-up
(4) Fitness, recreation & entertainment facilities up to 35,000 square feet
in size
(5) Government offices and related services, except the following
prohibited uses: correctional/detention facilities, half-way houses,
drug or alcohol rehabilitation facilities, facilities for the treatment or
confinement of the mentally ill, homeless shelters, domestic violence
shelters, and other similar facilities including those which may allow or
require that clients stay overnight or longer
(6) Hotels up to 65,000 square feet in size
(7) Medical/dental offices and clinics up to 25,000 square feet in size
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
(8) Neighborhood service establishments – personal services (low impact
retail and service uses such as bakery, bookstore, dry-cleaning
(pickup/drop off for off-premise cleaning), hair styling, pharmacy, art
supply/gallery, craft store, photocopy center, etc.)
(9) Professional and business offices
(10) Restaurant (traditional sit-down)
(b) Conditional Uses include:
(1) Churches, synagogues, temples and other places of worship
(2) Day care, pre-school
(3) Fast food establishments with drive-up
(4) Fitness, recreation & entertainment facilities over 35,000 square feet
in size
(5) Hospitals, inpatient and/or outpatient medical facilities
(6) Hotels over 65,000 square feet in size
(7) Laboratories
(8) Medical/dental offices and clinics over 25,000 square feet in size
(9) Mixed-use development incorporating any uses listed herein as
permitted uses over 35,000 square feet in size
(10) Multi-family and single-family residential, including residential facilities
for the elderly and handicapped, condominiums, and generally all
classes of housing, whether for rental or sale
(11) Nursing/convalescent facilities
(12) Public and quasi-public uses
(13) Schools and colleges
(14) Transportation hubs and transit/commuter and related facilities, but
not including outside storage, train yards, warehousing, storage,
switching, maintenance shops
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
12-31-060 Dimensional Standards
(a) Core Commercial District. In order to enhance the pedestrian environment in
the Core Commercial District, front and side yard build-to lines shall provide
adequate pedestrian access while minimizing the distance between adjacent
streets and building frontages as follows:
(1) Front Yard (measured from property line): Maximum of fifteen (15)
feet, except where a pedestrian plaza is provided.
(2) Side Yards (measured from face of building perpendicular to abutting
property line) are not required except to provide access to parking and
deliveries behind a building and for emergency access as deemed
necessary by the Fire Marshall.
(3) Rear Yard: No specified requirements, except that a minimum fifty
(50) feet shall be provided when adjacent to an R-1-8 zone.
(4) Side Yard Corner: same as front yard.
(5) Lot size: no requirement.
(6) Lot Frontage: minimum lot frontage shall be one hundred (100) feet.
(7) Building Height: Maximum building height shall vary depending on the
distance from the Legacy Parkway as follows. Buildings located
within one thousand (1,000) feet of the Legacy Parkway shall not
exceed the lesser of three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in height.
Buildings located more than one thousand (1,000) feet from the
Legacy Parkway shall not exceed the lesser of four (4) stories or sixty
(60) feet in height.
(b) Neighborhood/Mixed Use District. In order to support the pedestrian-friendly
environment of the Core Commercial District and to provide pedestrianoriented
travel within its own District boundaries, in the Neighborhood/Mixed
Use District front and side yard building build-to lines shall be as follows:
(1) Front Yard (measured from property line): Maximum of fifteen (15)
feet, except where a pedestrian plaza is provided.
(2) Side Yards (measured from face of building perpendicular to abutting
property line) ten (10) feet between residential buildings. Zero lot lines
are permitted when abutting a non-residential use.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
(3) Rear Yard: No specified requirements, except that a minimum of thirty
(30) feet shall be provided when adjacent to an R-1-8 zone.
(4) Side Yard Corner: same as front yard.
(5) Lot size: no requirement.
(6) Lot Frontage: minimum lot frontage shall be fifty (50) feet.
(7) Building Height: not to exceed the lesser of four (4) stories or sixty
(60) feet.
12-31-070 Density
Density calculations may be averaged over an entire parcel, including any areas
otherwise un-buildable, provided that compensating areas of open space, outdoor play or
sitting areas, and/or community facilities are provided. Allowable development densities
shall be as follows:
(a) Residential Development. Subject to the open space and other provisions of
the MDG, development projects in the Neighborhood/Mixed Use District must contain a
generous allocation of non-residential uses. Fifteen (12) dwelling units per net acre are
allowed in the Neighborhood/Mixed Use District, subject to the provisions of the MDG.
However, if a project in the Neighborhood/Mixed Use District contains a demonstrably
generous mix of non-residential uses, the city may consider densities higher than twelve 12
dwelling units per acre.
(b) Retail/service. The floor area to land ratio (FAR, which is the net constructed
floor area of all floors of a structure as a ratio to the overall parcel land area it is
constructed on) is not limited in the Core Commercial District. Parking structures shall not
be included in the FAR calculation. The FAR is limited to a maximum of .4 (40%) in the
Neighborhood/Mixed Use District.
12-31-080 Project Master Plan.
(a) Project Master Plan (“PMP”) Required. In the Core Commercial District, a
PMP is required for any development of property. In the Neighborhood/Mixed Use District,
a PMP is required for any development of property larger than 3 acres in size. All PMPs
shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval. The Project Master Plan must
show all phases of the development (including any phasing plans) in both existing and
projected development. Approval of the PMP does not constitute approval of individual site
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
plans for any buildings or improvements within the PMP area. Any required PMP, including
development plan approval, must be approved before any zoning approval is granted.
(b) Intent. The intent of the PMP is to establish a workable framework for the
development of large or phased projects. Major transportation, major drainage and grading,
and water quality systems, major utilities, open space or land use issues within the PMP
area shall be identified with a conceptual plan for addressing them. An approved PMP will
guide all future development within the area defined by the PMP.
(c) Application and Submittal. PMP applications shall be submitted to the City
Planner.
(d) PMP requirements. PMP applications shall include the following information:
(1) Narrative submittal requirements. Unless waived by the City Planner,
the following information shall be submitted in narrative form:
a. Description of land use concepts, anticipated structures,
ranges of square footage and general location, parking
concept, public open space concept, and circulation concept of
primary auto, bicycle and pedestrian and transit connections
within the area and to adjoining properties.
b. Description of major transportation systems, including arterial
streets, major storm water drainage and water quality systems,
major utilities, open space or land use issues and discussion of
how such issues will be addressed as development proceeds.
c. Description of any contemplated development standards at the
periphery of the PMP to promote compatibility between the
PMP and adjoining properties.
d. Estimated sequence and estimated timing (where known) of
project development, including on site infrastructure
improvements, off-site infrastructure improvements, and
supporting facilities.
e. Discussion of proposed incorporation of existing structures in
future development plans.
(2) PMP graphic submittal requirements. Unless waived by the City
Planner, the following information shall be submitted in graphic form:
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
a. Diagram indicating the location of land uses by area, indicating
the anticipated range of densities for each type of area within
the PMP.
b. Diagram of circulation plans for primary vehicular, transit,
bicycle, and pedestrian service.
c. Concept plan showing the relationship of development to site
ingress and egress and to public amenities and/or open
spaces.
d. Open space concept plan, showing both the general location
and general configuration of the intended public and private
open spaces, bicycle and pedestrian corridors.
e. Preliminary utility and regional storm water detention/retention
plans.
f. Preliminary transportation analysis that addresses roadway
network design, functional classification, lane requirements,
and intersection control for arterial and collector roadways,
modal split, trip distribution and bicycle, pedestrian, and transit
facility plans that provide critical linkages to the surrounding
local and regional transportation system.
g. Proposed incorporation of existing structures in future
development plans.
h. Maps and legal description of the boundaries of the project
area.
i. Proposed building configurations, elevations, anticipated
massing, signage plan and an overall schematic drawing of the
proposed development.
(3) Waiver of specific submissions. Any information required by these
PMP requirements may be waived by the City Planner on the basis
that the information is not necessary to review the proposed PMP.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
(4) Planning Commission Public Hearing. The Planning Commission shall
hold a public hearing on any proposed Master Plan within this Zone
and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the PMP.
(5) Except as provided below in Section 12-31-112 for PMP’s approved in
connection with the approval of a development agreement, the criteria
for review of all PMPs by the Planning Commission shall be:
a. Consistency with the Woods Cross City General Plan;
b. Compliance with city codes, rules, regulations and standards
applicable to the proposed PMP;
c. Consistency with any Development Standards and Design
Guidelines determined by the City to be applicable to all
development within the Legacy Gateway Zone; and
d. Establishment of an appropriate mix of uses in locations that
will promote and encourage the goals of the respective
districts.
(6) Approval of a PMP shall constitute use approval for uses shown and
described in an approved PMP and further conditional use approval
shall not be required for applications which are consistent with an
approved PMP.
(7) Recording. All approved PMPs, and all approved amendments to
such PMPs, shall be recorded in the real property records with a
notation that all land within such boundaries shall be subject to the
provisions of such PMP or amendment, unless or until amended.
(8) Major and minor amendments. An approved PMP may be amended
at any time using the process set out herein, and may be amended
simultaneously with the processing of a site plan application or a site
plan amendment. The City Planner shall determine whether a
proposed amendment is a “major” or “minor” amendment. In order to
initiate an amendment, the applicant shall submit to the City Planner
those PMP submission items that would change if the proposed
amendment were approved.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
a. Major amendments. Major amendments shall be reviewed and
approved by the planning commission. Changes of the
following types, if included in the approved PMP, shall define
an amendment as major:
i. To significantly modify or reallocate the allowable
height, mix of uses, or density of a development; or
ii. To significantly alter the location or amount of land
dedicated to parks, trails, open space, natural areas
or public facilities; or
iii. To significantly change the location of land use areas
as shown on the original PMP.
b. Minor amendments. Amendments that are not major
amendments shall be termed “minor amendments” and shall
be referred to the City Planner for review, who may also refer
the application to other departments or agencies for comment.
The City Planner shall approve, approve with conditions, or
deny such amendment within twenty (20) calendar days after
the date of applicant's submission of a complete application for
amendment.
(9) Effect of recorded plans. All PMPs and PMP amendments shall be
binding upon the applicants and their successors and assigns and
approving agencies, and shall limit and control the issuance of all
zoning permits and certificates and the construction, location, use and
operation of all land and structures included within the PMP or PMP
amendment.
(10) Appeals of decision.
a. The Planning Commission’s decision regarding a PMP may be
appealed to the City Council.
i. This appeal is initiated by filing a written appeal with the
City Council within thirty (30) days of the Planning
Commission’s determination.
ii. The City Council shall set a date for an appellate
hearing and shall notify the Planning Commission of the
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
date of such hearing at least seven (7) days prior to the
hearing date so that the Planning Commission may
prepare the record for the hearing.
iii. Upon holding the appellate hearing, the City Council
may affirm, reverse, or alter the Planning Commission’s
decision.
iv. The City Council shall render its appellate decision
within 30 days of the appellate hearing.
b. A decision of the City Council, in its appellate role, to
affirm, deny, or alter the Planning Commission’s determination
regarding a PMP may be appealed as to the District Court as
set forth in Utah Code Ann. § 10-9a-801, or its successor
section.
12-31-090 Master Development Guidelines
The developer of each area of land that is designated and mapped on the Woods
Cross City Zoning Map in a Legacy Gateway Zone shall prepare and submit Master
Development Guidelines (MDG) to be recorded against the property, which MDG shall
define the standards for design within the district for architectural controls, open space,
buildings, structures, landscaping, lighting, signs and similar external improvements. It is
specifically contemplated that development throughout the entire Legacy Gateway Zone
will meet certain Development Standards that are determined by the City to be reasonably
necessary to assure compatible, high quality development within the Legacy Gateway
Zone and that such Development Standards will be incorporated into the Master
Development Guidelines for each project.
The MDG shall be prepared by the developer and in all cases submitted to the
Planning Commission before the City shall grant any approval for any improvements within
any mapped zone district under the Legacy Gateway Zone regulations. All construction in
the Legacy Gateway Zone shall comply with applicable MDGs and CAMP. The MDG
and/or CAMP may contain specific lien and other enforcement provisions to ensure
adequate compliance. Any requirement of an MDG or CAMP may be more restrictive or
require a higher standard or quality than the Legacy Gateway Zone regulations or
Development Standards determined by the City to be applicable to all development within
the Legacy Gateway Zone.
12-31-100 Common Area Management Plan
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
Controls requiring the maintenance of open space, landscaping and common areas
shall be adopted via a CAMP to achieve the purposes of the Legacy Gateway Zone and
the City’s General Plan.
A CAMP pertaining to each individual development will be prepared by the
developer and approved by the Planning Commission. All development within each
proposed development project shall conform to the pertinent adopted CAMP provisions.
12-31-110 Design Guidelines
(a) General Requirements. In addition to general standards provided elsewhere
in the City’s Zoning Ordinances, and unless approved otherwise by the Planning
Commission in connection with the approval of a PMP, the following standards shall apply
specifically to developments in the Legacy Gateway Zone. These standards are to be
implemented in order to create a cohesive appearance unique to Woods Cross. Proposed
development within the Legacy Gateway Zone may also be subject to additional design
criteria stated in applicable Master Development Guidelines (MDG) and/or covenants,
conditions and restrictions contained in a Common Area Management Plans (CAMP).
(b) Purpose. The Legacy Gateway Zone is intended to become an iconic place,
where the urbanized environment interfaces with the natural shoreland environment
surrounding the Legacy Parkway and the Great Salt Lake. The purpose of these design
standards and regulations is to enhance the economic viability and aesthetic value of the
Legacy Gateway Zone by encouraging the creation of an architecturally unique, vibrant
commercial and mixed use district reflective of the unique geographic location, and historic
character of the Northwest Quadrant area of Woods Cross City.
More specifically, the design standards and regulations are intended to support the
following positive actions:
(1) To provide for development of a Core Commercial District around
the Legacy Intersection, consisting of more intense regional and
community commercial uses at the Intersection which decrease in
intensity further east from the Intersection. The Core Commercial
District will also incorporate a blend of compatible mixed uses in
close proximity to one another to provide a blend of retail, service,
office, and dining uses; and to facilitate safe, attractive, and
convenient pedestrian circulation and minimize conflicts between
pedestrians and vehicles;
(2) To provide for development of a Neighborhood/Mixed Use
District(s) with mixed uses that draw people to the area and support
the uses of the Core Commercial District by providing a transition
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
from the Core Commercial District to lower density residential
development;
(3) To provide open spaces, connections, and integrated landscaping,
furnishings and lighting to encourage and promote the creation of
destination centers as well as to encourage and promote an
integrated, traffic- and pedestrian-friendly development design;
(4) To provide design flexibility and efficiency in land use and the siting
of buildings, services and infrastructure, including the opportunity to
increase building height and/or density and reduce pavement areas
where appropriate; and
(5) To facilitate vehicle traffic in and out of the Legacy Gateway Zone
from major roadways while preserving the pedestrian-friendly
character of the Legacy Gateway Zone by establishing convenient
and logical vehicular circulation paths with properly spaced and
signalized intersections.
(c) Scope. Any lot or parcel located within the Legacy Gateway Zone shall be
subject to the standards and regulations of this Chapter. Such standards and
regulations are intended to be in addition to the existing standards and regulations of
the underlying zone of the property and other applicable regulations of this Zoning
Ordinance.
(1) Design Standards and Guidelines - This Chapter establishes three
(3) kinds of design criteria: Design Theme, Design Standards
and Design Guidelines.
a. Design Theme establishes the expected overall look of the
area, and the relationship of the built environment to the
natural shoreland environment through the use of principles.
These principles are not prioritized, but all are to be
reinforced through the implementation of design standards
and guidelines that are to be applied in planning the site
layout and buildings of all developments in the Legacy
Gateway Zone.
b. Design Standards are required in addition to other
standards set forth in this Zoning Ordinance and are
indicated by the verb “shall.” In the event of conflict between
the standards of this Chapter and other applicable
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, the interpretation and
provisions of this Chapter shall govern.
c. Design Guidelines indicate additional actions that are to be
taken to enhance the development design and achieve
greater compatibility of development in the Legacy Gateway
Zone. Guidelines thus use the verb “should” signifying that
the guidelines are desirable objectives to be achieved but
may not be mandatory or possible for every given
development situation.
(d) Rules of Interpretation.
(1) General. All provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained
in this Chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish the
purposes of this Chapter.
(2) Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows.
a. "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
b. "Or" indicates that one (1) or more of the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events shall apply.
(3) Mandatory and Discretionary Terms. The word "shall" is always
mandatory. The word “should” means that the matter described
ought to be accomplished if reasonable and possible under the
circumstances. The word "may" is permissive.
(4) Non-Technical and Technical Words. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common use and understanding of the
language, but technical words and phrases and such others as
may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall
be construed and understood according to such meaning.
(e) Development Project Evaluation
(1) Development Characteristics. Development within the Legacy
Gateway Zone shall exhibit design components and characteristics,
such as those set forth below, which set the development apart
from a standard subdivision and/or traditional site plan approval
accomplished under this Title:
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
a. Human-scaled Building Architecture;
b. Use of Shoreland Style Landscaping;
c. Viewshed Protection for the Legacy Parkway and the
Legacy Preserve;
d. Appropriate Use of Open Space;
e. Use of Public and Private Amenities.
(2) Evaluation Criteria. Each development proposal for development
within the Legacy Gateway Zone shall be evaluated based on its
compatibility with:
a. The Woods Cross City General Plan.
b. The Northwest Quadrant General Plan Update (2008).
c. The Woods Cross City Zoning Ordinance.
d. The purpose and development standards of the Legacy
Gateway Zone as set forth in this Chapter;
e. The purpose and design of the Legacy Parkway and Legacy
Preserve as set forth in the Legacy Parkway Scenic Byway
Master Plan; and
f. Any other City-approved study applicable to the subject
property.
(3) Burden of Persuasion. An applicant shall have the burden of
showing that the proposed uses, project design, and location of
utilities and facilities meet the requirements of this Chapter.
(f) Development Design Pattern Book
(1) Development Design Pattern Book Required. In addition to
applicable requirements of this Title and other provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance, all applications for the development of property
to the Legacy Gateway Zone shall include a development design
pattern book.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
(2) Development Design Pattern Book Approval. The development
design pattern book shall be reviewed and approved by the City in
conjunction with an application for conceptual site plan and/or
conceptual subdivision application.
(3) Development Design Pattern Book Submittal Requirements. The
development design pattern book shall provide and address the
following:
a. Written descriptions and graphic illustrations explaining how
the development compliments the physical form of the
property and how the theme, standards, and guidelines
found in this Chapter are to be integrated into the design of
the development;
b. Written descriptions and graphic illustrations explaining the
proposed conceptual architectural design, building
elevations, and other such related design schemes; and
c. Written descriptions and graphic illustrations that clearly
describe proposed open spaces, landscaping ideas,
pedestrian pathways, furnishings, lighting and related entry
way features and/or amenities.
d. Effect of Development Plan Approvals. Upon acceptance of
a conceptual plan and the associated development design
pattern book by the City, further development applications
such as subdivision plat and site plan approval for
development within the Legacy Gateway Zone shall comply
substantially with the conceptual plan approval and the
development design pattern book.
(g) Design Theme.
(1) The Design Theme describes the general feeling of the Legacy
Gateway Zone, utilizing a series of principles as follow.
a. Principle #1 – Context Sensitive – the setting, topography
and landscape should reflect and embrace the unique
qualities of the Great Salt Lake shorelands and Legacy
Parkway environment, which can be described as:
i. Broad open spaces and skies with expansive vistas
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
ii. Slow undulating lines
iii. Sense of openness or breeziness
iv. Low, native, grassy meadow and upland vegetation
v. Natural materials and textures
b. Principle #2 – Transitional – urban uses and districts should
merge and respond to the shoreland environment, which can
be described as:
i. Slow and progressive;
ii. Reinforcing a “sense of arrival” at Legacy Intersection
iii. Creating a “sense of entry” at edges of the area,
particularly from the west
iv. Responding to the needs of existing neighborhoods and
uses
v. Encouraging the formation of unique districts and
neighborhoods
c. Principle #3 – Balance – uses and development should create
a lively and spontaneous “Woods Cross” feel, which can be
described as:
i. Mixed use and multi-dimensional
ii. Natural and open to the west
iii. Obviously urban at the Legacy Intersection
iv. Responsive to existing uses and neighbors
v. Soft and open between differing uses
vi. Increasingly urban from west to east along 500 South
d. Principle #4 - Simplicity – the overall appearance can be
described as:
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
i. Clean, simple lines
ii. Bold gestures that recall organic forms on the edges
iii. Linear and urban at the Legacy Intersection
iv. Limited color palette
v. Low contrast
vi. Uncluttered
vii. Serenely animated
e. Principle #5 - Human-Scaled – the built setting is to reflect the
human experience in the Legacy Gateway Zone through:
i. Structures proportioned to people instead of vehicles
ii. Comfortably scaled spaces
iii. Low-profile forms hugging the horizon
iv. Pedestrian-friendly amenities
v. Urban forms and “street walls” at the Legacy
Intersection
vi. Interesting details and textures
vii. Slow-paced, with places to pause
viii. Appealing to the senses
f. Principle #6 - Natural or Natural Appearing Materials – the
natural or natural appearing materials of the Legacy Gateway
Zone are:
i. Stacked stone, cultured stacked stone or stone clad
ii. Natural or stained wood, wood siding, and cement
fiberboard with suitable textures and colors
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
iii. Decorative concrete or block, with suitable textures and
colors
iv. Stucco accenting, with suitable textures and colors
v. Colored concrete with suitable textures and colors, and
crushed gravel surfaces
vi. Subtle, non-reflective colors and stains
g. Principle #7 - Natural Vegetation - The natural vegetation and
patterns of the Legacy Gateway Zone are:
i. Informal placement of plantings
ii. A wide variety of species, mixed together, and no
invasive plantings
iii. Subtle floral displays and colors
iv. Grassland or meadow appearance
v. Multiple-season interest
vi. Predominance of perennial grasses and forbs
vii. Large, rural shade trees
viii. Ornamental shrubs, trees and landscape areas focused
on native species
ix. Drought-tolerant, water-wise and low-resource
consumption plantings
h. Principle #8 - Accents – The natural and man-made accents
supported in the Legacy Gateway Zone are:
i. Landscape boulders, rustic farm materials and similar
rural features typical of the surroundings and historical
setting
ii. Plaza and meeting areas that are comfortable and
attractive. Grassy swales and berms
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
iii. Open fencing styles
iv. Natural and soft surface trails
v. Terraced walls with limited heights
vi. Natural-appearing water features
vii. Furnishings, lighting and artistic embellishments that
reinforce the natural shoreland setting and traditions
(h) Mandatory Design Standards.
(1) Commercial, Industrial, or Institutional Building Architecture –
Buildings and structures are to enhance the visual environment of
the Legacy Gateway Zone by blending into the overall appearance
of the shoreland environment.
a. The architectural building design shall consider the visual
orientation to the Legacy Parkway, regional and local
streets, access roads and pedestrian pathways within the
Legacy Gateway Zone to create an attractive appearance
and views.
b. The apparent mass of buildings or structures shall be
minimized through articulation and use of materials. A
variety of vertical and horizontal planes, roof pitches, roof
lines, windows, reveals, and alcoves shall be used to create
facade variation, shadows, corners, and architectural
interest.
c. Where multiple story or multiple story appearing buildings
are constructed, the building design shall incorporate singlestory
heights for entryways, office space, and other such
usable spaces to create a tier effect to the building. Multiple
story buildings shall be set behind the single-story areas as
viewed from the Legacy Parkway, the local street system
and pedestrian pathways within the Legacy Gateway Zone,
or elsewhere where deemed applicable.
d. Buildings and structures shall generally appear to be
proportional or in scale with other buildings within the
immediate vicinity, specifically with regards to bulk, height,
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
and appearance, with the exception of those in the vicinity of
the Legacy Intersection.
e. Buildings on all edges of the Legacy Intersection should be
taller and distinctly urban in comparison to other buildings in
the area, helping to create a sense of arrival at an obvious
urban destination.
f. All building facades should face adjacent streets with
primary entrances and treatments. No setbacks should be
used in the vicinity of the Legacy Intersection, helping to
reinforce the sense of an urban destination. Setbacks on
other streets should be sufficiently consistent and treated in
a holistic manner in order to encourage the formation of
distinct neighborhoods and districts.
g. When facades face the Legacy Parkway, a regional street
(i.e. 500 South or Redwood Road), or any pedestrian
pathway within the Legacy Gateway Zone, or where deemed
applicable the Legacy Preserve, the architectural design
shall incorporate windows, doorways, entryways, canopies,
pillars, and other such features to accent the sense of a
“front entrance” to a building or structure. For multiple story
or multiple-story appearing buildings or structures, additional
elements such as windows, balconies, overhangs, and
canopies shall also be incorporated in upper levels to frame
and provide a human scale appearance to such buildings.
h. Natural or natural-appearing materials, such as stone,
cultured stone, and wood, shall be the bold gestures used in
the architectural design of all buildings. Decorative concrete
or block, tile, cement fiberboard, and other similar appearing
materials shall be the other main materials used in the
building design. Substantial or prominent use of unnatural
appearing materials, such as metal, vinyl and plastics is
prohibited.
i. Colors and finishes shall complement the shoreland
environment. Stains, flat paints, and matte finishes are
required. Reflective, glossy or shiny paints and finishes are
prohibited.
(2) Mixed Use, Office and Residential Building Architecture – Mixed
Use, Office and Residential styles and designs should enhance the
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
Legacy Gateway Zone by blending into the overall appearance of
the shoreland environment. The resulting forms and styles should
reflect a unique and different design and layout than is typically
found in other mixed use and residential projects in the region.
a. The building layout and architectural design shall consider
the visual orientation to the Legacy Parkway, regional and
local streets, access roads, pedestrian pathways and open
spaces within the area, or where otherwise deemed
applicable to create an attractive appearance when viewed
from these areas.
b. The apparent mass of all mixed use, office and residential
use buildings or structures shall be minimized through
articulation and use of materials. A variety of vertical and
horizontal planes, roof pitches, roof lines, windows, reveals,
and alcoves shall be used to create facade variation,
shadows, corners, and architectural interest.
c. When facades face the Legacy Parkway, a regional or local
street, an access road or any pedestrian pathway within the
Legacy Gateway Zone, or where otherwise deemed
applicable, the architectural design shall incorporate
porticos, entryways, and other such features to indicate a
street front entrance. Additional elements such as balconies
and other such overhangs shall also be incorporated in
upper levels of multi-story buildings to frame and provide a
human scale to such buildings.
d. Natural or natural-appearing materials, such as stone,
cultured stone, and wood, shall be the bold gestures used in
the architectural design of all residential use buildings. Wood
siding, cement fiberboard siding, and other similar appearing
materials shall be the other main materials used in the
design of all residential use sections of such buildings.
Substantial or prominent use of stucco, and unnatural
appearing materials, such as metal, vinyl, and plastics are
prohibited.
e. Colors and finishes shall complement the Legacy Parkway
Corridor environment. Stains, flat paints, and matte finishes
are required. Reflective or shiny paints and finishes are
prohibited.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
(3) Grading and Drainage – The relatively flat, slow-draining
environment of the area often produces wetland areas and
presents a challenge for proper drainage if the land is to be
developed. Every effort is to be made to work within the natural
drainage patterns of the land and minimize grading that would
disrupt the natural system and appearance of the area.
a. Minimize the amount of grading of the land to avoid excess
erosion, visual scarring, and other similar impacts.
i. Blend structures and exterior spaces into the natural
contours of the site.
ii. (B) Balance cut-and-fill on sites to the greatest degree
possible.
iii. Manmade contouring shall mimic natural contouring
and shall not begin or end with severe or abrupt
edges.
b. Minimize the use of retaining walls. If necessary, incorporate
or blend walls into the design of the building or parking areas
and return to the natural grades in the wetland and
landscaping areas.
c. Grading and drainage plans shall implement erosion control
measures to ensure that construction activities do not
compromise the overall natural drainage patterns and
system of the area.
(4) Landscape and Open Space Areas – Landscape and Open Space
Areas are to be used to enhance the Legacy Gateway Zone and
soften the transitions between the built and natural areas.
Landscape and Open Space Areas include vegetated areas as well
as "non-vegetative" elements, such as sidewalks, trails, plazas, and
other pedestrian-oriented hardscape areas.
a. At least 25% of each development site shall be used for
landscaping and open space areas. Where development
sites are adjacent to the Legacy Parkway, at least 50% of
the required landscaped/open space area shall consist of
native, informal or natural appearing plantings.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
b. All non-built, non-parking lot surface areas shall be
landscaped. Dedicated walkways, plazas, and other
pedestrian-oriented hardscape areas may be included as
landscaping, provided that they do not exceed twenty (25)
percent of the required minimum landscaping requirement.
As used herein, hardscape means sidewalks, concrete or
asphalt trails, plazas, and other non-vegetative construction
located in areas designated as landscaping.
c. The Landscape Plan of each site shall be unified both
internally and externally, and relate to the larger context of
the surrounding community. All landscape plans shall
consider the context of the Legacy Parkway Corridor, the
Great Salt Lake shore lands and the surrounding
environment and its unique contribution to the character of
the community.
d. The Landscape Plan shall include a pedestrian circulation
element that shows interconnectivity with surrounding
sidewalks, trails, and access to open space areas. Each
development is to provide appropriate pedestrian
connections to usable open space and trail amenities to
create various connections to the Legacy Parkway Trail
System.
e. Developed area landscapes adjacent to the Legacy Parkway
shall utilize a mixture of ornamental and native or local
climate plantings. Predominant plantings shall include
ornamental grasses, shrubs, and wildflowers that
complement the Legacy Parkway environment, with no
invasive plantings. Large areas of annual plants and/or
bright colors shall be avoided.
f. Landscaped areas adjacent to the Legacy Parkway shall
primarily consist of or be enhanced with native or local
climate shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses. Plants
with the potential to become invasive weeds in such areas
are prohibited.
g. Non-linear transition areas between the developed areas
and the natural areas adjacent to the Legacy Parkway shall
be created and intermingled with various styles and plant
species to soften the appearance of any transition line. An
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
appropriate barrier element, such as steel edge, shall be
used to prevent undesirable encroachment or overgrowth
between natural and formal plantings.
h. The Landscape Plan shall be coordinated with the
placement of utility elements to mitigate their impact and
reduce the potential for conflicts. Proper landscape design
shall be utilized to mitigate the visual impact of all site utility
elements such as overhead power lines, transformers, meter
boxes, fire protection devices, etc.
i. Landscaped areas shall be prepared with soils and slopes
suitable with their natural surroundings to encourage healthy
plant growth and proper drainage. The Landscape Plan shall
address the measures to be taken to properly care for and
maintain the landscaping areas.
j. Water elements, walls, landscape boulders, and other
landscaping features shall generally be used in a natural
looking manner to complement the appearance of the shore
land environment. Within plazas and other “urban” portions
of the site, more expressive and contemporary expressions
should be allowed and encouraged.
(5) Off-Street Parking – Parking is a necessity for the varied uses and
amenities in the Legacy Gateway Zone. In order to support the
formation of a unique and desirable “place”, parking should be
designed in such a manner as to enhance the visual appeal and
experience of working, playing or living in a special area.
a. Parking areas shall be segmented or spatially separated and
may be connected together by access lanes, green space,
stream corridors, or pedestrian pathways. Large, singlestanding,
or expansive parking or pavement areas are
prohibited.
b. Parking areas should be buffered from adjacent residential
and mixed use properties and screened from streets so
automobiles are not visible below the average headlight
height. Screening methods shall include undulating
landscaped berms, low walls and fences, vegetated screens
and plantings.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
c. Parking lots and service areas should be laid out and
designed in a fashion similar to streets, in order to create
positive and attractive streetscapes, minimize
pedestrian/vehicle conflict and to avoid the sense of nondescript
and utilitarian service areas.
d. Access drives, internal circulation drives, parking areas, and
pedestrian walkways shall be designed to provide safety and
convenience for both motorists and pedestrians and to
ensure access for the physically disabled. Areas where
pedestrian walkways cross driveways shall be constructed of
colored and/or raised concrete, concrete unit pavers, brick or
of other material and design so as to differentiate the area
as a pedestrian/vehicle interface.
e. Parking areas shall incorporate a limited palette of colors
and textures to define landscaped islands, pedestrian
pathways, loading/unloading areas, and other such
amenities to soften and improve the visual appeal of
impervious surfaces.
f. Ornamental entryway plantings shall be placed on both
sides of every drive accessing a public street to create a
unified image. The ornamental entryway for this area may
consist of artistic sculptures, landscaping features,
monument signs, or other elements designated by the City.
g. Direct access to individual parking lots or pavement areas
onto major arterial accesses shall be minimized. Parking lot
design and placement shall consider future development on
adjacent sites and the need for interconnections when
deemed appropriate.
h. Traffic circulation patterns should direct commercial,
industrial, and institutional traffic onto arterial and collector
streets and not local residential streets. Multiple-family
residential traffic should be directed onto collector or local
streets.
i. Multiple-use or sharing of parking and parking areas is
encouraged, provided that any needed parking requirement
modifications are approved, as allowed by the Zoning
Ordinance.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
(6) (f) Fences and Walls – The use of fences and walls are to be
minimized in the Legacy Gateway Zone.
a. Berms or landscape plantings shall be the primary means
for screening or for establishing needed spatial separation.
b. Where security and access controls are needed, an open
style fence or semi-private designs shall be utilized. Under
limited or intermittent circumstances, a short four (4) foot
solid fence or wall located atop a berm may be used for
security or screening purposes.
c. Walls and fences, if constructed, shall use materials and
styles to complement the architectural style of the buildings
or the Legacy Parkway Corridor environment. Retaining
walls shall be used only for significant retaining needs and
shall be minimal in height.
d. Open access to the pedestrian pathway or trail systems shall
be provided and shall not be impeded by the use of fencing
or walls.
e. The use of sound walls is strictly prohibited and shall not be
used to separate development within the zone from the
Legacy Parkway or the Legacy Preserve.
(7) Outdoor Lighting – Maintaining dark skies is an important
consideration for enhancing the character and natural intrinsic
quality of the area. Lighting is to be minimized within and around
the Legacy Parkway, and may transition up in intensity as one
proceeds east into other areas of the City.
a. Lighting shall generally be used only where it is needed for
safety and visibility. Lighting levels shall be scaled back to
the minimal levels needed to achieve its purpose. Excessive
lighting is prohibited.
b. Fixtures or elements producing light shall use the correct
bulb type to achieve the lowest wattage necessary. Lighting
elements shall be hidden or utilize full-cut-off shields to
eliminate shining or reflecting up into the night sky and to
minimize glare and light trespass beyond area where lighting
is needed or onto adjacent properties.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
c. Self-regulating on and off controls shall be used where
lighting is needed periodically, but not continuously, and
such controls shall be set to their proper operation times.
d. Up-lighting shall be used sparingly for accenting
architecture, landscaping, and signing. Where up-lighting is
used, a narrow angle focused fixture with low wattage lamp
shall be used.
e. Lighting shall be arranged or directed so as to reflect the
light away from adjacent properties and to prevent glare for
street traffic. The intensity of light at adjoining residential
property shall not exceed 0.1 foot candles and/or adjacent to
other zones shall not exceed 0.5 foot candles.
f. A Lighting plan shall be submitted for review and shall
include:
i. The location and height of all light poles, which shall
not exceed 20 feet in height; and
ii. The predicted illumination levels, based on
maintained illumination levels just after lamp
replacement and luminary cleaning, within, at, and
beyond property lines.
g. Designers of lighting plans shall consider shadow effects of
trees, signs, buildings, screen walls or other fixed objects.
(8) Signing – Signing is to enhance the scenic qualities of the Gateway
Zone and shall complement the signing style used for the Legacy
Parkway.
a. Signs shall be limited to locations along main access roads
to the project or development.
b. Business signing shall be simple and scaled to allow for
sufficient identification of the operation or facility. The style,
colors, and materials shall compliment the architecture and
design of buildings associated with the sign and shall
conform to the styles, colors, and materials shown in the
Legacy Parkway Scenic Byway Master Plan (Chapter 5-
Parkway Style, page 13-17).
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
c. Monument and/or Low Profile Signs shall not exceed twelve
(12) feet in height.
d. Sign copy shall consist of individual lettering and logos. Sign
copy shall not be internally illuminated or animated.
Electronic or changeable copy signs are prohibited.
e. Public, highway, or local street signing shall be similar to the
design and styles depicted in the Legacy Parkway Scenic
Byway Master Plan (Chapter 5-Parkway Style, page 13).
Design and styles shown shall be used as a template for the
design of all public, highway, or local street signs within the
Legacy Gateway Zone.
f. Informational or business location markers may be allowed
as part of the public signing program for streets and
highways. Such signs shall be clustered together on a single
sign element and shall conform to the design and styles
depicted in the Legacy Parkway Scenic Byway Master Plan
(Chapter 5-Parkway Style, page 13).
g. The following signs and devices are prohibited within the
Legacy Gateway Zone:
i. Animated, Roof, Graffiti, Billboards, Off-Premise, and
Pole Signs
ii. Spotlights, Flags, Streamers, Pennants, Banners and
other decorative device for commercial advertising
purposes
iii. Balloons, including cold air, helium, and other
balloons
h. Interpretive signs shall be designed to tell important stories
or messages related to history of the City or Northwest
Quadrant, or to the shore land experience. These signs shall
utilize a design and materials scheme that is consistent and
compatible with the theme of the Legacy Gateway Zone.
(i) Design Guidelines.
(1) Viewshed Protection – Buildings and similar structures should be
designed and placed where their visual impact is minimized to the
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
greatest extent possible, as viewed from the Legacy Parkway
Corridor.
a. Buildings should be setback a minimum of 200 feet from the
Legacy Parkway Right-of-Way or to the maximum extent
possible if less than 200 feet of space is available.
b. All main buildings and associated site landscaping and open
space areas within 250 feet of the Legacy Parkway should
be visually oriented towards the parkway.
c. View corridors should be created to allow visual connections
easterly towards the Wasatch Mountains and westerly
towards the shore lands of the Great Salt Lake. Buildings
should not be massed in a manner that creates a complete
visual fortress, specifically as viewed from the Legacy
Parkway or any other major arterial road within the Legacy
Parkway Corridor area.
d. All service areas and back lot uses, such as loading docks,
dumpsters, storage areas, etc., should be located away from
main building entrances and should be properly screened or
visually buffered from view from the Legacy Parkway,
regional and local streets, access roads or any pedestrian
pathway within the Legacy Gateway Zone, the Legacy
Parkway Corridor, or where deemed otherwise applicable.
e. Areas for storage, equipment parking, or other such
activities, should be screened and segmented into smaller
spatial areas and may be connected together by access
lanes, green space, and other buildings.
(2) Open Space and Critical Lands – Open spaces are to be provided
to protect and buffer critical natural areas associated with the
Legacy Parkway and Great Salt Lake shore lands, and to enhance
or create desirable view corridors eastwardly towards the Wasatch
Mountains and westerly towards the Legacy Preserve and the
shore lands of the Great Salt Lake.
a. Development proposals should identify critical lands, such
as wetland areas, stream corridors, canals, and other such
sensitive lands. The design and development layout should
protect and/or incorporate these features as buffers, open
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
spaces, trail and passive recreation amenities, drainage
corridors, and transition areas.
b. Create or locate open space areas adjacent to or oriented
towards the Legacy Parkway, the Legacy Preserve, or
towards natural areas such as adjacent wetlands.
c. Incorporate open space areas into the development pattern
that creates visual and/or physical connections to the
Legacy Parkway and the Legacy Preserve.
d. Develop trailheads and trail connections as part of the open
space development pattern that provides access to the
public trails systems in the area.
e. Use critical land areas to manage drainage and storm water
retention needs of development.
(3) Public Right-of-Way, Roadway and Parking Lot Surfacing Design –
Properly designed roadway and parking lot placement can create
opportunities for decentralizing storm water management for the
Legacy Gateway Zone and allow effective infiltration water runoff in
a more natural manner. Basic strategies include low-impact
roadway layouts, narrower road surface widths, shared accesses
and driveways, and open-section roadways. Additionally,
streetscape elements are important contributors to creating a
sense of place that can add to the experience of working, living,
and playing within the Legacy Gateway Zone.
a. 500 South and Redwood Road are key regional roadways,
providing primary access to the Legacy Gateway Zone from
other parts of the city and other communities to the east and
south. As illustrated in Figures 1 - 3 on the following pages,
both roads should be reconfigured and redesigned to
become “regional boulevards” that enhance the sense of
arriving in a special district. At the same time, each road
must address the functional requirements for conveying
traffic.
b. Local Roadways and parking lot areas should be placed to
avoid crossing slopes where significant cut and fill will be
required. Roadways and parking lots should run parallel to
the natural contours of the site and perpendicular to any
significant slope areas. Design of the roadway network and
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
parking lot areas may involve some give and take in
achieving layouts compatible with the existing topography.
c. Shared driveway use should be incorporated into the site
and building layout, including consideration of development
on adjacent sites. Residential driveway shall be not less than
ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) feet wide. One-way
driveways used for commercial, industrial or institutional
purposes shall be not less than fifteen (15) nor more than
twenty (20) feet wide. Two-way driveways used for
commercial, industrial, or instutional purposes shall be not
less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) feet wide. All
driveway surfaces should be sloped or crowned in a manner
to evenly drain (not erode) on to adjacent vegetative areas
(not onto public streets) where the runoff will infiltrate or
travel via sheet flow.
d. Public street design and development within the Legacy
Gateway Zone should reflect the proper design theme motif
and be unified across the corridor. The streetscape design
should include the use of, but not limited to, the following
types of elements:
i. Interpretive signs and kiosks
ii. Street trees with decorative planting beds or
decorative grating
iii. Decorative light fixtures and street signs
iv. Benches or places to rest
v. Bike lanes and bike racks
vi. Decorative waste cans and drinking fountains
vii. Trailhead and spur connections to the area’s trail
systems.
(4) Architecture – buildings and structures should enhance the Legacy
Gateway Zone experience and image, as is often done in National
Parks and resort areas.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
a. Building styles and themes should be harmonious with
natural landscape and form and support the Parkway’s
overall appearance.
i. Architectural lines should emphasize the horizontal,
and the sense of being on a shoreland.
ii. Use patios and outdoor spaces to transition between
the built and natural environment.
b. Building materials should harmonize with the shoreland
motif.
i. Use natural materials, such as wood, stone, and
stucco. Avoid highly manufactured materials, such as
metal, concrete, glass, and vinyl.
ii. Use muted colors and finishes. Avoid bright, reflective
or shiny surfaces. Avoid high contrast color
combinations.
c. Buildings should have human proportions and be in scale
with other buildings in the vicinity.
i. Build smaller, more human-scaled buildings instead
of large big-box buildings.
ii. Break up large buildings into smaller forms or multiple
facades to reduce their apparent scale.
iii. Use building projections, corners, varied rooflines,
balconies, overhangs, patio areas, trellises, and
landscaping to break up long, continuous building
walls.
iv. Use architectural details, windows, doors, reveals,
cornices, and alcoves to add interest, shadows and
human scale.
d. Site buildings to encourage pedestrian and bicycle use and
safety.
e. Orient buildings to allow an attractive appearance from the
Parkway.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
Figure 1
500 South - Typical Plan and Section, Looking East
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
Figure 2
500 South - Typical Plan and Section, Looking East (with Slip Road)
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Amended November 6, 2018
Figure 3
Redwood Road - Typical Plan and Section, Looking North
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
f. Incorporate signage into building designs to let the
architecture predominate.
(5) Legacy Parkway streetscape design for major roads and
public spaces - ensure consistent light fixtures, benches,
trash cans, bike racks, drinking fountains, tree grates, street
signs, kiosks and interpretive signs. Streetscape examples
are illustrated below.
Street Furnishings
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Lighting—Option 1
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Lighting—Option 2
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Lighting—Option 3
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
(6) Design with the natural topography and drainages to
minimize disruption to the natural systems and appearances.
a. Use natural drainage ways and patterns. Maintain the
balance in the water supply reaching wetlands.
i. Shed runoff water naturally.
ii. Preserve natural hydrology to enhance the
wetlands protected by the Legacy Nature
Preserve.
b. Minimize grading to avoid erosion, visual scarring,
and disturbing existing vegetation.
i. Blend structures, roads and outdoor spaces
into the natural site contours.
ii. Balance cut-and-fill on site.
iii. Mimic natural contours and avoid abrupt
edges.
c. Minimize retaining walls and incorporate them into
building footprints where possible.
(7) Landscaping – Landscape areas adjacent to the Legacy
Parkway in a manner that enhances the natural environment
and softens transitions between built and natural areas.
a. Maintain existing trees and plants to enhance and
protect natural systems.
b. Match new landscaping to its context and reflect the
shore land motif.
i. Developed, urban areas should use a mixture
of native and ornamental trees, shrubs,
perennials and annual grasses and wildflowers
that complement the shore land motif.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
ii. Trees are encouraged for shading, screening
and privacy. Avoid large areas of annuals and
bright colors. The judicious use of evergreen
trees is encouraged in order to strengthen the
shore land landscape motif
iii. Natural areas should use native and
naturalized shrubs, perennials and annuals.
Trees and evergreens should be used
sparingly. Avoid groupings of colorful or
ornamental plants.
iv. Transition areas between these two types of
landscaping should mix the styles and plant
species to soften the line transition. Use mow
strips or fence to subtly demarcate the
boundary to prevent encroachment.
v. Select plants recommended in the Legacy
Gateway Area Tree below. Remove and avoid
plants that may become invasive weeds.
Legacy Gateway Area Tree Palette
Scientific Name Common
name
Mature
Size
Characteristics/
comments
Min. Size
at
Planting
Celtis laevigata Sugarberry H 60'
W 60'
Inconspicuous
flowers; small fruit.
2” Cal.
Celtis occidentalis Common
Hackberry
H 40'
W 30'
Upright, arching
branches. Yellow fall
color. Resistant to
insects/disease.
2” Cal.
Gymnocladus dioica Kentucky
Coffeetree
H 50'
W 35'
Erect, rounded
crown. Mahogany
seed pods provide
winter interest. Yellow
fall color. Tolerates
alkaline/salt.
2” Cal.
Morus alba 'Stribling' Fruitless White Mulberry H 30'
W 40'
Fast growing. Large
maple-like leaves.
2” Cal.
Quercus bicolor Swamp White
Oak
H 50'
W 35'
Dark green leaves
with velvety, white
undersides; Tolerant
of saline soils. Yellow
to orange fall color.
2” Cal.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Quercus macrocarpa Burr Oak H 55'
W 45'
Dark green leaves
become yellow brown
in fall. Broad and
spreading with
maturity. Large and
ornamental acorns.
2” Cal.
Tilia tomentosa 'Sterling Silver' Silver Linden H 45’
W 35’
Dark green leaves
are silvery, white
underneath. Yellow
flower in early
summer. Drought and
pollution tolerant.
2” Cal.
Ulmus parvifolia Lacebark Elm H 50'
W 30'
Foliage turns orangerust
in fall. Attractive
exfoliating bark.
2” Cal.
Ulmus x. Frontier Elm H 40’
W 30’
Beautiful reddishpurple
to burgundy
fall color.
2” Cal.
Zelkova Serrata ‘Green Vase’ Green Vase
Zelkova
H 50’
W 40’
Vase shaped tree
with finely serrated
leaves. Green foliage
turns bronze in fall.
2” Cal.
Zelkova Serrata ‘Village Green’ Village Green
Zelkova
H 40’
W 40’
Green foliage turns
rusty-red in fall.
2” Cal.
Legacy Gateway Area Tree Palette – Photo Examples
SUGGESTED
TREES
Celtis laevigata
Sugarberry
Celtis occidentalis
Common Hackberry
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
Gymnocladus dioica
Kentucky Coffeetree
Morus alba 'Stribling'
White Mulberry
Quercus bicolor
Swamp White Oak
Quercus macrocarpa
Burr Oak Tilia tomentosa 'Sterling Silver'
Silver Linden
Ulmus parvifolia
Lacebark Elm
Ulmus x. Frontier
Elm
Zelkova Serrata ‘Green Vase’
Green Vase Zelkova
Zelkova Serrata ‘Village Green’
Village Green Zelkova
c. Prepare landscaped areas with soils and slopes
suited to the Parkway natural setting to encourage
healthy plant growth and proper drainage.
d. Design water features, walls and other landscape
features to appear natural and reflect the shore land
motif, particularly in highly visible areas from adjacent
streets, pathways, trails and corridors.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
(8) Fences and walls - Design fences and walls for a seamless
transition between the natural and developed areas.
a. Minimize fences and walls to:
i. allow people, wildlife, and plant seeds to flow
between spaces,
ii. visually connect areas,
iii. blend in with the environment.
b. Maximize access to the Parkway Trail with gates,
open fences and openings in walls.
c. Use open fencing for safety and access control. Avoid
solid fences and walls above eye level in height.
d. Use berming or landscaping for screening instead of
walls. Low walls integral to berms are appropriate.
Avoid large retaining walls.
e. Avoid sound walls. The Parkway road was designed
to minimize noise so no sound walls are included in
its construction.
f. Design walls and fences to reflect the shore land
motif and Legacy Parkway designs.
(9) Lighting - Protect the dark skies of the Parkway environment
that are an integral part of its natural intrinsic quality.
a. Minimize lighting within the Parkway Corridor.
i. Use unobtrusive lighting in gateway areas to
provide a transition between urban and natural
areas.
ii. Ramp-up lighting levels based on distance
from the Legacy Parkway.
iii. Use the minimum amount of light needed for
safety and security of entries, parking,
pedestrian areas, parks, trailheads, and other
public places.
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
iv. Light only areas that support or encourage
nighttime usage.
b. Design lighting to enhance both the environment and
Parkway aesthetics.
i. Use lighting fixtures in the Parkway
Streetscape design program to unify streets
and developments adjacent to the Parkway.
ii. Select fixtures that reflect the shoreland motif.
iii. Use hidden, full cut-off fixtures.
c. Select light fixtures that minimize glare, light trespass
and energy use.
i. Use the lowest wattage possible.
ii. Use a combination of light fixtures suited for
specific areas and uses.
d. Locate lighting selectively.
i. Use a greater number of small, low-intensity
fixtures instead of large, high intensity lights.
ii. Minimize accent lighting for signs, buildings,
and landscape.
12-31-120 Alternative Approval Process; Development Agreements
(a) Alternative Development Agreement Approval Process. Projects within
the Legacy Gateway Zone involving the development of at least 10 acres of land
may elect the alternative approval process described in this Section, resulting in the
approval, execution and recordation of a development agreement. An approved
development agreement shall govern the specific uses, densities and intensities of
use proposed for the project area and the specific Development Standards to be
applied in the development of any necessary public infrastructure and the private
improvements to be located on the project site. A development agreement must be
consistent with the provisions of Sections 12-31-030 (Definitions), 12-31-040 (Core
Commercial District: Permitted and Conditional Uses), 12-31-050
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
(Neighborhood/Mixed Use District: Permitted and Conditional Uses) 12-31-070
(Density), and the provisions of 12-31-080 (Project Master Plan), to the extent not
inconsistent with this Section, but may supersede and be inconsistent with the
provisions of Sections 12-31-010(g) (Purpose), 12-31-060 (Dimensional Standards),
12-31-090 (Master Development Guidelines), and 12-31-100 (Common Area
Management Plan), and with the provisions of Section 12-31-110 (Design
Guidelines), where the City Council determines an alternative Development
Standard proposed by the project developer is appropriate for the development of
the project and the Council finds there is appropriate consideration, in the form of
tangible or intangible consideration of benefit to the City or the public from the
proposed development and/or other appropriate reasons that justify the
determination of the City to alter generally applicable standards. The Development
Standards of an approved development agreement shall also govern over any
conflicting Development Standards contained in any other provisions of Woods
Cross City ordinances including, without limitation, provisions relating to site
development standards in Title 11 of the Woods Cross City Code, off-street parking
in Chapter 20 of the Zoning Ordinance, supplementary regulations in Chapter 21 of
the Zoning Ordinance, and signage standards in Title 11 of the Woods Cross City
Code.
(b) The processes for approval of a development agreement and
subsequent approvals for a project covered by a development agreement shall be
governed by the provisions of this Section and any supplemental procedural
provisions agreed by the parties in an approved development agreement.
(c) Application for Development Agreement. Simultaneously with the
application for a PMP, an applicant for a PMP involving at least 10 acres may apply
for approval of a development agreement. In addition to the application
requirements for a PMP, the applicant shall provide in narrative form a proposed
development agreement including a specific description of the proposed uses,
densities and intensities of use proposed for the project area and a statement of the
specific Development Standards proposed by the applicant to be applied in the
development of any necessary public infrastructure and the private improvements to
be located on the project site. The proposed uses, densities and intensities of use
shall be consistent with the requirements and purpose of the Legacy Gateway Zone,
but the other proposed Development Standards may vary from those Development
Standards set forth elsewhere in this Chapter, this Title, or the Woods Cross City
Code. However, nothing herein shall be construed to allow any deviation from
Uniform Construction Codes or Standards as set forth in the Woods Cross City
Code. Any application information required by this paragraph may be waived by the
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
City Planner on the basis that the information is not necessary to review the
proposed PMP and development agreement.
(d) Consideration and Approval of a Development Agreement. The
development agreement shall be considered at the same time as the PMP and
following the same approval and appeal processes described in Section 12-31-
080(d)(4), (5) and (11). The criteria for review of a PMP and development
agreement application by the Planning Commission and City Council shall
consist of the following criteria in lieu of the criteria set forth in Section 12-31-
080(d)(6):
(1) Consistency with the Woods Cross City General Plan;
(2) Compliance with applicable city codes, rules, regulations
and standards applicable to the proposed PMP, except that
Development Standards specifically included in the
development agreement may be different from Development
Standards contained in the Woods Cross City Ordinances;
(3) Consistency with any Development Standards determined
by the City to be applicable to all development within the
Legacy Gateway Zone;
(4) For development in the Core Commercial District,
establishment of an appropriate mix of uses in locations that
will promote and encourage the goals of the Legacy
Gateway Zone; and
(5) Establishment of circulation and transportation features
sufficient to meet the requirements of the project, to
coordinate with anticipated offsite circulation and
transportation features and to further any applicable
community-wide transportation objectives.
(e) Final Development Agreement. The final development agreement
shall incorporate the terms of the approved PMP, and shall contain Development
Standards for the development of the project site and any public infrastructure
required to be improved, the duration of the agreement and the rights granted
pursuant thereto and such conditions of approval as may be imposed by the City
Council and agreed to by the applicant. In addition to addressing uses, densities
and intensities of use and Development Standards governing to project, the final
development agreement shall include a Common Area Management Plan, and
processes for future approvals and amendments to the terms of an approved
development agreement consistent with the provisions of Subsection (g) below. The
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
common area management plan, Development Standards and architectural review
provisions in the development agreement shall be applicable to the project site only
and not to the balance of the land within a Legacy Gateway Zone, but the foregoing
shall not limit the discretion of the City to require other developers to implement
Development Standards adopted in the development agreement through the Master
Development Guideline provisions of Section 12-31-090. The final development
agreement may contain such other agreements between the City and the applicant
as may be agreed by such parties and necessary for the development and financing
of the project, including without limitation, agreements regarding the phasing of
development, the vesting of development rights and approvals, the terms and
conditions for the extension of public infrastructure, the extension by developer of
infrastructure, and any payment or repayment obligations associated therewith, the
donation of any land or any other agreement reflecting an agreement between
developer and the City, not covered within the description of the approved PMP.
(f) Controlling Provisions. The terms of a development agreement shall
be binding on the City and all successors in the ownership and occupancy of any
portion of the project site covered by the development agreement. The provisions of
the development agreement shall control over any inconsistent provision in the
Zoning Ordinance. Upon approval and recordation of a development agreement,
the property covered by the development agreement shall be deemed to be
established as a separate district for purposes of establishing and enforcing the
development regulations contained in the development agreement.
(g) Approval Processes after the Approval of a Development Agreement.
(1) Site Plan Review. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision
of the Zoning Ordinance, a final development agreement may
contain such site plan review processes as may be agreed
between developer and the City, including such application
requirements and review processes.
(2) Amendment. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of the
Zoning Ordinance, a development agreement and a PMP for a
project covered by a development agreement may be
amended on such terms and following such processes as is
provided in the final development agreement. A PMP shall be
deemed amended by any changes to the PMP approved at the
time of final site plan review. No amendment of a PMP or a
development agreement shall be required to reflect normal
adjustments to the locations of improvements that occur as a
Gateway Zone Ordinance August 28, 2008
result of the development of more specific plats, plans and
specifications.
Chapter 12-32 SIGNS
12-32-010 Purpose and Scope
12-32-020 Interpretation
12-32-030 Definitions
12-32-040 Construction of Terms
12-32-050 Appeals
12-32-060 Permits
12-32-070 Maintenance
12-32-080 Prohibited Sign Locations
12-32-090 Prohibited Signs
12-32-100 Confiscation of Signs
12-32-110 Abandoned Signs
12-32-120 Unsafe or Dangerous Signs
12-32-130 Lighting
12-23-140 Off Premise Commercial Center Directory Signs
12-32-150 General Regulations For All Signs
12-32-160 Specific Regulations By Sign Type
12-32-170 Non-Conforming Signs
12-32-010 Purpose and Scope
The City Council of Woods Cross City finds and declares that the provisions set
forth in this Chapter recognize the unique interests to be balanced in regulating signs in
a manner that is fair, comprehensive, and enforceable, allowing Woods Cross to create
and maintain a safe and aesthetically pleasing atmosphere, while allowing businesses
and other interests to communicate with the public. To implement these objectives and
the goals of the General Plan, the City hereby establishes standards and procedures to
control the size, type, number, design, placement, illumination and maintenance of
signs. The objectives of this Chapter are as follows:
(a) Reduce potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians by providing
adequate signage in order to identify a business or facility while
eliminating excessive, obtrusive, and confusing sign displays.
(b) Encourage sign owners to integrate signs with buildings and sites through
use of similar building materials and moderate sign proportions.
(c) Preserve and improve the aesthetic appearance of the City as a place in
which to live and work by reducing or prohibiting signage that is
overbearing, creates visual clutter, or is not consistent with the design
guidelines of Woods Cross City.
2
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(d) Allow each business to clearly identify itself and the goods and services
which it offers.
(e) Safeguard and enhance property values by allowing for aesthetically
pleasing signage that will help to promote economic development and
attract quality businesses to the City.
(f) Protect public and private investment in buildings and open space.
(g) Preserve freedom of speech.
(h) Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
Woods Cross City.
12-32-020 Interpretation
(a) The provisions of this Chapter shall be plenary. Signs not specifically
allowed herein shall be prohibited.
(b) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall prevent the erection, location, or
construction of signs on private property where such erection, location, or
construction of signs is required by law.
(c) Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent anyone from engaging in
noncommercial speech as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the
United States Constitution.
DEFINITIONS AND REGULATIONS
12-32-030 Definitions
(a) “A-frame sign.” Any sign composed of two (2) sign faces mounted or
attached back to back or a sign structure built in such a manner as to form
a basically triangular vertical cross section through the faces or structure.
(b) “Area of sign.” The area of a sign shall be computed by enclosing the
entire area within a geometric shape of the smallest size sufficient to
cover the entire area of the sign and then computing the area of the
geometric shape. Where a sign has more than two (2) faces, the area of
the third face and all additional faces shall be included in determining the
area of the sign. The area of all legal signs in existence at the time of the
enactment of this Chapter shall be included in the computation of the
total area of signs per property permitted by this Chapter, but properties
whose existing sign area exceeds the permitted total area of signs per
property as of the date this ordinance takes effect are not subject to
3
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
any penalty beyond the City’s refusal to permit the creation of additional
sign area on that property.
(c) “Awning sign.” Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning,
canopy, marquee or other fabric, plastic, metal or similar structural
protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area.
(d) “Back-lit Awning.” Any awning which is made from fiberglass, plastic, or
other translucent material that allows for illumination of the entire awning
when lighting is placed behind or underneath it.
(e) “Balloon sign.” Any sign that is any lighter-than-air or gas-filled balloon
attached by means of a rope or tether to a definite or fixed location.
Displays designed to inflate - or move by use of a fan or blower - shall
also be considered a balloon sign.
(f) “Banner sign.” Any sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no
enclosing framework.
(g) “Building face or wall.” All of the window, door, and wall area of a building
in one plane or elevation.
(h) “Changeable Copy sign – Electronic.” Any sign whose informational
content, display or copy can be changed or altered by electronic means -
such as an LED sign, flat-panel digital screen, video projection or other
similar electronic method.
(i) “Changeable Copy sign – Manual.” Any sign whose informational
content, display or copy can be changed or altered by manual means.
(Commonly seen as a sign with a white background and removable
black lettering. Also can be referred to as a ‘marquee sign’).
(j) “Changeable Copy sign – Mechanical.” Any sign whose informational
content, display or copy can be changed or altered by mechanical
mechanisms, gears or other similar method.
(k) “Commercial Complex.” A group of two (2) or more businesses in one (1)
or more freestanding building(s) and contained on one (1) parcel of record
or which is approved as a part of an overall site plan or commercial
subdivision. For the purposes of this Chapter, planned commercial
developments and commercial condominium projects are considered
commercial complexes.
(l) “Clear Vision Areas.” A triangular area established at the intersection of
two (2) streets or at the intersection of a street and a driveway. Such a
4
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
triangle shall have legs of thirty feet (30’) along the right-of-way and/or
the driveway.
(m) “Commercial condominium project.” See “Commercial complex.”
(n) “Copy.” The wording or display on a sign face.
(o) “Directional sign.” Any sign used to direct traffic flow into or out of a
parking lot through a City approved drive approach.
(p) “Flag Signs.” Any sign constructed of fabric, canvas, or similar material
bearing information relating to or identifying a business (with the exception
of a national or state flag) secured or mounted on a structure in such a
way as to allow wind movement and intended to be displayed in a freeflowing
manner.
(q) “Flashing sign.” Any sign which has a flashing light source, such as a
strobe light, or rapidly blinking LED lights. Flashing signs are prohibited.
(r) “Freeway Oriented sign.” A sign situated within five hundred (500’) feet of
Interstate 15 and erected in a manner such as to be clearly visible to
motorists on Interstate 15.
(s) “Frontage.” The width of the parcel of land that faces a dedicated street.
The frontage definition for the “Monument Sign Table” shall mean the
street frontage from which the sign is designed to be read.
(t) “Grade (ground level).” The average elevation of the ground level at the
point that a sign emerges from the ground. For signs located on a bermed
surface, grade shall mean the average elevation of the ground level at the
base of the berm.
(u) “Height of sign.” The vertical distance measured from the grade to the
highest point of the sign or sign structure.
(v) “Interior property line.” A property line other than one having frontage
along a dedicated street or a private street.
(w) “Interior sign.” Any sign placed within the interior of a building and which is
not intended to be visible from a public street.
(x) “LED sign.” (LED stands for ‘Light Emitting Diode’). LED signs typically
produce a high intensity light by having many individual LED bulbs placed
together in a series and are commonly seen displaying changing copy or
messages that flash, scroll, or move across the sign. Many LED signs are
5
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
bright red, yellow, or auburn and are considered a type of electronic
‘Changeable Copy’ sign.
(y) “Low Profile sign.” This ordinance considers a low profile sign to be the
equivalent of a monument sign and makes no distinction between them.
(z) “Marquee.” Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building
or wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide
protection from the weather. Also referred to as an awning.
(aa) “Monument sign.” Any on-premise sign which is mounted directly to the
ground having no visible uprights or freestanding poles with a foundation
or pedestal that is as wide, or wider than, the actual sign with a maximum
height and area as indicated by the Monument Sign Table.
(bb) “Name plate.” Any sign identifying the name, occupation, profession,
and/or address of any occupant of the premises.
(cc) “Nonconforming sign.” Any sign which was lawfully erected but which
currently fails to conform to all of the requirements of this Chapter.
(dd) “Off-premise sign.” Any sign erected for the purpose of advertising or
promoting a product, event, person, or subject not entirely related to the
premises on which the sign is located. For the purpose of this definition,
bus benches shall be defined as an off-premise sign. Off premise signs
are prohibited.
(ee) “On-premise sign.” Any sign advertising merchandise, services, or
businesses available on the premises of the sign's location.
(ff) “Pennant sign.” Any sign made of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other
material whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended
from rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
(gg) “Pole Sign.” Any on-premise sign which is supported by one or more
uprights, poles, or braces fastened to a foundation or embedded in the
ground and not attached to any building. Pole signs typically have a sign
face that is larger than the foundation or support structure of the sign.
(hh) “Portable sign.” Any sign that is not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including,
but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A-frame or T-frame; umbrellas used for advertising;
signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public
6
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
right-of- way, unless said vehicle is used in normal day-to-day operations;
and, any banner type sign not attached parallel to a building wall.
(ii) “Projecting sign.” Any sign attached to a building structure and extending
in whole or in part more than eighteen inches (18") beyond the wall to
which it is attached. Projecting signs are prohibited.
(jj) “Reader board sign.” Any portable sign with changeable copy designed to
be moved from one site to another and used for occasional promotional
events. Reader board signs are prohibited.
(kk) “Roof sign (suspended).” Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and
over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending
vertically above the highest portion of the roof. Roof signs (suspended)
are prohibited.
(ll) “Roof sign (integral).” Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or
essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that
no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof
and that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof. Roof
signs (integral) do not include painted signs on roofs.
(mm) “Rotating sign.” Any sign or portion of a sign which moves in a revolving or
similar manner. Rotating signs are prohibited.
(nn) “Sign.” Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses color, form,
graphics, illumination, symbols, or writing to advertise, announce, identify,
promote or communicate information of any kind to the public.
(oo) “Statue signs.” Any three-dimensional likeness of a character, logo,
trademark, animal, product, etc. that is intended to be used as a
promotional display or advertisement for a business.
(pp) “Temporary sign.” Any sign not permanently mounted and which is
intended for display for a temporary period of time, such as signs
advertising an open house.
(qq) “Wall sign.” Any sign erected parallel with and attached to or painted on an
exterior wall or fascia of a building, or any awning sign, including a back-lit
awning sign.
(rr) “Window sign.” Any sign installed upon a window for the purpose of being
viewed from the outside of the premises, but not including displayed
merchandise.
7
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(ss) “Youth activity sponsor sign.” Any sign that identifies and advertises the
sponsors of youth teams or programs.
(tt) “Zone.” Any land use regulatory zone as found in Title 12 of the Woods
Cross City Code.
12-32-040 Construction of Terms
Words in the present tense include the future and the future includes the present;
the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. The words "lot",
"plot", "tract" and "parcel" shall be considered synonymous when the context so
requires. The term "erect" means construct, alter, move, reconstruct, modify, "expand:,
“extend”, “rebuild”, and “convert". The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory.
The term "City" shall mean Woods Cross City.
12-32-050 Appeals
Any person who has been ordered by the City to alter or remove any sign, or any
person whose application for a sign permit has been refused, may appeal such Order.
All appeals shall be made as follows:
(a) The appeal shall be made within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of
the order or refusal of the City by filing a written notice of appeal with the
Planning Commission.
(b) The notice of appeal shall specify, in detail, the action and grounds upon
which the applicant considers himself or herself aggrieved. A notice that
fails to specify the grounds for appeal may be summarily dismissed by the
Planning Commission without prejudice.
(c) All documents constituting the record upon which the action being
appealed is based shall be transmitted to the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission shall decide, based upon a review of the record,
whether or not the decision regarding removal of a sign or the grant or
denial of an application for a sign permit was correct. Factual
determinations underlying the decision appealed from shall be given
deference and shall only be overturned if they are against the clear weight
of evidence.
(d) The Planning Commission shall set a hearing date for the appeal to be
held within a reasonable time from the date the appeal is received, and
notice of the appeal hearing shall be given as required by law. The
appellant may appear in person or may be represented by an attorney or
other authorized agent at any meeting of the Planning Commission.
Written authorization shall be required for an agent. After hearing the
appeal, the Planning Commission may reverse or affirm the order, wholly
8
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
or in part, or may modify the order appealed from. The Planning
Commission shall provide a written decision within 10 days of the date the
decision is announced.
(e) The City or any person aggrieved by any decision of the Planning
Commission under this Section may appeal such decision to the City
Council. Such appeal shall be made within ten (10) days from the written
decision of the Planning Commission by filing a written notice of appeal
with the City Council. The appeal shall address specifically the alleged
error in the decision of the Planning Commission. The City Council shall
determine if the decision of the Planning Commission was correct. No
new evidence shall be presented and the appeal shall be based on the
record of proceedings before the Planning Commission. The City Council
may direct the filing of appeal briefs in its discretion. The Council shall
issue a written decision on the appeal
(f) Upon filing of an appeal, the City shall take no further action with regard to
the removal of the sign involved until the Planning Commission makes a
final decision on the appeal. However, if the City finds that the sign
presents an immediate or serious danger to the public, the City shall
proceed immediately to have the sign altered or removed.
(g) The City or any person aggrieved by any decision of the City Council
under this Section may apply for relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction, provided the petition for relief is presented to the court within
thirty (30) days from the date of the written decision by the City Council.
12-32-060 Permits
(a) Permits required. Except as provided in this title it shall be unlawful for any
person to erect, alter or relocate a sign within Woods Cross City without
first obtaining a sign permit from the City.
(b) Permission of Property Owner. No person shall erect, construct or
maintain any sign upon any property without the written consent of the
owner.
(c) Application. Application for a permit shall be made to the City Planner
upon a form provided by the City and shall contain such information as
may be required to assure compliance with all appropriate laws and
ordinances of the City, including but not limited to the following
information:
(1) A site plan drawn to scale indicating the location of the proposed
signage, existing signage, existing and future buildings, property
9
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
lines, streets, sidewalks, landscaped areas, parking areas, and
driveways.
(2) A drawing to scale indicating the proposed sign dimensions,
construction specifications, electrical components and wiring,
method of attachment, and character of structural members to
which attachment will be made.
(3) An elevation drawing of existing or future buildings that will display
the attached signage.
(4) Any other reasonably related information deemed necessary by the
City.
(d) Sign inspections. All signs requiring a permit shall have the following
inspections, unless waived by the Building Official:
(1) Footing inspections on all freestanding signs.
(2) Electrical inspections on all illuminated or electrical signs.
(3) Expansion inspections where evidence shall be provided to show
that the existing sign can structurally support an increase in size
and weight to the sign.
(4) Final inspections which shall cover the sign location, structural
members and placement of the insignia.
(e) Fees required by this Chapter shall be paid in an amount set by resolution
of the City Council.
12-32-070 Maintenance
All signs shall be kept in good repair, maintained in a safe and attractive
condition by the owner, and displayed so as to conform to the conditions required by the
sign permit. Signs in disrepair that have not been repaired for sixty consecutive days
shall be removed from the building or premises by the owner, the person having control
of the sign and/or premises or the person receiving the benefit of such sign.
12-32-080 Prohibited Sign Locations
No person shall erect or maintain a sign on or overhanging public property or a
public right-of-way, nor shall any sign extend over an adjoining property line; provided,
however, that governmental signs, and signs erected by a public utility company and
approved by the City which are necessary for public safety are exempt from this section.
The City may erect banners which overhang public property or a public right-of-way as
10
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
provided in Section 12-32-150(b). No person shall erect any sign so as to interfere with
or restrict access to windows, fire escapes, or required exits. No person shall erect any
sign which constitutes a safety hazard as determined by the City.
12-32-090 Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited in the City:
(a) Abandoned signs
(b) Flashing Signs
(c) Off-premise signs
(d) Portable signs, except those expressly permitted in this title
(e) Projecting signs
(f) Reader board signs
(g) Rotating signs
(h) Roof signs
(i) Temporary signs, except those expressly permitted in this title
12-32-100 Confiscation of Signs
The City is hereby authorized to immediately confiscate any sign located on
public property in violation of City ordinances. Confiscated signs shall be stored at a
location determined by the Public Works Director for a period of 30 days, during which
time the owner or person having charge, control or benefit of the confiscated sign may
redeem the sign after payment of enforcement costs to the City in an amount
determined by the City Council. Payment of costs to the City shall be made to the
Community Development Department which shall issue a release notice for redemption
of the sign upon payment of costs. Woods Cross City shall be held harmless for any
damages incurred to signs as a result of their confiscation. In addition to enforcement
costs, sign owners and persons having charge, control and/or benefit of any sign
erected in violation of this title shall be liable for any damages caused to public property,
public facilities or public utilities by reason of the placement, attachment and/or removal
of such unlawful signs. Signs not redeemed within 30 days shall be destroyed.
11
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
12-32-110 Abandoned Signs
(a) Abandoned signs shall be removed from any building or premise by
the owner or person having control of the premises or the abandoned
sign.
(b) Any sign which has been taken down or removed from its location for a
period of one (1) year or more shall be deemed abandoned and shall not
be reinstalled thereafter unless a new permit is issued in conformance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
(c) Any sign whose display area has not been used for current and existing
advertising purposes for a consecutive period of one (1) year or more shall
be deemed abandoned and such sign and sign structure shall be removed
at the expense of the owner, unless the owner obtains a new permit in
conformance with the provisions of this Chapter.
12-32-120 Unsafe or Dangerous Signs
If an unsafe or dangerous sign as determined by the Building Official is not
repaired or made safe within five (5) working days after the City has given written notice
by personal service or registered mail to repair or make the sign safe, the Building
Official may at once abate the sign according to the procedures in the Uniform Code for
the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
12-32-130 Lighting
The following articles shall relate to guidelines for exterior lighting of any
residential, commercial, industrial, or professional development. These articles relate
specifically to sign lighting.
(a) Lighting shall be stationary. No lighting shall blink, flash, or be of unusually
high intensity or brightness so as to be distracting to motorists or other
properties within the vicinity.
(b) Lighting shall be directed away from all adjacent properties and public
streets and rights-of-way.
(c) Lighting shall be shielded or recessed so that direct glare and reflections
are contained within the boundaries of the parcel.
(d) No sign or group of signs may exceed one foot candle in brightness as
measured at the property line and shall be carefully directed so that light is
not obtrusive or a nuisance to adjacent properties.
12
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(e) Neon lights, strings or lines of LED lighting, other electrically activated gas
tubing or similar lighting placed around the perimeter of a sign, along a
building elevation as building accents, or within a window (where such
lighting is intended to be visible from the exterior of the building) is
prohibited. Neon tubing may only be allowed to illuminate or outline
wording, copy, or logos within a sign face.
12-32-140 Off Premise Commercial Center Directory Signs
Upon review and approval by the Planning Commission, off premise commercial
center directory signs may be allowed for commercial center property with six (6) or
more separate tenants or businesses, on property held under one ownership. Such
signs may be located off the premise it identifies, provided that such signs meet the
following requirements:
(a) Be located on one of the following streets:
(1) 500 South Street
(2) 500 West Street
(3) 2600 South Street
(4) Redwood Road
(b) Be within one thousand (1000) feet of the property it identifies.
(c) Be located with permission of the owner of the property on which the sign
is to be located.
(d) Total allowable sign area (counting one side of a two sided sign) shall be
up to one hundred (100) square feet plus an additional ten (10) square
feet per tenant located in the commercial center; however, no off premise
commercial center directory sign may exceed two hundred fifty (250)
square feet in total sign area per side. Ground monument signs shall not
exceed ninety-six (96) square feet per side.
(e) Maximum allowable height shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
(f) Pole signs shall provide a minimum clearance of ten (10) feet above the
grade.
13
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(g) Each such sign shall be located in an area with a minimum of two hundred
fifty (250) square feet of landscaping. Landscaping details and plans shall
be reviewed and approved by the Planning commission.
(h) Square pole covers shall be used for commercial center signs.
(i) Commercial center signs shall be located so as not to project over any
property lines or public right of ways. Ground monument sign locations
shall be determined by the planning commission after review and
comment by the City Engineer of such factors as safe sighting distances
and clear vision requirements.
(j) The top portion of the sign shall identify the name of the commercial
center along with its logo, if any.
(k) Up to twenty percent (20%) of the total sign area may be used as a
changeable copy marquee or electronic message center. If only an
electronic message center is used, without any other sign panels except
the required commercial center identification sign at the top portion, the
total sign area permitted shall be sixty four (64) square feet. In addition,
the electronic message center sign shall rotate continuously through all
tenant messages and shall not be for the exclusive use of one or a few
tenants of the commercial center.
(l) Only one (1) sign per commercial center shall be allowed.
(m) Off-premise commercial directory signs are permitted within the C-2, S-
1and I-1 zones.
12-32-150 General Regulations For All Signs
(a) All mounting structures, sign casings, poles, monument bases,
foundations for a sign or other materials used in housing a sign shall be
constructed with subdued, earth-tone colors. For monument and pole
signs, the use of natural materials such as wood or stone is strongly
encouraged in the design of the sign frames and bases. This shall not be
construed to mean that the City regulates the colors or copy of a sign face,
but only the housing materials on which the sign is positioned.
(b) The total combined signage for any face of a building shall not exceed 12
percent coverage of the building face. This includes signage on windows,
wall signs, roof signs, etc. No building shall be deemed to have more than
four (4) building faces.
14
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
12-32-160 Specific Regulations By Sign Type
(a) A-Frame Signs:
(1) A-frame signs not exceeding thirty-six (36) by forty-five (45) inches
(36” x 45”) do not require a permit. A-frame signs exceeding these
dimensions shall be prohibited.
(2) A-frame signs shall not be placed or displayed within the public
right-of-way.
(3) No business shall display more than one A-frame sign for each
location, except on a corner lot where one A-frame sign shall be
allowed on each fronting street.
(4) A-Frame signs are permitted in the A-1, C-1, C-2, S-1, AP, I-1, I-1A,
I-2, LGC and LGN Zones.
(b) Balloon Signs:
(1) Balloon signs are permitted by conditional use permit.
(2) Balloon signs shall:
(i.) Be placed no closer than ten (10') feet from the public rightof-
way;
(ii.) Not be placed in a clear vision area; and
(iii.) Not obstruct the vision of any motorist from seeing any traffic
or traffic control devices.
(3) Businesses may only display balloon signs a maximum of ninety
(90) days per site in any one (1) calendar year.
(4) Balloon signs may be displayed in the C-2, and I-1 zones by
persons obtaining the necessary conditional use permit.
(c) Banner Signs:
(1) Banner signs that are attached to a building through use of screws,
bolts, nails or other fasteners are considered ‘anchored’ banner
signs and do not require a sign permit. Anchored banner signs
shall:
15
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(i.) Be permitted for use by any business or entity for no longer
than twelve (12) months:
(ii.) After twelve (12) months, be removed and/or replaced with a
permanent sign meeting Woods Cross City requirements.
(“Anchored” banner signs are not permitted for long-term,
permanent use.);
(iii.) Be anchored approximately every 18” or less along the
perimeter of the banner;
(iv.) Be maintained in a neat and attractive condition. Frayed or
torn signs shall be removed;
(v.) Be attached to any wall of a building;
(vi.) Not exceed ten percent (10%) of the wall area to which the
sign is attached or ten percent (10%) of the wall dedicated to
an individual unit within a commercial complex.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no more than two (2) banner
signs shall be allowed for any business;
(vii.) Not extend above the roofline;
(viii) Not be used on the same building or unit within a complex
which has an Integral Roof Sign;
(ix.) Not project more than eighteen inches (18”) from the face of
the part of the building to which it is attached.
(2) Temporary banner signs used for promotional events or other
limited advertising purposes (not the primary signage for a
business) do not require a sign permit. Temporary banner signs
shall:
(i.) Be attached parallel to a wall of the main building of the
business or along a fence on the same lot as the business;
(ii.) Not exceed ten percent (10%) of the wall area to which the
sign is attached or shall be no larger than thirty-two (32)
square feet if placed on a fence;
(iii.) Not be used on the same wall as an existing “wall sign” or
other banner sign unless the combined area of all signs on
the wall at issue is less than ten percent (10%) of the wall
area to which the signs are attached;
16
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(iv.) Not be attached to, or between telephone poles, utility poles,
public or private light poles, trees, vehicles, temporary fence
post or any other apparatus other than a building wall or
fence,
(v.) Not be placed on the roof of any building;
(vi.) Be maintained in a neat and attractive condition; and
(vii.) Be permitted for a maximum of ninety (90) days in one (1)
calendar year.
(3) Banner signs are permitted in the C-1, C-2, AP, I-1, I-1A, and I-2
zones.
(d) Changeable Copy Signs – Electronic or Mechanical:
(1) Zones, Conditional Use. Electronic Changeable Copy signs (such
as LED’s or flat-panel digital technologies) and Mechanical
Changeable Copy signs may only be erected in the C-2 or I-1
zones and must be approved as a conditional use. Conditions may
address a variety of factors including, without limitation,
dimensions, structural considerations, materials of construction,
compatibility with nearby uses, and safety considerations.
(2) Size Requirements. Electronic Changeable Copy signs (such as
LED’s or flat-panel digital technologies) and Mechanical
Changeable Copy signs shall not exceed fifty-six (56) square feet.
(3) Location. Electronic Changeable Copy signs and Mechanical
Changeable Copy signs may be utilized as a wall sign, pole sign, or
monument sign only. The coverage and size limitations for wall,
pole or monument signs shall also apply to any proposed Electronic
Changeable Copy sign or Mechanical Changeable Copy sign.
(4) Minimum Hold Time – Times of Day – Transitioning – Background
Color.
(j) During daylight hours (defined as the hours beginning
at sunrise and ending at sunset for each day as
determined by the public records of the National
Weather Service), the minimum hold time between
messages shall be not less than three (3) seconds.
17
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(ii) During the hours beginning at sunset and ending at
sunrise, and subject to the “dark period” set forth below,
the minimum hold time between messages shall be not
less than six (6) seconds; and, during these same
hours, in order to reduce the visual impact of
illuminated images, the background for all images
displayed shall be black or a similar dark color. The
luminosity of an electronic message sign shall be
reduced to ten percent (10%) of its mid-day luminosity.
(iii) The time for fading, transitioning or dissolving of images
shall be not less than one (1) second and not more than
one and one-half (1.5) seconds.
(iv) Any sign that does not meet the minimum hold and
transition times defined herein shall be deemed a
prohibited “flashing sign” as defined in this chapter.
(5) Dark Period. During the hours beginning at 11:00 midnight and
continuing through 5:00 a.m. the luminosity of an electronic
message sign shall be reduced to ten percent (10%) of its mid-day
luminosity; the minimum hold time between messages shall be not
less than thirty (30) seconds; and the background color of all
images shall be black or a similar dark color.
(6) Electronic and Mechanical Controls. Each sign shall be equipped
with electronic or manual controls that enables and ensures that an
Electronic Changeable Copy or Mechanical Changeable Copy sign
is fully consistent with the requirements of this section and is
otherwise adjustable to meet the reasonable requirements of the
City related to luminosity, frequency and transitions for changes in
copy and images, and background color.
(7) Traveling Messages. Traveling messages shall be defined as the
display of words, copy or images that move or scroll within the face
of a sign. Traveling messages are prohibited.
(e) Changeable Copy Signs - Manual:
(1) Manually Changeable Copy signs require a sign permit from the
City.
(2) Manually Changeable Copy signs shall:
18
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(i.) Only be used in connection with pole signs, monument
signs, or wall signs; and
(ii.) Not have dimensions which exceed the requirements of the
ordinance for pole, monument, or wall signs.
(3) Manually Changeable Copy signs are permitted in the C-1, C-2, S-
1, AP, I-1A, or I-2 zones.
(f) Directional Signs:
(1) Directional signs must be located on site and require a sign permit
from the City.
(2) Only one (1) Directional sign is allowed for each City approved
drive approach.
(3) Directional signs shall:
(i.) Not exceed three feet (3') in height; and
(ii.) Not exceed six (6) square feet in area.
(4) Directional signs are permitted in all zones.
(g) Flag:
(1) Flag signs must be located on-site and require a sign permit from
the City.
(2) Flag signs are only permitted in the AP, C-2, S-1, I-1, I-1A, I-2 and
LGC zones.
(3) Flag signs shall be kept in good repair (no frayed or torn edges, or
excessive fading) or shall be required to be removed or
replaced.
(4) All flag sign poles must be set back at least half the distance in feet
of the flag pole height from any property line.
(Setback=flagpoleheight/2);
(5) For purposes of calculating overall sign area or allowed signage, a
flag sign shall be considered a pole sign.
19
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(h) Interior Signs:
(1) No permit is required for Interior signs. (An electrical permit may be
required when installing an illuminated interior sign)
(2) Interior signs are permitted in all zones.
(i) Monument signs.
The following provisions apply to monument signs:
(1) Monument signs require a sign permit from the City.
(2) Monuments signs shall be mounted directly to the ground with the
entire base covered (no poles visible beneath base of sign). The
base shall be as wide, or wider than, the sign face.
(3) Monument signs shall not exceed six feet (6') in height unless
the length of lineal street frontage on the property is sufficient to
provide for a larger permitted sign height as specified in the
“Monument Sign Table.”
Monument Sign Table
Street Frontage
(in feet)
Max Sign Area
(sq ft)
Max Height
(in feet)
175 feet or less 36 6
175 to 200 50 8
201 to 225 75 11
226 or more 110 14
(4) On corner lots, only the street frontage of the ‘principle’ or most
traveled roadway adjacent to the lot shall be counted towards the
street frontage allowed for obtaining a monument sign. For corner
lots that have streets with similar traffic use, the side on which the
sign will face shall be used to determine street frontage. The length
of street frontage on lots with rounded property corners shall be
measured from the point of intersection if both property lines on
either side of the corner were continued in a straight line.
(5) Shall not exceed thirty six square feet (36') in area unless otherwise
specified on the “Monument Sign Table” as calculated by lot
frontage.
(6) Shall be set back from the public right-of-way a minimum of ten feet
(10').
20
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(7) Shall be erected on a landscaped area of at least one hundred
twenty square feet (120') with a minimum landscaped length and
width of three feet (3').
(8) Shall not be erected in the clear vision area, except for signs which
do not exceed three feet (3') in height from the adjacent street
grade.
(9) Monument signs are permitted in the C-1, C-2, S-1, I-1, LGC, LGN,
I-1A, and I-2 zones.
(10) Each parcel or commercial complex may have one monument sign,
however, one additional monument sign six feet (6') in height and
thirty six square feet (36') in area may be approved where the
parcel or commercial complex has more than two hundred feet
(200') of frontage on a dedicated street, or has frontage on two (2)
or more dedicated streets. The minimum distance between two (2)
monument signs on the same parcel or commercial complex shall
be one hundred feet (100').
(11) A three foot (3') high berm (measured from sidewalk grade level)
may be placed beneath a monument sign. The berm must be
landscaped and run along the entire length of the street frontage on
which the sign is facing. In no case shall the berm beneath the sign
exceed three feet (3'). The total height of a sign placed on top of
any berm shall be measured from finish grade at the base of the
sign.
(12) A landscaping ‘clear vision area’ is permitted within a distance of
thirty feet (30') of either side of the sign as measured horizontally
along the direction of the street for which the sign is facing. Any
required trees or shrubbery within the 30' clear vision area that
may block the view of a monument sign shall be permitted to be
moved elsewhere within the required front landscaping area,
but any tree or shrub must maintain a minimum three foot (3')
separation from any curb, sidewalk, or paved area. In no case shall
the net number of required trees or shrubbery be reduced. Grass,
flowers, or other low-lying landscaping around the sign will still be
required per code or as shown on approved site plans.
(13) The use of natural materials such as wood or stone is strongly
encouraged in the design of monument sign foundations, frames, or
bases.
(j) Nameplates:
21
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(1) No permit is required for Nameplates,
(2) Nameplates shall not exceed three (3) square feet, and
(3) Nameplates are permitted in all zones.
(k) Off-Premise Signs:
Off-Premise Signs are prohibited in all zones in the City.
(l) Pennant Signs:
(1) Pennant signs require a sign permit from the City.
(2) Pennant signs shall:
(i.) Not be placed in such a way as to obstruct the vision of any
motorist from seeing any traffic or traffic control devices.
(ii.) Businesses may only display pennant signs a maximum of
ninety (90) days in any calendar year per site.
(3) Pennant signs are permitted in the AP, C-2, S-1, I-1, I-A, I-1A and I-
2 zones.
(m) Pole Sign:
(1) Pole signs require a sign permit from the City.
(2) Pole signs are only permitted in the AP, C-2, S-1, I-1, I-A, I-1A and
I-2 zones.
(3) Pole signs shall:
(i.) Not exceed a maximum height of twenty-five feet (25') from
the base of the sign. Freeway oriented signs, if approved as
a conditional use may be erected to a height of twenty-five
feet (25') above Interstate 15 grade level at a point
perpendicular to the sign; however, in no case may a
freeway oriented sign exceed fifty feet (50’) in total height.
(ii.) Be limited to not more than three (3) free standing or ground
signs per lot and each sign is not to exceed three (3) square
feet in area for each lineal foot of frontage of the lot upon
which said signs are situated, with a maximum square
footage per sign of three hundred (300) square feet.
22
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
oriented signs, however, may be erected without limitation
by reason of the lineal feet of frontage of the lot upon which
situated to a size not to exceed five hundred (500) square
feet in area.
(iii.) Not overhang or extend into or above the street right of way.
(n) Portable Signs: Portable signs are prohibited in all zones in the City.
(o) Projecting Signs: Projecting signs are prohibited in all zones in the City.
(p) Reader Board Signs: Reader Board signs are prohibited in all zones in
the City.
(q) Roof Signs (Suspended): Roof signs are prohibited in all zones in the
City.
(r) Roof Signs (Integral):
(1) Integral Roof signs require a sign permit from the City.
(2) Integral Roof signs shall:
(i.) Not be allowed on buildings having a wall sign; and
(ii.) Not have copy which exceeds ten percent (10%) of the
structure to which it is attached.
(iii.) Integral Roof signs are permitted in the AP, C-1, C-2, LGC,
LGN, I-1, I-1A, and I-2 zones.
(s) Rotating Signs: Rotating Signs are prohibited in all zones in the City.
(t) Statue Signs:
(1) Statue signs shall be permitted in all zones and shall be counted
within the size limitation of a sign area or coverage. (Examples:
(a)If a monument sign for a feed store has a statue of a cow on top
of the sign, the side elevation (or profile) of the sign and cow would
need to fit within the square foot size limitation for monument signs.
(b) If a restaurant has a statue of a chili pepper mounted to the front
wall of their building, the statue would have to fit within the
percentage coverage limitations of a wall sign when looking at the
front elevation of the building.)
23
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(2) Statues designed and located as public art and not as ‘promotional
displays’ are not regulated by this ordinance.
(u) Temporary Signs:
(1) Duration. Temporary signs may be displayed for a period of time
not exceeding sixty (60) days.
(2) Durability. All temporary signs, excepting A-frame signs shall be
securely attached to stakes or posts embedded in the ground or
shall be securely attached to a permanent structure. Signs shall be
made of durable materials such as will withstand the elements for
the period of duration.
(3) Size and Setback. All temporary signs shall have an area no larger
than fifteen (15) square feet in size. All Temporary Signs must be
set back at least ten (10) feet from the property line.
(4) Owner consent. Any person wishing to display a sign must have
the consent of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the property on
which the sign will be located, prior to placement.
(5) Illumination. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
(6) Number. A maximum of one (1) signs shall be allowed on any lot.
(7) Public right-of-way. No sign shall be posted or displayed in the
public right-of-way, or on any traffic regulatory sign pole or tree
within any public street right-of-way, or on any utility pole, nor shall
any sign be posted so as to obstruct sight lines within thirty (30)
feet of any intersection or to inhibit travel along a public right of
way.
(v) Wall Signs:
(1) Wall signs require a sign permit from the City.
(2) Wall signs shall:
(i) Be attached to any wall of a building;
24
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(ii.) Not exceed ten percent (10%) of the wall area to which the
sign is attached or ten-percent (10%) of the wall face
dedicated to an individual unit within a commercial complex;
(iii.) Not extend above the roof line;
(iv.) Not be used on the same building or unit within a complex
which has an Integral Roof sign.
(v.) Not project more than eighteen inches (18”) from the face of
the part of the building to which it is attached - including any
light box or structural part of the sign, except for awning
signs and back-lit awning signs which shall project not more
than five (5) feet from the face of the part of the building to
which it is attached.
(3) Wall signs are permitted in the AP, C-1, C-2, S-1, LGC, LGN, I-1, I-
1A, and I-2 zones.
(w) Window Signs:
(1) No permit is required for a Window sign.
(2) Window signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total
transparent area of any window on which they are located.
(3) Flashing lights, LED signs, or strobe lights placed on the interior of
a window but intended to be seen from the exterior of the building
are prohibited.
(4) Window signs are permitted in the AP, C-1, C-2, S-1, I-1, I-1A, and
I-2 zones.
(x) Temporary Outfield Signs
(1) Subject to the terms and conditions of this Subsection, Temporary
Outfield Signs may be allowed on a limited basis by license,
contract, or use agreement with the City.
(2) Temporary Outfield Signs are only permitted for baseball fields
located within Mills Park and must comply with all terms, conditions
and requirements of this Section.
(3) Temporary Outfield Signs must be securely attached to a
permanent baseball field fence and shall be secured to the fence
every eighteen (18) inches or less along the perimeter of the sign.
25
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(4) Temporary Outfield Signs shall only be allowed to be displayed on
outfield fencing and shall be prohibited on infield fencing,
backstops, or other park fencing.
(5) Temporary Outfield Signs shall face inward toward the playing field.
(6) Temporary Outfield Signs shall not exceed the height of the fence
to which it is attached or five (5) feet from the ground, whichever is
less.
(7) Temporary Outfield Signs shall not exceed a total of thirty-two (32)
square feet in size for each sign.
(8) Temporary Outfield Signs shall be temporary in nature and must be
a banner sign made of fabric or other non-rigid material with no
enclosing framework and durable to withstand the elements.
(9) Temporary Outfield Signs must be maintained in a neat and
attractive condition. Fringed or torn signs shall be removed and/or
replaced immediately.
(10) Temporary Outfield Signs shall not be illuminated.
(11) Temporary Outfield Signs shall only be permitted for a maximum
period of one hundred twenty two (122) days and may only be
displayed between April 1st through July 31st.
12-32-170 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS
Continuation of legal non-conforming signs.
Any lawfully erected sign which has become unlawful solely by passage of this
Chapter or a predecessor section or Chapter may continue to be maintained under the
provisions of this section of the Woods Cross City Code.
(a) Alterations.
(1) A legal non-conforming sign shall not be structurally modified,
reconstructed, raised, moved, placed, extended, or enlarged unless
the sign is modified to conform with all of the provisions of this
Chapter.
(2) The sign shall not be changed to or replaced by another
nonconforming sign.
26
Chapter 12-32 9/28/2016
(3) Alterations shall not be interpreted to include changing the text or
copy of advertising signs, signs for theaters, or other similar signs
which are designed to accommodate changeable copy.
(4) Alterations shall not be interpreted to include changes in any sign
face or copy as long as those changes do not require structural
modifications to the sign. Content changes to a sign face do not
require the sign to come into conformance with the current sign
ordinance.
(c) Maintenance. Minor repairs and maintenance may be made to a
nonconforming sign; however, in the event such sign has deteriorated
such that the damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the reproduction
value of the sign, according to appraisal thereof by competent appraisers,
the owner will be given written notice. If the sign is not repaired or
restored within six months, the sign may be restored, reconstructed,
altered or repaired only to conform with this Chapter. This does not
include destruction caused involuntarily, in whole or in part due to fire or
other calamity, unless the sign has been abandoned in accordance with
12-32-090.
END OF ORDINANCE

























WOODS CROSS TITLE 12 INDEX
12-1 General Provisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-2 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-3 Master Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-4 Zoning Administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-5 Zone Establishment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-6 Residential Zone R-1-8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-7 Residential Zone R-1-10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-8 Residential Zone R-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-9 Residential Zone R-4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-10 Agriculture Zone A-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-11 Restricted Commercial Zone C-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-12 General Commercial Zone C-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-13 Special Use Zone S-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-14 Light Industrial/Business Park Zone I-1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-15 Industrial Zone I-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-15A Airport Zone AP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-15B Light Industrial I-1A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-16 Planned Unit Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-16A Condominium Ordinance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-16B Mixed Use Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-17 Repeal Ordinance 406 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-18 Conditional Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-19 Site Plan Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-20 Off Street Parking and Loading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-21 Supplementary Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-22 Prior Non-Conforming Uses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-23 Performance Standards for Industrial and Other Uses. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-24 Landscape Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-25 Swimming Pools and Recreational Facilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-26 Airport Protective Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-27 Home Occupations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-28 Residential Facilities for Handicapped & Elderly Persons. . . . . . . . . . .
12-29 Amendments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12-30 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
TITLE 13
CRIMINAL CODE
CHAPTER 13-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 13-03: ADOPTION OF STATE CODES
CHAPTER 13-06: LOCAL CRIMINAL OFFENSES
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 13, Page 1
TITLE 13
CRIMINAL CODE
CHAPTER 13-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 13-03: ADOPTION OF STATE CODES
CHAPTER 13-06: LOCAL CRIMINAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 13-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
13-01-010. Title.
13-01-020. Omission Not a Waiver.
13-01-030. Rules of Construction.
13-01-040. Penalties.
13-01-050. Fine Schedule.
13-01-010. Title.
This Title shall be known as the Woods Cross City Criminal Code" and may be so cited.
13-01-020. Omission Not a Waiver.
The omission to specify or enumerate in this Title those provisions of general criminal law and
offenses applicable to all cities shall not be construed as a waiver of the benefits and enforcement of any
such provisions.
13-01-030. Rules of Construction.
Insofar as possible, the provisions of this Title and the Codes and statutes adopted herein shall be
construed in a manner to ensure the enforcement of the criminal laws of the State of Utah. In the event
any provisions are inconsistent, the inconsistency shall be resolved as follows:
(a) Any provision of this Title which was at one time, but is not now, consistent with the
Codes or statutes adopted herein shall be controlled by the law as it is reflected in the most recent version
of the Code or statute, as amended.
(b) Any provision of this Title which deals with the particular local needs and policies of
Woods Cross City and is otherwise lawful shall control.
13-01-040. Penalties.
Except as otherwise provided by State law or Woods Cross City Ordinances, any violation of this
Title shall be a Class B misdemeanor punishable by fine and/or imprisonment as provided in Title 76 of the
Utah Code Annotated, as amended. This Section shall not limit the authority of the Court to impose any
other sanction or order any other relief as may be appropriate and lawful under the laws of the State of
Utah.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 13, Page 2
13-01-050. Fine Schedule.
Fines for violations of this Title may be assessed in accordance with the Uniform Fine Schedule
as adopted and amended by the Judicial Council of the State of Utah. This Section does not limit the
court from, in its discretion, imposing no fine, or a fine in any amount up to and including the maximum
fine, for the offense.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 13, Page 3
CHAPTER 13-03: ADOPTION OF STATE CODES
13-03-010. Utah Criminal Code.
13-03-020. Utah Code of Criminal Procedure.
13-03-030. Utah Controlled Substances Act.
13-03-040. Utah Drug Paraphernalia Act.
13-03-050. Imitation Controlled Substances Act.
13-03-060. Criminal Offenses Provisions of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
13-03-070. Offenses on School Property.
13-03-080. Limitations.
13-03-090. Violations.
13-03-100. Citation.
13-03-010. Utah Criminal Code.
The Utah Criminal Code set forth at Utah Code Ann.  76-1-101, et seq., as amended, is hereby
adopted as the Criminal Code of Woods Cross City.
13-03-020. Utah Code of Criminal Procedure.
The Utah Code of Criminal Procedure as set forth at Utah Code Ann.  77-1-1, et seq., as
amended, is hereby adopted as the Code of Criminal Procedure of Woods Cross City.
13-03-030. Utah Controlled Substances Act.
The Utah Controlled Substances Act as set forth in Utah Code Ann.  58-37-1, et seq., as
amended, is hereby adopted as the Controlled Substances Act of Woods Cross City.
13-03-040. Utah Drug Paraphernalia Act.
The Utah Drug Paraphernalia Act as set forth in Utah Code Ann.  58-37a-1, et seq., as
amended, is hereby adopted as the Drug Paraphernalia Act of Woods Cross City.
13-03-050. Imitation Controlled Substances Act.
The Utah Imitation Controlled Substances Act as set forth in Utah Code Ann.  58-37b-1, et seq.,
as amended, is hereby adopted as the Imitation Controlled Substances Act of Woods Cross City.
13-03-060. Criminal Offenses Provisions of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
The criminal offenses provisions of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, as set forth at Utah
Code Ann.  32a-12-101, et seq., as amended, is hereby adopted as the Woods Cross City criminal
offenses provisions of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
13-03-070. Offenses on School Property.
Offenses on school property, as set forth at Utah Code Ann.  53A-3-501 through 53A-3-504, as
amended, is hereby adopted as the offenses on school property provisions of Woods Cross City.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 13, Page 4
13-03-030. Limitations.
Each of the Codes and statutes adopted herein are hereby adopted as if fully set forth at length,
provided however, that any provision which is classified as a felony or a Class A misdemeanor or which is
not enforceable by Woods Cross City under the laws of the State of Utah, is excluded.
13-03-040. Violations.
Class B and C misdemeanors and infractions found in Title 76 of the Utah Code Annotated, as
they exist now and as amended or enacted in the future, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
this reference as violations of City Ordinances. All other Class B and C misdemeanors and infractions set
forth in the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, as they exist now and as amended or enacted in the
future, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by this reference as violations of City Ordinances.
Peace officers and any public officials charged with enforcement of the law are hereby authorized to cite
violations of the City Code hereunder.
13-03-050. Citation.
For purposes of referring or citing to provisions of the Codes and Acts adopted herein, the specific
provision of the Code or Act shall be cited by number preceded by Title 13 of the Woods Cross City Code,
e.g. 13/76-1-101.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 13, Page 5
CHAPTER 13-06: LOCAL CRIMINAL OFFENSES
13-06-010. Curfew.
13-06-020. Aiding Minor to Violate Curfew.
13-06-030. Lewd or Obscene Behavior.
13-06-040. Lewd or Obscene Material.
13-06-050. Cheats and Swindlers.
13-06-060. Destruction of Property.
13-06-070. Trespass by Persons and Motor Vehicles.
13-06-080. Temporary Auto Theft.
13-06-090. Interference with Schools, Students or Personnel.
13-06-100. Disturbing the Peace  General Prohibition.
13-06-110. Hunting or Discharging Firearms.
13-06-120. Soliciting Services of Others.
13-06-130. Failure to Report Child Abuse.
13-06-140. Fireworks.
13-06-010. Curfew.
(a) It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be in any public place
or on any public street, sidewalk or alley within Woods Cross City between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 5:00 a.m.
(b) The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to situations:
(1) Where the minor is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other person
having the legal care and custody of said minor; or
(2) Where the presence of the minor is connected with or required by some legitimate
employment or business of the minor; or
(3) Where the presence of the minor is connected with a bona fide meeting, dance,
party, sporting event or practice sponsored by a church, school, league, youth club or theater; or
(4) Where the presence of the minor is connected with an emergency.
13-06-020. Aiding Minor to Violate Curfew.
(a) Generally. It is unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor to
violate the provisions of Section 13-06-010.
(b) Parent or Guardian. It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having legal
care of any minor, to allow or permit such minor to be in any public place or public street, sidewalk, or alley
within Woods Cross City between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. in violation of Section 13-06-
010.
(c) Owner or Operator of Business. It is unlawful for any person owning or operating a
business to permit any minor to be or remain on the premises where such business is conducted between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. in violation of Section 13-06-010.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 13, Page 6
13-06-030. Lewd or Obscene Behavior.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any lewd, lascivious or obscene conduct, to associate in
a lewd, lascivious or obscene manner with any person, or to make any exposure of his or her genitals,
pubic area, nipple portion of the female breast, or buttocks in any public place or any place exposed to
public view.
13-06-040. Lewd or Obscene Material.
It is unlawful for a person to knowingly permit or authorize the public display of any obscene
performance or materials or to knowingly own, lease, or manage any theater, building, structure, room or
place for the purpose of presenting such obscene performance or materials.
13-06-050. Cheats and Swindlers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or practice any game, trick or device with intent to
defraud, cheat, or swindle another.
13-06-060. Destruction of Property.
(a) Wood or Timber. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully cut down, destroy, injure,
sever, or carry away any kind of wood or timber growing or lying upon the land of another without the
permission of the owner or occupant thereof.
(b) Earth, Soil or Stone. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully dig, sever, or carry
away any earth, soil or stone from the land of another without the permission of the owner or occupant
thereof.
(c) Affixing or Painting. It shall be unlawful for any person to put up, affix, or paint any sign,
notice, advertisement, or other item upon the property of another without permission of the owner or
occupant thereof.
13-06-070. Trespass by Persons and Motor Vehicles.
In addition to offenses set forth in the City Traffic Code regarding trespass by vehicles, the
following activities are prohibited:
(a) Exposing Enclosed Premises. It is unlawful for any person to open any gate, take down
any fence, or let down any barrier so as to expose any enclosed premises of another without the
permission of the owner or occupant thereof.
(b) Presence on Premises. It is unlawful for any person to drive or park any motor vehicle,
motorcycle, or other contrivance, or to walk, lodge, camp, or sleep upon the premises of another without
the permission of the owner or occupant thereof.
(c) Presence on City Premises. It is unlawful for any person to drive or park any motor
vehicle, motorcycle, or other contrivance upon any City-owned property which is not designated for
vehicular traffic or parking.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 13, Page 7
13-06-080. Temporary Auto Theft.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle which is not his or her own, without the
consent of the owner thereof and with the intent to temporarily deprive the owner of possession of the
vehicle, even though he or she may not have the intent to steal the vehicle. The consent of the owner of a
vehicle to its taking or driving shall not in any case be presumed or implied because of such owner's
consent on a previous occasion to the taking or driving such vehicle by the same or a different person.
13-06-090. Interference with Schools, Students or Personnel.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and the good order of the City, or any
lawful assembly by any of the following acts which tend to cause a breach of the peace:
(1) Disturb, interfere with, or otherwise prevent the orderly conduct of the activities,
administration or carrying on of classes of any school;
(2) Annoy, disturb, assault, or molest any person, student or employee of any school
district while in the school or on the grounds thereof;
(3) Loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or about or on any school grounds or building,
either on foot or in or on any vehicle without having some lawful business therein or thereabouts,
or in connection with the school or the employees thereof, or without being engaged in permitted
recreational activity;
(4) Conduct himself or herself in a lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or
behavior in, about, or on any school building or grounds.
(5) Park or move a motor vehicle within six hundred (600) feet of any school building
or grounds for the purpose of annoying or molesting any student or employee of the school district
or in an effort to induce, entice, or invite any person, student or employee into or on the vehicle for
immoral or unlawful purposes.
(b) For purposes of this section, "school property" includes property being used by a public or
private school for a school function.
13-06-100. Disturbing the Peace  General Prohibition.
It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and the good order of the City, or any lawful
assembly therein, or of any person by clamor or noise, by intoxication, fighting, by using obscene or
profane language, by indecent or disorderly conduct, by lewd or lascivious behavior, or otherwise.
13-06-110. Hunting or Discharging Firearms.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, rifle, gun, pistol, shotgun, airgun,
bean Shooter, flipper, slingshot, or other instrument, or BB gun within the limits of the City, except in
self-defense. This provision shall not apply to peace officers in the discharge of their lawful duties, to
target shooting by those holding a Permit issued therefor by the Chief of Police of the City, or to
supervised archery target practice or competition, and shall not prevent any person from discharging a
firearm while killing a dog or other animal which is attacking, chasing, or worrying any domestic animal
having a commercial value, or any species of hoofed or protected wildlife, while attacking domestic fowls,
or while such dog or other animal is being pursued thereafter.
(b) It is unlawful to hunt within the City limits of Woods Cross.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 13, Page 8
(c) It is unlawful for any minor under the age of seventeen (17) years to have in his or her
possession or carry any firearm or air gun in any street, back yard or field, whether private or public, within
the City limits unless he or she is accompanied by and within the immediate supervision of his or her
parent or other responsible adult.
(d) It is unlawful for any parent or guardian or person having the charge or control of any
minor under the age of seventeen (17) years to permit such minor to discharge, or to permit any such
minor under the age of seventeen (17) years to possess or carry any firearm or air gun in violation of this
and the foregoing Subsection, or permit a minor under eighteen (18) years to possess a dangerous
weapon.
13-06-120. Soliciting Services of Others.
It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to solicit or utilize the services of any
other person to procure any prohibited article or admission to any prohibited premises.
13-06-130 Failure to Report Child Abuse.
It is unlawful for any person, official, or institution required under Utah Code Ann.  62A-4a-403,
to report a case of suspected child abuse, child sexual abuse, neglect, fetal alcohol syndrome, or fetal
drug dependency to willfully fail to do so. Action for failure to report must be commenced within four (4)
years from the date of knowledge of the offense and the willful failure to report.
13-06-140. Fireworks.
(a) In Woods Cross City, Class C common State approved explosives shall be defined under
Utah Code Ann.  53-7-202.
(b) It is unlawful to sell Class C common State approved explosives other than:
(1) After June 19 and before July 26.
(2) After December 19 and before January 3; and
(3) Fifteen (15) days before and on the Chinese New Year.
(b) It is unlawful to discharge Class C common State approved explosives other than:
(1) Three (3) days before, on the day of, and three (3) days following:
(A) July 4;
(B) July 24;
(C) January 1; and
(D) The Chinese New Year.
TITLE 14
TRAFFIC CODE
CHAPTER 14-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 14-03: ADOPTION OF STATE CODES
CHAPTER 14-06: TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
CHAPTER 14-09: ACCIDENTS
CHAPTER 14-12 SPEED RESTRICTIONS
CHAPTER 14-15: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
CHAPTER 14-16: SCHOOL PROPERTY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ON DAVIS COUNTY
SCHOOL DISTRICT PROPERTY
CHAPTER 14-18: MISCELLANEOUS RULES
CHAPTER 14-21: CITY IMPOUNDMENT
TITLE 14
TRAFFIC CODE
CHAPTER 14-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 14-03: ADOPTION OF STATE CODES
CHAPTER 14-06: TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
CHAPTER 14-09: ACCIDENTS
CHAPTER 14-12 SPEED RESTRICTIONS
CHAPTER 14-15: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
CHAPTER 14-16: SCHOOL PROPERTY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ON DAVIS COUNTY
SCHOOL DISTRICT PROPERTY
CHAPTER 14-18: MISCELLANEOUS RULES
CHAPTER 14-21: CITY IMPOUNDMENT
CHAPTER 14-01: GENERAL PROVISIONS
14-01-010. Short Title
14-01-020. Citation.
14-01-030. Rules of Construction.
14-01-040. Police Chief to Administer.
14-01-050. Applicability Generally.
14-01-060. Applicability to School Property.
14-01-070. Exceptions.
14-01-080. Penalties.
14-01-090. Fines.
14-01-010. Short Title.
This Title shall be known as the “Woods Cross City Traffic Code.”
14-01-020. Citation.
For purposes of referring or citing to the Utah Code Annotated provisions
adopted herein by reference, the specific provision s of the Utah Code Annotated shall be cited
by number preceded by Title 14 of the Woods Cross City Code, e.g. 14/41-1a-101
14-01-030. Rules of Construction.
Insofar as possible, the provisions of this Title and the Utah Code Annotated provisions
adopted herein shall be construed in a manner to ensure the enforcement of the traffic laws of the
State of Utah. In the event any provisions are inconsistent, the inconsistency shall be resolved as
follows:
(a) Any provision of this Title which was at one time, but is not now, consistent with
the provisions of State law adopted herein shall be controlled by the State law as it is reflected in
the most recent version of the provision, as amended.
(b) Any provision of this Title which deals with the particular local needs and policies
of Woods Cross City and is otherwise lawful shall control.
Woods Cross Municipal Code January 2007
Title 14, Page 1
14-01-040. Police Chief to Administer.
The Woods Cross City Chief of Police is hereby vested with the powers necessary to
administer the provisions of the Woods Cross City Traffic Code and all laws relating to the
operation of vehicles on the highways of the City.
14-01-050. Applicability Generally.
Pursuant to the authority vested in municipalities under Utah Code Ann. § 10-8-30, as
amended, and to the extent permitted by law, the Woods Cross City Traffic Code shall be
applicable to all pedestrian and vehicular traffic and parking on any public roads, streets and
highways within the jurisdiction of Woods Cross City. The provisions of said Traffic Code shall be
enforceable by any law enforcement officer having jurisdiction over such roads, streets and
highways.
14-01-060. Applicability to School Property.
Pursuant to Utah Code Ann. § 53A-3-504, as amended, and to the extent requested by
the responsible board of education, the Woods Cross City Traffic Code is hereby made applicable
to vehicular traffic and parking on all public school property within Woods Cross City. All law
enforcement officers having jurisdiction within Woods Cross City are hereby vested with the
authority to interpret and enforce the Traffic Code of Woods Cross City to vehicular traffic and
parking on all public school property within Woods Cross City. The Traffic Code shall be
interpreted, construed and applied insofar as practicable to traffic and parking situations arising
upon school property to the same extent as though such school property were a public street,
road, or highway, and for the purposes of this Chapter, such school property is declared to be
and shall be considered a public street, road, or highway.
14-01-070. Exceptions.
(a) Emergency vehicles. The operator of an authorized emergency vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the
law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges
set forth in Utah Code Ann. § 41-6-14, as amended.
(b) Maintenance Vehicles. The provisions of this Traffic Code do not apply to
persons, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of
a highway within the jurisdiction of Woods Cross City, as provided in Utah Code Ann. § 41-6-14,
as amended.
14-01-080. Penalties.
Except as otherwise provided, any violation of this Title shall be a Class C misdemeanor.
This Section shall not limit the authority of any other relief as may be appropriate and lawful under
the laws of the State of Utah.
14-01-090. Fines.
Except as otherwise provided in this Title, fines for all criminal and traffic offenses set
forth herein shall be set and imposed in accordance with the Uniform Fine/Bail Schedule
established by the Utah Administrative Office of the Courts.
Woods Cross Municipal Code January 2007
Title 14, Page 2
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 14, Page 3
CHAPTER 14-03: ADOPTION OF STATE CODES
14-03-010. Adoption of State Traffic and Motor Vehicle Code Provisions.
14-03-020. Adoption of State Highway Code Provisions.
14-03-030. Adoption of State Uniform Driver License Act Provisions.
14-03-040. Copies of State Traffic Code Provisions.
14-03-010. Adoption of State Traffic and Motor Vehicle Code Provisions.
Chapters 1a, 6, 8, 12a, 21 and 22 of Title 41 of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, known as
the Motor Vehicle Code, are hereby adopted by this reference as if fully set forth herein, provided
however, that those provisions which are exclusive to the State of Utah or which are not enforceable by
Woods Cross City under the laws of the State of Utah, are excluded.
14-03-020. Adoption of State Highway Code Provisions.
Title 72 of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, known as the Transportation Code, is hereby
adopted by this reference as if fully set forth herein, provided however, that those provisions which are
exclusive to the State of Utah or which are not enforceable by Woods Cross City under the laws of the
State of Utah, are excluded.
14-03-030. Adoption of State Uniform Driver License Act Provisions.
Chapter 3 of Title 53 of the Utah Code Annotated, as amended, known as the "Uniform Driver
License Act," is hereby adopted by this reference as if fully set forth herein, provided however, that those
provisions which are exclusive to the State of Utah or which are not enforceable by Woods Cross City
under the laws of the State of Utah, are excluded.
14-03-040. Copies of State Traffic Code Provisions.
Three (3) copies of the Utah Code Annotated provisions adopted herein by reference should be
available in the City Recorder's Office for use and examination by the public during regular business
hours.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 14, Page 4
CHAPTER 14-06: TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
14-06-010. Traffic Signs and Signals.
14-06-020. Curb Markings.
14-06-030. Failure to Obey.
14-06-010. Traffic Signs and Signals.
The City shall place and maintain official traffic signs, signals and markings upon highways under
its jurisdiction as necessary to regulate and guide traffic and parking within Woods Cross City and to carry
out the provisions of this Title. All signs and signals erected under this Section shall conform to and be
maintained in conformance with the Department of Transportation manual and specifications for a uniform
system of traffic-control devices under Utah Code Ann.  41-6-20, as amended.
14-06-020. Curb Markings.
The City shall paint and maintain traffic markings upon curbs of any highway under its jurisdiction
as necessary to restrict or prohibit the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in such areas and to carry
out the provisions of this Title. For purposes of this Section, any curb which is painted red shall mean that
no stopping, standing or parking is permitted at anytime. For purposes of this Section, any curb which is
painted yellow shall mean that stopping, standing or parking is only permitted as designated by
appropriate signs. All markings made hereunder shall conform to the provisions of Title 41 of the Utah
Code Annotated, as amended.
14-06-030. Failure to Obey.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey any lawfully erected traffic sign, signal or curb
marking provided herein, unless otherwise directed to do so by a police officer or other law enforcement or
public safety official.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 14, Page 5
CHAPTER 14-09: ACCIDENTS
14-09-010. Written Report Required.
The operator or owner of a vehicle involved in any accident occurring within Woods Cross City
shall fill out the required accident forms provided by Woods Cross City and shall provide additional
information regarding the accident upon the request of the Police Department or any investigating officer.
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 14, Page 6
CHAPTER 14-12: SPEED RESTRICTIONS
14-12-010. Prima Facie Speed Limit.
14-12-020. Posted Limits.
14-12-010. Prima Facie Speed Limit.
The prima facie speed for all highways under the jurisdiction of Woods Cross City shall be as
follows:
(a) Twenty (20) miles per hour when passing through a reduced speed school zone as
defined in Utah Code Ann.  41-6-20.1, as amended;
(b) Twenty-five (25) miles per hour when passing through a residential district; and
(c) Thirty (30) miles per hour when passing through a business district.
14-12-020. Posted Limits.
The City shall declare and post alternative speed limits for highways under the jurisdiction of
Woods Cross City when it is determined after an engineering and traffic investigation that the reasonable
and safe speed limit may be as posted. Any speed limit altered under this Section is effective when
appropriate signs giving notice are erected upon the affected highway.
CHAPTER 14-15 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
14-15-010. All-Night Parking.
14-15-020. Authorization for All-Night Parking.
14-15-030. Parking for Certain Purposes.
14-15-040. Storing Vehicle on Street.
14-15-050. Truck Parking.
14-15-060. Explosive Materials.
14-15-070. Hazardous Parking.
14-15-080. Parking in Narrow Roadway.
14-15-090. Owner’s Responsibility for Parking Violation.
14-15-100. Parking Unregistered Vehicles.
14-15-110. Unauthorized Parking of Motor Vehicles on Private Property.
14-15-120. Fines.
14-15-010. All-Night Parking.
No person shall park a vehicle on any street within the jurisdiction of Woods Cross City
during the period from November 1st through March 31st, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. for more than one (1) hour, except physicians during emergency calls, emergency vehicles
or law enforcement vehicles exempted under Section 14-01-100, or other authorized vehicles in
accordance with Section 14-15-020.
14-15-020. Authorization for All-Night Parking.
Any resident of Woods Cross City may apply to the City for authorization for all-night
parking when the same is required by emergency or other unusual circumstances. The Chief of
Police, upon good cause showing, may authorize such all-night parking for a period not to exceed
twenty-four (24) hours. The Chief of Police shall be in the sole judge as to the necessity and
requirement for the authorized all-night parking.
14-15-030. Parking for Certain Purposes.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any highway within the jurisdiction of Woods Cross
City for the principal purpose of:
(a) Displaying such vehicle for sale;
(b) Displaying any advertising;
(c) Greasing or repairing such vehicle other than repairs necessitated by an
emergency;
(d) Displaying for sale or selling any foodstuffs or merchandise.
14-15-040. Storing Vehicle on Street.
Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall park a trailer, boat, motor vehicle,
bus, camping vehicle, truck, vehicle or any other similar contrivance upon any highway within the
jurisdiction of Woods Cross City for more than a continuous twenty-four (24) hour period.
14-15-050. Truck Parking.
No person shall park any vehicle having a total gross weight, loaded or unloaded, in
excess of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds, or having a total length in excess of twenty-four
(24) feet, within any residential zone or along any collector or arterial street within the jurisdiction
Woods Cross Municipal Code January 2007
Title 14, Page 7
of the City as designated on the City General Plan or Zoning Map, except while actually loading
or unloading cargo on or in said vehicle. In determining the total gross weight or total length set
forth herein, the length shall be measured from the most forward point of the vehicle or its load,
and the length or weight of a trailer connected or attached to or in tandem with the motor vehicle
shall be included.
14-15-060. Explosive Materials.
No person shall park any vehicle carrying more than one hundred (100) gallons of
flammable liquid or more than five (5) pounds of dynamite or other explosive of comparable
blasting power, or more than fifty (50) gallons or fifty (50) pounds of highly corrosive freight, within
a residential zone or along a collector street within the jurisdiction of the City as designated on the
City General Plan or Zoning Map, except while actually loading or unloading cargo on or in said
vehicle.
14-15-070. Hazardous Parking.
No persons shall stop, stand or park a vehicle at any hazardous or congested place
within the jurisdiction of Woods Cross city as properly designated by the City with official signs or
makings. In no event shall any person stop or park a vehicle in such a manner as to interfere
with the free flow of traffic along the street upon which it is parked.
14-15-080. Parking in Narrow Roadway.
No person shall park a vehicle in an alley within the jurisdiction of Woods Cross City in
such a manner as to leave less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway available for the
free movement of vehicular traffic, or to block the driveway entrance of any abutting property.
14-15-090. Owner’s Responsibility for Parking Violation.
Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of any ordinance prohibiting or
restricting parking, the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie
responsible for such violation and subject to the penalty therefore.
14-15-100. Parking Unregistered Vehicles.
It is unlawful to park, or for an owner to knowingly permit to be parked, upon any street or
upon public property a vehicle which is not currently registered in accordance with State law.
14-15-110. Unauthorized Parking of Motor Vehicles on Private Property.
No person shall park any motor vehicle on any private property without the consent of the
owner of the property or person having control of the property. Any vehicle parked upon private
property in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be
summarily abated by commercial towing or otherwise. Any vehicle towed away shall be stored in
a safe place and shall be restored to the owner or operator of such vehicle upon payment of the
towing fee plus any storage charge.
14-15-120. Fines.
Fines for violations of this chapter shall be set forth in the Woods Cross City
Consolidated Fee Schedule most recently adopted by the Woods Cross City Council.
Woods Cross Municipal Code January 2007
Title 14, Page 8
Woods Cross Municipal Code July 2002
Title 14, Page 9
CHAPTER 14-16: SCHOOL PROPERTY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ON DAVIS COUNTY
SCHOOL DISTRICT PROPERTY
14-16-010. School Speed Limit.
14-16-020. Signs and Markings.
14-16-030. School Parking.
14-16-040. Abatement of Nuisance.
14-16-050. Application of Traffic Laws.
14-16-010. School Speed Limit.
It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle upon school property at a speed greater than
twenty (20) miles per hour.
14-16-020. Signs and Markings.
The following signs or traffic markings shall have these meanings:
(a) Red curbs mean no stopping, standing or parking is permitted at any time.
(b) Yellow curbs or signs with words "Restricted Zone" mean no stopping, standing or parking
is permitted except as stated on the signs or markings giving notice thereof. This provision shall not apply
on Sundays and legal holidays.
14-16-030. School Parking.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle except within parking stalls as are
designated by lines.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a "Restricted Zone" except as permitted
on signs or markings giving notice thereof.
(c) It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in red curb or fire zones upon school
property.
(d) It is unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle upon school property which constitutes a
hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
(e) Any vehicle stopped, standing or parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
Chapter is a nuisance and may be abated in accordance with the provisions set forth below.
14-16-040. Abatement of Nuisance.
Such nuisances as prescribed herein may be summarily abated by removing, by means of towing
or otherwise.
14-16-050. Application of Traffic Laws.
All traffic laws in the Woods Cross City Traffic Code, including incorporation of State Traffic
Provisions under the Utah Code Annotated which are not inconsistent with the foregoing sections, apply to
school property.
Woods Cross Municipal Code October 2004
Title 14, Page 10
CHAPTER 14-18: MISCELLANEOUS RULES
14-18-010. Driving within Bicycle Lanes.
14-18-020. Driving over "Wet" Traffic Markings.
14-18-030. Driving on New Pavement.
14-18-040. Avoiding Intersection or Highway.
14-18-050. Duty to Keep Proper Lookout.
14-18-060. Interference with Control.
14-18-070. Seating.
14-18-080. Standing on Seat.
14-18-090. Hanging on Outside of Moving Vehicle.
14-18-100. Attaching Sled or Other Conveyance.
14-18-110. Tampering with Vehicle.
14-18-120. Safe Operation.
14-18-130. Negligent Collision.
14-18-140. Driving While Impaired.
14-18-150. Funeral Processions.
14-18-160. Parades and Processions.
14-18-170. Discharge of Debris.
14-18-180. Securing Loads.
14-18-190. Restricted Loads.
14-18-200. Obstruction of Traffic.
14-18-210. Rollerskating and Skateboard Restrictions.
14-18-220. Livestock on Streets.
14-18-230. Skateboards, low profile vehicles (pocket bikes) and sleds.
14-18-010. Driving within Bicycle Lanes.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use a marked bicycle lane as a turning lane, or
to drive within, through, park or stop within a marked bicycle lane except to briefly cross said lane to turn
into an intersection, street, alley, driveway or other parking area. Any vehicle so turning must yield the
right-of-way to all bicycles within the lane which are close enough to constitute an immediate hazard.
14-18-020. Driving over "Wet" Traffic Markings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or ride any vehicle or animal over, on or across any
painted traffic markings which are indicated as being Wet.
14-18-030. Driving on New Pavement.
No person shall drive or ride any vehicle or animal over or across any newly made pavement in
any public street when there is a person, sign, or barrier warning persons not to drive or ride over or
across such pavement or that the street is closed.
14-18-040. Avoiding Intersection or Highway.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to avoid designated intersections or highways, or
the traffic regulations set forth herein, by cutting through any service station lot, parking lot, or other public
or private lot.
Woods Cross Municipal Code October 2004
Title 14, Page 11
14-18-050. Duty to Keep Proper Lookout.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle without keeping a reasonable and proper
lookout for other traffic, objects, and persons.
14-18-060. Interference with Control.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity that interferes with the safe control and
operation of any vehicle while the same is in motion.
14-18-070. Seating.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to have in his or her lap any other person, adult or
child, or animal, or for the driver to be seated in the lap of any other person while the vehicle is in motion.
14-18-080. Standing on Seat.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle while any person, adult or child, is
standing on a seat within such vehicle.
14-18-090. Hanging on Outside of Moving Vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to climb, swing, or otherwise hold onto the outside of any
moving vehicle.
14-18-100. Attaching Sled or Other Conveyance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly drive or operate a vehicle upon any street within
the jurisdiction of Woods Cross City while any person riding a bicycle, moped, coaster, skateboard, roller
skates, sled, or similar conveyance is attached or connected to such vehicle.
14-18-110. Tampering with Vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, tamper, or interfere with another person's vehicle
without the authority of the owner or the person lawfully in charge of the vehicle. Such acts include but are
not limited to climbing upon or into the vehicle, sounding the horn or any other signaling device,
manipulating any of the levers, starter, brakes or machinery thereof, or setting the vehicle in motion.
14-18-120. Safe Operation.
No person shall drive a vehicle in such a manner as to endanger life or property by failing to keep
his or her vehicle under safe and proper control.
14-18-130. Negligent Collision.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle with such lack of due care and in such
negligent manner as to cause the same to collide with any vehicle, person or object.
14-18-140. Driving While Impaired.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle while his or her ability or alertness is so
impaired through fatigue, illness or any other cause as to make it unsafe for him or her to drive such
vehicle. This Section shall not be interpreted to include circumstances amounting to "driving while
intoxicated" or "reckless driving" as defined in Utah Code Ann.  41-6-44 and 41-6-45, as amended.
Woods Cross Municipal Code October 2004
Title 14, Page 12
14-18-150. Funeral Processions.
All persons driving a motor vehicle in a funeral procession shall comply with and observe the
Traffic Rules and Regulations set forth herein.
14-18-160. Parades and Processions.
(a) Permit Required. Any persons desiring to engage in a procession or parade shall obtain a
permit from the Chief of Police before occupying, marching, or proceeding along any street within the
jurisdiction of Woods Cross City.
(b) Permit Request. All requests for permits shall be made in writing at least ten (10) days
prior to the actual time of the procession or parade and shall state the time, place of formation, proposed
line of march, destination and such other information as the City may require.
(c) Time, Place and Manner. The City may alter the time, place and manner of the parade or
procession as it deems necessary to promote the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public.
(d) Supervision. The person or persons obtaining a permit, together with the sponsoring
organizations, shall provide at their own expense, police supervision for such parades or processions
which are not of a community-wide nature when the Chief of Police determines that such supervision is
necessary to promote the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(e) Appeal. Any final determination by the Chief of Police made hereunder may be appealed
in writing within ten (10) days from the date of the determination to the City Manager or the City Council.
14-18-170. Discharge of Debris.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or load, or cause to be operated or loaded, a vehicle
upon any public highway within the jurisdiction of Woods Cross City from which any kind of sand, gravel,
rocks, mud, materials, or debris fall, discharge, or otherwise escape therefrom. This Section shall not
apply to official street maintenance crews or to other persons who have obtained a proper permit from the
Chief of Police.
14-18-180. Securing Loads.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or load, or cause to be operated or loaded, any
vehicle upon any public highway within the jurisdiction to Woods Cross City in which the contact points of
the material being hauled are less than six (6) inches from the top of the bed, unless the vehicle is
sufficiently covered or tied down so as to prevent such materials from littering, spilling or otherwise
escaping therefrom. This Section shall not apply to official street maintenance crews or to other persons
who have obtained a proper permit from the Chief of Police.
14-18-190. Restricted Loads.
(a) Restricted Loads. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, haul, drive, propel, or
convey, or cause to be transported, hauled, driven, propelled, or conveyed on any vehicle any load or
burden containing acids, corrosives, explosives, mopping or roofing tar, road asphalt and cut back, or
gasoline, propane, butane, or other highly flammable liquids, materials, or substances over or upon any of
the following streets within the corporate limits of the City:
Woods Cross Municipal Code October 2004
Title 14, Page 13
(1) Any street within a platted and recorded subdivision.
(2) 1500 South Street from 500 West westerly to the Union Pacific Railroad right-ofway.
(3) 800 West Street from 770 South to the South City limits.
(4) 1100 West Street from 1500 South to the North City limits.
(5) 1500 South Street from 1100 West to 1400 West.
(b) Exclusions. The restrictions of this Section shall not apply to trucks or vehicles making
deliveries of gasoline or similar motor vehicle fuels to service stations by means of the shortest traveled
routes within the City, or of propane, butane, or other heating fuels to customers or other users, also by
the shortest traveled routes within the City.
(c) Exceptions. The City Council may, upon written application, grant special permission to
transport or convey loads prohibited by this Section over streets enumerated herein when, in its judgment,
public convenience and necessity require, but such permission shall be in writing and shall be obtained
before any such conveyances are made contrary to the provisions of this Section.
14-18-200. Obstruction of Traffic.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway
within the City or to otherwise obstruct or prevent the free passage and use of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on the streets, sidewalks and crosswalks within the City. In accordance with this provision, it shall
be unlawful for any person to erect or place a basketball standard or other recreational item in the street or
within a park strip or public right-of-way such that the street is used as a playing area or field. Such use of
the street is declared to be unsafe and dangerous to the public health and safety.
14-18-210. Rollerskating and Skateboard Restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person upon rollerskates, rollerblades, skateboards, or riding in or by
means of any coaster, sled, toy-wagon, scooter, or similar device, to obstruct or restrict vehicular traffic
upon any roadway within Woods Cross City or to otherwise use such devices in a dangerous or unsafe
manner.
14-18-220. Livestock on Streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive livestock upon any streets within the jurisdiction of
Woods Cross City not designated for such purpose, except as otherwise provided by permit obtained from
the Chief of Police.
14-18-230. Skateboards, low profile motorized vehicles (pocket bikes) and sleds.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to operate a low profile motorized vehicle upon any street,
sidewalk or other public property within Woods Cross City. It is unlawful for an adult,
parent, or guardian to allow or permit a minor to operate a low profile vehicle on public
property within Woods Cross City.
Woods Cross Municipal Code October 2004
Title 14, Page 14
(b) As used in this Section a “low profile motorized vehicle” means any motorized vehicle
that: (a) is not regulated by the State of Utah or by any other provisions of the Municipal Code; (b) is not
otherwise expressly permitted upon a highway or sidewalk; and (c) is less than thirty-six (36) inches in
height when in its normal operating position, not including any flag, antenna, or other device attached or
modifications made thereto. This definition includes, but is not limited to, “pocket” or miniature
motorcycles.
Woods Cross Municipal Code October 2004
Title 14, Page 15
Woods Cross Municipal Code October 2004
Title 14, Page 15
CHAPTER 14-21: CITY IMPOUNDMENT
14-21-010. City Impoundment.
14-21-020. State Impound.
14-21-030. Other Remedies.
14-21-010. City Impoundment.
(a) Authority. The City may seize and take possession of any vehicle left unattended on any
public highway within the jurisdiction of Woods Cross City when:
(1) The vehicle is left parked in the same place continuously for twenty-four (24)
hours;
(2) The vehicle obstructs traffic or creates a hazard to the safety and welfare of the
public;
(3) The vehicle obstructs fire fighting apparatus or constitutes a fire hazard;
(4) The person in charge of the vehicle is physically incapacitated to an extent as to
be unable to provide for its custody or removal, for reasons other than "driving while intoxicated"
or "reckless driving" as defined in Utah Code Ann. 41-6-44 and 41-6-45, as amended;
(5) The person in charge of the vehicle has been taken into custody by the Police
Department for reasons other than "driving while intoxicated" or "reckless driving" as defined in
Utah Code Ann. 41-6-44 and 41-6-45, as amended.
(b) Procedure. When a vehicle is impounded pursuant to Subsection (a), the City need not
notify the State Division of Motor Vehicles nor fill out a State Tax Impound Form, but shall comply with all
the other towing and impound procedures set forth at Utah Code Ann. 41-6-116.10, as amended.
(c) Fees. The fees for impounding a vehicle under this Chapter may be set forth by the City
Council by resolution.
14-21-020. State Impound.
Nothing herein shall be interpreted to permit the impoundment of any vehicle contrary to the
requirements of state impoundment procedures when applicable.
14-21-030. Other Remedies.
The impounding of a vehicle under this Chapter shall not prevent or preclude the City from
instituting other appropriate criminal or civil proceedings against the owner.
TITLE 15
STORMWATER
CHAPTER 15-01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 15-02 STORMWATER UTILITY
CHAPTER 15-03 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND PERMIT
CHAPTER 15-04 PROHIBITED ACTIONS
CHAPTER 15-05 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
1
CHAPTER 15-01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
15-01-010. Purpose.
15-01-020. Applicability.
15-01-030. Administration and Interpretation.
15-01-040. Appeals.
15-01-050. Ultimate Responsibility.
15-01-060. Storm Drainage Master Plan.
15-01-070. UPDES General Permit.
15-01-080. Stormwater Management Plan.
15-01-085. Minimum Control Measures.
15-01-090. Definitions.
15-01-100. Severability.
15-01-010. Purpose.
The purpose of this Title is to establish and provide policies, rules and regulations regarding the
City’s storm drain system and for the control, management, discharge, removal and prevention of
pollutants entering the City’s storm drain system. It is further the purpose of this Title to protect the health,
safety and welfare of Woods Cross City, its inhabitants and the environment by improving the City’s storm
drain system, managing and controlling stormwater run-off, protecting property, and preventing polluted
water from entering the City’s storm drain system and other receiving waters to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and State law. This Title is intended to comply with all regulations and
requirements of the NPDES and UPDES programs. The objectives of this Title are:
(a) To regulate and prevent the contribution of pollutants to the City’s storm drain system by
stormwater discharges by any user;
(b) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the City’s storm drain system;
(c) To guide, regulate and control the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any
development or other activity that results in the movement of earth on land within the City;
(d) To minimize increases in non-point source pollution caused by stormwater run-off from
development which would otherwise degrade local water quality;
(e) To reduce stormwater run-off rates and volume, soil erosion and non-point source
pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater BMPs, and to ensure that these BMPs are properly
maintained and pose no threat to public safety;
(f) To protect property from flooding by providing hydrology and hydraulic standards to
adequately provide for stormwater disposal;
(g) To establish a viable and fair method of financing the construction, operation and
maintenance of the City’s storm drain system;
(h) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring
procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Title;
(i) To establish penalty and enforcement procedures for violations of this Title; and
(j) To ensure compliance with requirements of the Woods Cross City UPDES General
Permit and the Woods Cross City Stormwater Management Plan.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
2
5-01-020. Applicability.
The provisions of this Title shall apply to any activities conducted within the incorporated area of
the City, to all real property and development within the incorporated area of the City, and to all portions of
the City’s storm drain system. This Title shall also apply to all water entering the City’s storm drain system
generated on any developed or undeveloped land or entering any creek, stream or stormwater facility
located within the City, including such creeks, streams or facilities located within the City but maintained by
Davis County, unless explicitly exempted in writing by the City or other authorized enforcement agency.
15-01-030. Administration and Interpretation.
The Public Works Director is hereby designated as the City’s authorized enforcement official and
as such shall implement, administer, and enforce the provisions of this Title. Any powers granted or
duties imposed upon the Public Works Director may be delegated by the Public Works Director or the City
Council to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City.
15-01-040. Appeals.
Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, any person aggrieved by a final decision of the
Public Works Director interpreting or administering the provisions of this Title may appeal such decision to
the City Manager by filing a written Notice of Appeal with the City Recorder within fifteen (15) days from
the date of the decision being appealed and stating the specific grounds for the appeal. The City Manager
may hold a hearing on the appeal. If the person or entity is not satisfied with the City Manager’s decision,
a further appeal may be made to the City Council. The appeal to the City Council shall follow the same
procedure as the appeal to the City Manager. The City Council’s decision shall be final and binding on all
parties.
15-01-050. Ultimate Responsibility.
The standards and requirements set forth in this Title and promulgated pursuant to this Title are
minimum standards and requirements. This Title does not intend or imply that compliance by any person
will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. The
issuance of any permit or any inspection conducted under the terms and provisions of this Title shall not
release any person from responsibility, liability, penalty, or requirement set forth herein or by any
applicable State or Federal laws or regulations. Any person violating the terms and conditions of this Title
or discharging contaminated waters into the City’s storm drain system shall be liable and responsible for
such violations and/or contaminations.
15-01-060. Storm Drainage Master Plan.
The City has adopted a master plan for the construction of storm drainage facilities within the City
known as the Woods Cross City Storm Drainage Master Plan. All construction and development within
the City and any connections or discharges of water into the City’s storm drain system shall comply with
provisions of the Storm Drainage Master Plan, as may be amended from time to time.
15-01-070. UPDES General Permit.
The City has applied for and received from the State of Utah, Department of Environmental
Quality, Division of Water Quality, a UPDES General Permit for Discharges from Small Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4's), Permit No. UTR090000. All construction and development
within the City and any and all connections and discharges of waters into the City’s storm drain system
shall comply with the terms, conditions and provisions of the City’s UDPES General Permit, as may be
amended from time to time.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
3
15-01-080. Stormwater Management Plan.
Pursuant to the City’s UPDES General Permit, the City has adopted a Stormwater Management
Plan (“SWMP”) in accordance with applicable State and federal rules and regulations. The City’s current
SWMP shall be made available for public review on the City’s website and at the Woods Cross City
Offices. All construction and development within the City and any and all connections and discharges of
waters into the City’s storm drain system shall comply with the provisions of the SWMP, as may be
amended from time to time.
15-01-085. Minimum Control Measures.
The City’s SWMP shall include and address the following minimum control measures:
(a) Public education and outreach on stormwater impacts;
(b) Public involvement and participation;
(c) Illicit discharge detection and elimination (IDDE);
(d) Construction site stormwater runoff control;
(e) Post-construction stormwater management;
(f) Pollution prevention and good housekeeping for municipal operations.
15-01-090. Definitions.
Words not otherwise defined but used in this Title or the materials referenced herein are defined
in the Federal Clean Water Act and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and any
applicable State laws, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, the UPDES and NPDES
programs. As used herein, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the following meanings:
(a) Authorized Enforcement Official. City employees designated to administer and enforce
this Ordinance.
(b) Best Management Practices (BMPs). Includes schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, design standards, and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into the waters of the United States. BMPs also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, educational activities, and practices to control site
run-off spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
(c) Catch Basin. A basin combined with a storm drain inlet used to trap solids.
(d) City Approvals. Any permit or approval required by the City prior to any construction
activity, including, but not limited to, site preparation, grading, excavation or construction.
(e) Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. ' 1251 et seq.),
and any subsequent amendments thereto.
(f) Construction Activity. Any land disturbance or construction activities such as clearing,
grubbing, grading, excavating, building, and demolition.
(g) Conveyance System. Any channel or pipe for collecting and directing the stormwater.
(h) Culvert. A covered channel or large diameter pipe that directs water flow below the
ground surface.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
4
(i) Degradation. (Biological or Chemical) The breakdown of chemical compounds into
simpler substances, usually less harmful than the original compound, as with the degradation of a
persistent pesticide. (Geological) Wearing down by erosion. (Water) The lowering of the water quality of a
watercourse by an increase in the amount of pollutant(s).
(j) Detention. The process of collecting water from developed areas and releasing it at a
slower rate than it enters the collection system. The excess of inflow over outflow is temporarily stored in
a pond or a vault and is typically released over a few hours or a few days.
(k) Detention Basin. A depression, designed with an inlet and outlet that regulates water
flow and allows debris to settle out, that is capable of detaining stormwater run-off until it can be released
downstream.
(l) Discharge. The release of stormwater or other substance from a conveyance system or
storage container.
(m) Drainage. The collection, conveyance, containment, and/or discharge of surface and
stormwater run-off.
(n) Drain Inlet. A point of entry into a detention basin, storm drain, or other inlet used to trap
solids.
(o) Entity. Any corporation, partnership, limited liability company, organization, association,
trust, governmental agency, or any other legal entity.
(p) Erosion. The wearing away of land surface by wind or water. Erosion occurs naturally
from weather or run-off but can be intensified by land-clearing practices related to farming, residential or
industrial development, road building, or timber-cutting.
(q) Fill. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
(r) Final Stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that
a uniform (e.g. evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of
70% of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas
and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as
the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
(s) General Permit. A permit issued under the NPDES or UPDES program to cover a class
or category of stormwater discharges.
(t) Grading. The cutting and/or filling of the land surface to a desired slope or elevation.
(u) Hazardous Waste. By-products of society that can pose a substantial or potential hazard
to human health or the environment when improperly managed. Possesses at least one of four
characteristics (flammable, corrosive, reactive, or toxic), or appears on special EPA lists.
(v) Illegal Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain
system, except discharges from fire fighting activities and other discharges exempted in this Title.
(w) Illicit Connection. Any physical connection to a publicly maintained storm drain system
allowing discharge of non-stormwater which has not been permitted by the public entity responsible for the
operation and maintenance of the system.
(x) Impervious Surface. Any hard surface area which prevents or retards the penetration,
absorption or entry of water into the ground, or any hard surface area which causes water to run off the
surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions preWoods
Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
5
existent to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to: roofs; sidewalks;
concrete or asphalt paving; walkways; patios; decks; driveways; parking lots; storage areas; trafficked or
compacted gravel; roadbase; or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of storm and
surface water.
(y) Individual Permit. A permit issued under the NPDES or UPDES program for a specific
facility, whereby the unique characteristics of that facility may be addressed through the imposition of
special conditions or requirements.
(z) Infiltration. The downward movement of water from the surface to the subsoil. The
infiltration capacity is expressed in terms of inches/hour.
(aa) Inlet. An entrance into a ditch, storm sewer, or other waterway.
(bb) Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). A municipally owned and operated
stormwater collection system that may consist of any or all of the following: curb, gutter, drainage swales,
piping, ditches, canals, detention basins, inlet boxes, or any other system used to convey stormwater that
discharges into canals, ditches, streams, rivers, or lakes not owned and operated by that municipality.
(cc) Mulch. A natural or artificial layer of plant residue or other materials covering the land
surface which conserves moisture, holds soil in place, aids in establishing plant cover, and minimizes
temperature fluctuations.
(dd) Non-Point Source. Pollution caused by diffuse sources (not a single location such as a
pipe) such as agricultural or urban run-off.
(ee) Nonstructural Practices. A preventative action to protect receiving water quality that
does not require construction. Nonstructural BMPs rely predominantly on behavioral changes in order to
be effective. Major categories of nonstructural BMPs include education, recycling, maintenance practices
and source controls.
(ff) NPDES (National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System). EPA’s program to control
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
(gg) NPDES Permit. An authorization, or license, or equivalent control document issued by
EPA or an approved state agency to implement the requirements of the NPDES program.
(hh) Off-site. Any area lying upstream of the site that drains onto the site, any area lying
downstream of the site to which the site drains, and any area that is not on-site of the project.
(ii) On-site. The entire property that includes the proposed development.
(jj) Outfall. The point, location, or structure where wastewater or drainage discharges from a
sewer pipe, ditch, or other conveyance to a receiving body of water.
(kk) Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, organization,
association, trust, governmental agency, or any other legal entity.
(ll) Point Source. Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not
limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock,
concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may
be discharged.
(mm) Pollutant. Generally, any substance introduced into the environment that adversely
affects the usefulness of a resource. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse,
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
6
rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may
cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances
and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes;
wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter
of any kind.
(nn) Receiving Waters. Bodies of water or surface water systems receiving water from
upstream constructed or natural systems.
(oo) Retention. The process of collecting and holding surface and stormwater runoff with no
surface outflow.
(pp) Riparian. A relatively narrow strip of land that borders a stream or river.
(qq) Run-Off. That part of precipitation, snow melt, or irrigation water that runs off the land into
streams or other surface water. It can carry pollutants from the air and land into the receiving waters.
(rr) Source Control. A practice or structural measure to prevent pollutants from entering
stormwater run-off or other environmental media.
(ss) Storm Drain. A closed conduit for conducting stormwater that has been collected by
inlets or collected by other means.
(tt) Storm Drain System. The City’s storm drain system comprised of storm and subsurface
water facilities, improvements, streets, gutters, drains, swales, detention basins, property, or other
interests therein made, constructed or acquired by the City for purposes of managing and controlling
storm or subsurface water.
(uu) Stormwater. Water produced by storms, surface drainage, snow and ice melt, and spring
flows and drainage. Stormwater does not include infiltration.
(vv) Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP). A document which describes the
BMPs and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or
contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters.
(ww) Structural Practices. Constructed facilities or measures to help protect receiving water
quality and control stormwater quantity. Examples include storage, vegetation, infiltration and filtration.
(xx) Swale. An elongated depression in the land surface that is at least seasonally wet, is
usually heavily vegetated, and is normally without flowing water. Swales direct stormwater flows into
primary drainage channels and allow some of the stormwater to infiltrate into the ground surface.
(yy) UPDES Permit. An authorization, or license, or equivalent control document issued by
the State of Utah to implement the requirements of the NPDES and UPDES program.
(zz) Waters of the State. Surface waters and ground waters within the boundaries of the
State of Utah and subject to its jurisdiction.
(aaa) Waters of the United States. Surface watercourses and water bodies as defined in 40
CFR ' 122.2. including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may
carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry
stormwater at and during all times and seasons.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
7
15-01-100. Severability.
The provisions of this Title are hereby declared severable. If any provision, clause, section, or
sentence of this Title or the application thereof to any person, establishment or circumstance is held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect or invalidate any other remaining
provisions or application of this Title.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
1
CHAPTER 15-02 STORMWATER UTILITY
15-02-010. Purpose.
15-02-020. Definitions.
15-02-030. Stormwater Utility.
15-02-040. Enterprise Fund.
15-02-050. Facilities and Assets.
15-02-060. Fees.
15-02-070. Billing.
15-02-080. Exemptions.
15-02-090. Credits.
15-02-100. Administration.
15-02-110. Policies.
15-02-120. Appeals.
15-02-010. Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City and its
inhabitants by improving the City’s storm drain system, managing and controlling groundwater and
stormwater run-off, protecting property, improving water quality, preventing polluted waters from entering
the City’s water supply and other receiving waters, and establishing a viable and fair method of financing
the construction, operation and maintenance of the City’s storm drain system.
15-02-020. Definitions.
In addition to the definitions set forth in Section 15-01-090, for the purposes of this Chapter, the
following terms, phrases and words shall have the following meanings:
(a) Developed Parcel. “Developed parcel” means any parcel that has been altered from its
natural condition by the construction of improvements or other impervious surface areas or by grading or
filling of the ground surface areas which grading or filling affects the hydraulic properties of the parcel.
(b) Equivalent Residential Unit (“ERU”). “Equivalent residential unit” or “ERU” means the
average amount of impervious surface, expressed in square feet, on developed parcels in the City.
(c) Parcel. The smallest separately segregated unit or plot of land having an identified
owner, boundaries, and surface area which is documented for tax purposes and given a tax account (lot)
number by the Davis County Assessor.
15-02-030. Stormwater Utility.
The City Council hereby creates and establishes a stormwater utility (“Stormwater Utility”). The
Stormwater Utility shall plan, design, construct, maintain, administer and operate the City’s storm drain
system, including subsurface drain facilities and system owned by the City.
15-02-040. Enterprise Fund.
The City Council hereby establishes a Stormwater Utility enterprise fund to handle all income,
expenses and other financial transactions related to the Stormwater Utility. All Stormwater Utility service
charges shall be deposited in the Stormwater Utility enterprise fund. Money in the Stormwater Utility
enterprise fund shall not be commingled with or transferred to other City funds. However, the Stormwater
Utility may pay other City funds for services and expenses directly attributable to the Stormwater Utility.
The Stormwater Utility enterprise fund shall be operated according to State law and City ordinances, rules,
regulations and policies.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
2
15-02-050. Facilities and Assets.
The Stormwater Utility shall operate independently of City operations funded by the general fund.
Upon creation of the utility, all of the City’s storm drain system, facilities and assets (other than streets and
other facilities and assets designated by the City Manager) shall be transferred to the Stormwater Utility in
consideration for the Stormwater Utility’s agreement to take primary responsibility for planning, designing,
constructing, maintaining, administering and operating the City’s storm drain system.
15-02-060. Stormwater Utility Fees.
(a) Imposed. Each developed parcel of real property in the City shall be charged a
Stormwater Utility fee.
(b) ERU. The fee shall be based on the number of equivalent residential units (ERU’s)
contained on the parcel. The City Council finds that the ERU is the most accurate measurement for
determining the amount that each parcel contributes to, benefits from, and otherwise uses the Stormwater
Utility. Based on a study completed within Woods Cross, the City Council finds and establishes that one
ERU equals 3,000 square feet of impervious surface area.
(c) Calculation. The fees established herein are based upon studies conducted by the City,
or caused to be conducted by the City. Based on collected data, the City Council finds that each single
family residential unit and residential duplex contributes approximately the same amount of stormwater
run-off; therefore, each developed single family residential parcel or residential duplex shall pay a base
rate of one ERU. All developed multi-family residential parcels, commercial parcels, and other
nonresidential parcels shall pay a multiple of this base rate, expressed in ERU’s, according to the
measured impervious area on the parcel.
(d) Charge per ERU. The amount charged for each ERU shall be established by resolution
of the City Council and set forth in the City’s “Consolidated Fee Schedule”.
15-02-070. Billing.
The City Council finds that the City’s storm drain system, culinary water system and solid waste
collection system are all interrelated services that are part of a unified City plan to provide for the health,
safety and welfare of the City and its residents in an environmentally responsible manner. Therefore, the
Stormwater Utility fee shall be included on the City’s regular monthly utility bill for any given property. If
there is no regular utility bill for the property, the Stormwater Utility fee shall be charged to the owner of the
property. In addition to any other remedies provided in this Title, failure to pay the Stormwater Utility fee
within thirty (30) days from due date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to interest at the rate
of ten percent (10%) per annum on the unpaid delinquent amount. The property owner and/or responsible
party shall be required to pay all collection costs, including legal fees, incurred by the City. The
Stormwater Utility fee, interest, and collection costs, shall be deemed a civil debt owed to the City by the
person or entity paying for the City utility service provided to the property and/or the property owner. All
developed parcels shall be charged the fee, regardless of whether or not the owner or occupant of the
property requests the Stormwater Utility service. Failure to pay any portion of the utility bill may result in
termination of water service.
15-02-080. Exemptions.
The City Council may establish exemptions to the Stormwater Utility fees by resolution.
15-02-090. Credits.
The City Council may establish credits to the Stormwater Utility fees by resolution.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
3
15-02-100. Administration.
The Stormwater Utility shall be administered by the City’s Public Works Director.
15-02-110. Policies.
The Public Works Director may recommend for adoption by the City Council policies and
procedures to assist in the application, administration and interpretation of this Chapter. Said policies and
procedures may be adopted by resolution of the City Council.
15-02-120. Appeals.
Any person or entity aggrieved by any final decision of the Public Works Director in implementing
this Chapter or with the Stormwater Utility fee assessed hereunder may appeal such decision to the City
Manager in accordance with the appeal provisions set forth in Section 15-01-040.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
1
CHAPTER 15-03 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND PERMIT
15-03-010. Stormwater Permit Required.
15-03-020. Permit Exemptions.
15-03-025. Permit Exclusions.
15-03-030. Stormwater Permit Application.
15-03-040. City Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
15-03-045. Hydrologic Methods and Design Standards.
15-03-050 Stormwater Hydrology and Hydraulics
15-03-055. Licensed Professional Engineer.
15-03-060. Permit Review and Approval.
15-03-065. Stormwater Permit Prior to Activity.
15-03-070. Notice of Commencement of Work.
15-03-080. Permit Duration and Extensions.
15-03-090. Permit Nontransferable or Assignable.
15-03-100. Compliance with Other Ordinances.
15-03-110. Permit Kept On-Site.
15-03-120. Inspections.
15-03-130. As-Built Plans.
15-03-140. Notice of Termination (NOT).
15-03-150. Construction Stormwater Management Performance Criteria.
15-03-160. Construction Stormwater Management Design Criteria.
15-03-165. Maintenance Agreements.
15-03-010. Stormwater Permit Required.
(a) Large Projects. Except as otherwise exempted under Section 15-03-020, any person or
entity proposing to disturb one (1) acre or more of ground in connection with any development, land
disturbance, or construction activity within the City or any person or entity proposing to disturb less than
one (1) acre of ground which is part of a larger common plan of development that disturbs one (1) acre or
more of ground shall be required to obtain a Stormwater Permit from the City.
(b) Small Projects. Except as otherwise exempted under Section 15-03-020, a Stormwater
Permit shall also be required for any building permit for a structure requiring earth moving, unless
otherwise waived by the Public Works Director. In determining whether to grant a waiver, the Public
Works Director shall consider the following with respect to the property and circumstances associated with
the same: topography, vegetation, wetlands, steep slopes, sensitive areas, high water table, proximity to
water channels, creeks, well or riparian areas.
(c) Stormwater Permits are required to be obtained prior to or in conjunction with the
issuance of any demolition, excavation, land disturbance, building, site plan, land use or subdivision permit
or approval or any development or construction activity within the City.
15-03-020. Permit Exemptions.
A Stormwater Permit is not required for the following activities:
(a) Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or
natural resources; or
(b) Existing nursery and agricultural operations legally conducted as a permitted main or
accessory use.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
2
15-03-025. Permit Exclusions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided in this Title, a Stormwater Permit issued by the City shall not
include or in any way authorize the following:
(a) Discharges that are mixed with sources of non-storm water;
(b) Stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity as defined in Utah Administrative
Code R317-8-3.9, as amended;
(c) Stormwater discharges associated with construction activities as defined in Utah
Administrative Code R317-8-3.9, as amended;
(d) Discharges that would cause or contribute to in-stream exceedances of water quality
standards as set forth in Utah Administrative Code R317-2, as amended;
(e) Discharges of any pollutant into any waters of the State for which a Total Maximum Daily
Load (TMDL) has been approved by the EPA, unless the discharge is consistent with the TMDL; or
(f) Discharges or discharge-related activities that are likely to jeopardize the continued
existence of any species that are listed as endangered or threatened under the Endangered Species Act
(ESA) or result in the adverse modification or destruction of habitat that is designated as critical under the
ESA.
15-03-030. Stormwater Permit Application.
A completed application for a Stormwater Permit shall be submitted to the Public Works Director
on forms provided by the City. All applications for a Stormwater Permit shall contain the following
information and/or documents:
(a) The name, address and contact information for the owner of the site, the developer of the
site, contractors working at the site, and any consulting firm retained by the applicant;
(b) The proposed starting date and estimated completion date for the proposed work and/or
construction activity;
(c) A City Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, as more particularly described in Section 15-
03-040, for the subject property and the proposed construction activities to be prepared and implemented
in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Title;
(d) A copy of the UPDES Permit issued by the State and a copy of the Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan submitted in conjunction with the UPDES Permit for the subject property and the
proposed construction activities, as applicable;
(e) The required stormwater pollution prevention review and application fee as set forth in the
City’s Consolidated Fee Schedule; and
(f) A bond in the amount deemed sufficient by the City to cover all costs and required
performance under the terms and conditions of this Title regarding stormwater pollution prevention,
including, but not limited to, compliance with the terms and conditions of this Chapter, the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan, and any additional conditions required by the Public Works Director and/or City
Engineer as provided herein.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
3
15-03-040. City Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
(a) A City Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (“City SWPPP”) shall be required with all
permit applications and shall include sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, soil
reports, erosion and sediment control plan, etc.) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the
project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the
water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the structural and/or non-structural BMPs
proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The City SWPPP shall include a
landscaping plan in accordance with Section 15-03-160(c). The intent of the City SWPPP is to determine
the type of stormwater BMPs necessary for the proposed project and to ensure adequate planning for
long-term operation, management, and maintenance of stormwater run-off from future development.
Furthermore, the SWPPP is intended to protect water quality, reduce pollutant discharge and to control
waste and should address these issues as well. The Public Works Director may prepare a City SWPPP
checklist for assistance in preparing such plans.
(b) For development or redevelopment occurring on a previously developed site, an applicant
shall be required to include within the City SWPPP BMPs for controlling existing stormwater run-off
discharges from the site in accordance with the standards of this Title to the maximum extent practicable.
15-03-045. Hydrologic Methods and Design Standards
The City has established Hydrologic Methods and Design Standards for all stormwater design
within the City as more particularly set forth in the City’s SWMP. Updates to these standards may be
made from time to time by the City. Such standards shall be binding upon all design and construction
within the City.
15-03-050. Storm Water Hydrology and Hydraulics
The standard to determine the adequate disposal of storm water from a property to protect it from
flooding, shall be the calculation using a ten(10) year one(1) hour storm with the Farmer Fletcher
Distribution within the boundaries of the property and the existing flows entering the property from
adjacent properties. Adequate shall also be defined as providing for overflow for a 100 year storm.
15-03-055. Licensed Professional Engineer.
When determined necessary or desirable by the City Engineer, any proposed stormwater facilities
and submitted plans shall be calculated, designed and certified by a licensed professional engineer.
15-03-060. Permit Review and Approval.
The Public Works Director and/or the City Engineer shall review all Stormwater Permit
applications and City SWPPP for compliance with the terms and conditions of this Title. In the event the
Stormwater Permit application or City SWPPP as submitted is deemed inadequate or fails to meet the
terms and requirements of this Title, the Public Works Director and/or City Engineer may require
additional information or impose additional conditions and requirements on the proposed construction
activities to the extent necessary to bring the application and/or plan into compliance with the terms and
purposes of this Title. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of this Title shall be grounds for
denial of the Stormwater Permit and/or any development, land use, subdivision or land disturbance permit
or approval.
15-03-065. Stormwater Permit Prior to Activity.
No construction activity, land use or land disturbance activity shall occur on the subject property
until a Stormwater Permit is approved by the Public Works Director.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
4
15-03-070. Notice of Commencement of Work.
After issuance of a permit, the Public Works Director shall be notified by the permittee of
proposed commencement of the work at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencement of work.
15-03-080. Permit Duration and Extensions.
A Stormwater Permit shall be valid for the time period specified in the permit. If the work is not
completed during such period, prior to the expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply to the City for
a permit extension. A permit extension shall be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Director and
shall only be issued upon a showing of good cause. The length of the extension shall not exceed the
original term and shall be determined by the Public Works Director. Any extension shall require written
review and amendment to the Stormwater Permit, SWPPP, and bonding, as necessary.
15-03-090. Permit Nontransferable or Assignable.
Stormwater Permits shall not be transferable or assignable and work shall not be performed under
a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit. Nothing contained herein shall prevent a
permittee from subcontracting the work to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the
holder of the permit shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under the permit,
and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this Title. Subcontractors shall be appropriately
licensed, insured and bonded.
15-03-100. Compliance with Other Ordinances.
The issuance of any Stormwater Permit by the City shall be subject to and conditioned upon
compliance with all other applicable City Ordinances regarding the proposed land disturbance or
construction activity, including, but not limited to, Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, excavation,
erosion control and grading permit ordinances, and other land use development requirements.
15-03-110. Permit Kept On-Site.
Any approved Stormwater Permit, SWPPP and all related documents and plans shall be kept onsite
at the project.
15-03-120. Inspection.
The City is required to inspect all phases of construction subject to this Title. Field inspections
may occur prior to land disturbance, during active construction, and following active construction to verify
BMPs are built and properly designed and to ensure BMPs are properly maintained. Field inspections for
compliance with this Title and any permits issued hereunder shall be conducted by the Public Works
Director, the Stormwater Utility Supervisor, the City Building Inspector, the City Ordinance Enforcement
Officer, and/or other designated agent of the City. The Public Works Director may prepare an inspection
checklist to assist in field inspections. As a condition of issuance of any Stormwater Permit, access shall
be granted to qualified personnel of the City to inspect all construction and post-construction stormwater
BMPs on private properties that discharge into the City’s Storm Drain System.
15-03-130. As-Built Plans.
In addition to all other Ordinance requirements, all permittees subject to the terms and conditions
of this Chapter are required to submit actual as-built plans for any and all permanent stormwater BMPs
and facilities after final construction is completed. As-built plans must show the final design specifications
for all stormwater BMPs facilities and, when required by the Public Works Director, must be certified by a
licensed professional engineer. A final inspection by the Public Works Director and/or City Engineer is
required before release of any bond can occur.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
5
15-03-140. Notice of Termination (NOT).
(a) Operators. Operators wishing to terminate coverage under the City Stormwater Permit
must submit a notice of termination (NOT) to the City. Such NOT shall be submitted to the Public Works
Director.
(b) Permittees. All permittees must submit a NOT within thirty (30) days after completion of
their construction activities and final stabilization of their portion of the site, or another operator taking over
all of their responsibilities at the site. A permittee cannot submit a NOT without final stabilization unless
another party has agreed to assume responsibility for final stabilization of the site. Appropriate
enforcement action may be taken for permit violations where a permittee submits a NOT but the permittee
has not transferred operational control to another permittee or the site has not undergone final
stabilization.
15-03-150. Construction Stormwater Management Performance Criteria.
Unless determined by the Public Works Director to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following
performance criteria shall be utilized and addressed for stormwater BMPs at all sites and proposed land
disturbance or construction activities.
(a) All site designs shall establish stormwater BMPs to control the peak flow rates of
stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms (specified by the UPDES Stormwater
General Permit for Construction Activities UTR300000) and reduce the generation of stormwater. These
practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater run-off
from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent
practicable to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity.
(b) New development shall not discharge untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional
wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact
of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the Public
Works Director. In no case shall the impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the Army
Corp of Engineers (ACE) or the Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) responsible for natural
resources.
(c) Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained, by promoting infiltration through
the use of structural and non-structural methods. At a minimum, annual recharge from the post
development site shall mimic the annual recharge from pre-development site conditions. This subsection
shall not apply to areas with high water tables.
(d) All site designs shall establish stormwater BMPs to minimize, to the maximum extent
practicable, sediment, debris and all other pollutants from entering the storm drain system during all
phases of demolition and construction. The owner, developer, contractor and/or their authorized agents
shall be responsible for the removal of all construction debris, dirt, trash, rock, sediment, and sand that
may accumulate in the storm drain system and stormwater appurtenances as a result of site development.
(e) All site designs shall establish stormwater BMPs to minimize, to the maximum extent
practicable, soil erosion. Any earth disturbance shall be conducted in such a manner so as to effectively
reduce accelerated soil erosion and resulting sedimentation. All earth disturbances shall be designed,
constructed, and completed in such a manner so that the exposed area of any disturbed land shall be
limited to the shortest possible period of time. Soil erosion control measures for all slopes, channels,
ditches, or any disturbed land area shall be completed within fourteen (14) calendar days after final
grading, or final earth disturbance, has been completed. All temporary soil erosion control measures shall
be maintained until permanent soil erosion control measures are implemented.
(f) Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., cold water fisheries,
shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas, water supply reservoirs) may be subject to additional
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
6
performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater BMPs.
(g) Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant
loadings, known as "hotspots", may require the use of specific structural BMPs and pollution prevention
practices.
(h) Post-construction stormwater BMPs, where practicable, shall be installed during the
construction process to control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after construction
operations have been completed. Post-construction stormwater BMPs may include, but are not limited to,
stormwater detention structures (including wet ponds); stormwater retention structures; flow attenuation by
use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions; infiltration of run-off on-site; and sequential
systems (which combine several practices).
(i) Prior to design, applicants shall consult with the Public Works Director to determine if the
project or activity is subject to additional stormwater design requirements.
15-03-160. Construction Stormwater Management Design Criteria.
(a) Site Design. Stormwater BMPs for a site shall be chosen based on the physical
conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be considered:
(1) Topography;
(2) Maximum Drainage Area;
(3) Depth to Water Table;
(4) Removal of Suspended Sediment;
(5) Soils;
(6) Slopes;
(7) Terrain;
(8) Head; and
(9) Location in relation to environmentally.
(b) Conveyance. All stormwater BMPs shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for
the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but is not limited to:
(1) Maximizing of flowpaths from inflow points to outflow points;
(2) Protection of inlet and outfall structures;
(3) Elimination of erosive flow velocities; and
(4) Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable.
(c) Landscaping. All stormwater BMPs and City SWPPP must have a landscaping plan
detailing both the vegetation to be in the practice and how and who will manage and maintain this
vegetation. When required by the Public Works Director, this plan shall be prepared by a registered
landscape architect.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
7
15-03-163. Maintenance Requirements.
The City is required, as part of its UPDES General Permit, to ensure adequate ongoing long-term
operation and maintenance of approved stormwater control measures and BMPs. In order to do so, the
City is hereby authorized to enter upon and inspect stormwater control measures and BMPs on private
properties that discharge to the City’s Storm Drain System to ensure that adequate maintenance is being
performed. The property owner, operator, and/or permittee carrying out all BMPs and control measures
under the provisions of this Title, and all subsequent owners, operators and/or permittees of the property
on which such measures have been taken, shall maintain all temporary and permanent BMPs and control
measures. The property owner, operator and/or permittee responsible for maintenance shall be required
to provide the City with annual certification that adequate maintenance has been performed and the
structural controls are operating as designed to protect water quality. Such annual certification shall be
submitted to the Public Works Director by July 1st of each year. The property owner, operator and/or
permittee shall also be required to enter into a Maintenance Agreement with the City in accordance with
the provisions of Section 15-03-165, as amended, addressing maintenance requirements for any control
measures and BMPs installed on the property. Should the property owner, operator, permittee, or any
subsequent property owner, operator, permittee and/or tenant, fail to adequately maintain the temporary
and permanent BMPs and control measures, the City is hereby authorized to enter the affected property
and to take such action as is necessary in accordance with the enforcement and violation provisions set
forth in Chapter 15-05, as amended, and/or the enforcement provisions provided in the Maintenance
Agreement.
15-03-165 Maintenance Agreements.
A Maintenance Agreement shall be required for any property containing permanent control
measures or BMPs to ensure that adequate maintenance is and will be performed by the property
owner/operator. Maintenance Agreements shall be recorded against the subject property and shall run
with the land as an obligation on subsequent owners. The City may provide an outline or template for
such maintenance agreements, including required Standard Operating Procedures (SOP’s), Inspection
Forms and Maintenance Logs. All maintenance agreements shall be recorded with the property and shall
run with the land. Maintenance Agreements shall include and address the following:
(a) The property owner shall provide for both construction-phase and post-construction
access for the City to inspect stormwater control measures on private properties that discharge to the City
Storm Drain System to ensure that adequate maintenance is being performed.
(b) Alternatively, the second party may be permitted to maintain of their own controls on
private property. A qualified third party may be agreed upon for said maintenance and certified annual
inspections.
(c) The Maintenance agreement shall allow for the City to define in an agreement, any
maintenance requirements for any control measures or structural BMP installed on site.
(d) Through the agreement, the City shall be allowed to conduct oversight inspections of the
stormwater control measures during construction.
(e) The agreement shall account for transfer of responsibility in leases and/or deeds of the
responsibilities defined in the agreement.
(f) The City shall be able to perform necessary maintenance or corrective actions neglected
by the property owner/operator, and bill or recoup costs from the property owner/operator as needed.
(g) Inspections shall be addressed in the agreement, Inspect annually the controls either by
pre-approved third party inspector or by the City Inspector. If a third party inspector is arranged, the City
shall be able to inspect the site at least every five years.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
8
(h) Access to private property associated with the Stormwater Controls and pollutants shall
be granted by the agreement.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
1
CHAPTER 15-04 PROHIBITED ACTIONS
15-04-010. Violations of this Title.
15-04-020. Permit Required.
15-04-030. No Polluted Waters.
15-04-040. Obstructions.
15-04-050. Dumping.
15-04-060. Damage to Facilities.
15-04-070. Tracking Mud or Materials on Public Street.
15-04-080. Washing Out Concrete Trucks.
15-04-090. Stockpiling Debris.
15-04-100. Chemical Storage or Use.
15-04-110. Dumpster Location.
15-04-120. Portable Toilet Location.
15-04-130. Dust Control.
15-04-140. Illicit Discharges.
15-04-145. Illicit Connections.
15-04-150. Residential Roof Drainage Restrictions.
15-04-160. Sanitary Sewer Discharges, Connections and Overflow.
15-04-010. Violations of this Title.
It is unlawful for any person or entity to violate or cause to be violated any of the provisions of this
Title.
15-04-020. Permit Required.
It is unlawful for any person or entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any activity which is
subject to the Stormwater Permit requirements of this Title upon any parcel of real property within the City
unless a Stormwater Permit and all of its applicable components have been issued for the subject parcel
of real property and activity.
15-04-030. No Polluted Waters.
The only substance allowed to be discharged under this Title into the City’s storm drain system is
stormwater, surface drainage, subsurface drainage, ground water, roof run-off, or non-polluted water.
Such water may be discharged only into City storm drain system facilities which have adequate capacity
for the accommodation of such water. Such discharged water shall comply with the terms and provisions
of this Title and the City’s stormwater quality standards.
15-04-040. Obstructions.
(a) Obstruction. It is unlawful for any person or entity to obstruct or contribute to the
obstruction of the flow of stormwater run-off or non-stormwater run-off into any detention basin, storm
drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other associated structural controls that convey stormwater and/or
non-stormwater run-off, unless the obstruction is authorized in writing by the City.
(b) Interference. It is unlawful for any person or entity to cause any obstruction that inhibits
the normal flow of stormwater and/or non-stormwater run-off in any curb and gutter, unless the obstruction
is associated with a street and/or storm drainage improvement project and is authorized in writing by the
City and granted with the issuance of a permit signed by an authorized agent of the City.
(c) Covering Inlet. It is unlawful for any person or entity to cover any drain inlet for any
reason or purpose, unless the obstruction is authorized in writing by the City; provided, however, that a
drainage system inlet may be temporarily obstructed in emergency situations in order to prevent
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
2
contaminants from entering the storm drain system.
(d) Exceptions. Subsections (a) and (b) of this Section shall not apply during clean-up
periods established by the City, provided the materials are placed according to any directions from the City
and do not obstruct drain inlets.
15-04-050. Dumping.
It is unlawful for any person or entity to dump or allow to be dumped into any detention basin,
storm drain, curb, gutter, drain inlet, or other storm drainage structure that conveys stormwater and/or
non-stormwater, any type of deleterious product, including, but not limited to, debris, petroleum product,
chemical, paint, pesticide, herbicide, heavy metal, acid or base product, solid or liquid waste product,
hazardous waste product, and/or human or animal waste.
15-04-060. Damage to Facilities.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to place or cause to be placed in the easement,
channel, bed or bank of any river, stream, wash or other natural drain or within or upon any storm drain,
subsurface drain, flood control channel, reservoir, detention basin, debris basin, spreading ground or other
property over which the City has an interest, matter of any kind that may operate to impede, retard or
change the normal direction of the flow of flood, storm, subsurface or other waters, or that may catch or
collect debris carried by such waters, or that may be carried downstream by such waters to the damage
and detriment of adjacent private or public property, or that may degrade the quality of the water, without
first obtaining a written permit for such placement from the City.
15-04-070. Tracking Mud or Materials on Public Street.
It is unlawful for any person or entity to track or drop mud, stones, dirt, concrete, gravel, sediment
or other similar materials onto public streets by construction or delivery vehicles. It shall be the duty of the
driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops or deposits mud, stones, concrete, gravel, sediment or other
similar materials or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or deposited upon any public
street to immediately remove the same or cause the same to be removed. It shall be the duty of the driver
of any vehicle to clean the tires and vehicle undercarriage of dirt or debris before the vehicle enters onto a
paved public street. Developers shall provide for the cleaning of all construction vehicles on site before
the vehicles leave the site. Developers shall be required to bond for protection measure and potential
clean up costs as determined by the Public Works Director and City Engineer in connection with any City
approvals or permits issued for the land disturbance or construction activity. In the event construction
traffic causes debris to be dropped or deposited onto public streets in violation of this Section, Developers
shall also be responsible and liable for cleaning the public streets. Curbs, gutters and streets adjacent to
construction projects will be inspected by the City for compliance with the provisions herein.
15-04-080. Washing Out Concrete Trucks.
It is unlawful for any person or entity to wash out a concrete truck at any construction site other
than in pre-approved designated areas or to discharge waste concrete or concrete truck rinse water
except into pre-approved discharge facilities. Dumping of excess concrete at any construction site shall
not be allowed. It shall be the duty of the driver of the concrete vehicle to wash out his or her concrete
truck in pre-approved designated areas. The driver of the vehicle shall be responsible for cleaning up any
concrete or debris deposited on any site in violation of this Section. Developers shall provide a preapproved
designated area for the cleaning of concrete trucks. Developers shall be required to bond for
protection measure and potential clean up costs as determined by the Public Works Director and/or City
Engineer in connection with any City approvals or permits issued for the land disturbance or construction
activity. In the event a concrete truck is washed out or excess concrete is deposited on any site, the
Developer shall also be responsible and liable for cleaning up the illegally deposited concrete from the
site. Projects will be inspected by the City for compliance with the provisions herein.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
3
15-04-090. Stockpiling Debris.
It is unlawful for any person or entity to stockpile construction or yard improvement materials or
debris in the street, gutter or in any drainage channel (natural or man-made). This includes, but is not
limited to, ramps being constructed for temporary access across the existing curb and gutter, stockpiling
of topsoil or other fill material, stockpiling of sand, gravel, landscape rock, bark, mulch or any other
material that may be considered a source of pollution in the storm drain system. Materials stored on a
pallet or in a self contained storage unit may be pre-approved by the Public Works Director.
15-04-100. Chemical Storage or Use.
It is unlawful for any person or entity to use or store chemicals in a manner that causes pollution
to the City’s storm drain system.
15-04-110. Dumpster Location.
Dumpsters shall not be allowed in the street or on any paved surfaces except as may be
approved under special circumstances by the Director of Public Works. Drain plugs with respect to
containers designed with drains shall be in place at all times. Dumpsters shall be serviced with sufficient
frequency so as to prevent overflow, spillage and the emanation of offensive odors.
15-04-120. Portable Toilet Location.
Portable toilets shall not be allowed in the street, on any paved surfaces, or in the park strip
except as may be approved under special circumstances by the Director of Public Works.
15-04-130. Dust Control.
Dust control measures shall be implemented on all construction sites where there will be major
soil disturbances or heavy construction activity, such as clearing, excavation, demolition, or excessive
vehicle traffic. Dust control measures include, but are not limited to mulch, sprinkling, vegetative cover,
wind breaks, stone, and spray on chemical soil treatments.
15-04-140. Illicit Discharges.
(a) No person or entity shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the City’s storm drain
system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards.
(b) The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to the City’s storm
drain system is prohibited; provided, the following non-stormwater discharges may be permitted unless the
City identifies any such discharge as a significant source of pollutants to stormwater or waters of the State
or as causing or contributing to a violation of water quality standards:
(1) Water line flushing
(2) Landscape irrigation
(3) Approved diverted stream flows;
(4) Rising ground waters
(5) Uncontaminated ground water infiltration to storm drains;
(6) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater
(7) Discharges from other potable water sources;
(8) Foundation drains
(9) Air conditioning condensation;
(10) Irrigation water
(11) Springs
(12) Water from crawl space pumps
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
4
(13) Footing Drains
(14) Lawn watering runoff
(15) Individual residential car washing
(16) Flows from riparian habitat or wetland
(17) Residual street washwater
(18) Discharges or flows from Fire fighting activities,
(19) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges (only if dechlorinated in accordance
with federal regulations to less than 0.4 PPM chlorine)
(20) Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges
(c) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a written notification to the Public
Works Director five (5) business days prior to the time of the test.
(d) The prohibitions set forth in this Section shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the
discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable
laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm
drain system by the City.
(e) The prohibitions set forth in this Section expressly include, without limitation, connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable
or prevailing at the time of connection. The prohibition also expressly includes, without limitation,
connections of sanitary sewer lines to the storm drain system.
(f) No person or entity shall install drainage outlets into curbsides unless approved by the
City Engineer or Public Works Director. Approval shall be granted only in limited circumstances and must
be based on a showing of good cause and necessity.
15-04-145. Illicit Connections.
No person or entity shall connect to the City’s Storm Drain System without written approval and
compliance with all terms, conditions and restrictions of this Title and applicable State and Federal laws,
rules and regulations.
15-04-150. Residential Roof Drainage Restrictions.
No person or entity shall connect roof drains to the subsurface drainage system. The capacity of
the subsurface drainage system is not designed to handle the quantity of run-off generated from roof
drains. Run-off from roof drains should be directed to a lawn or a flower bed.
15-04-160. Sanitary Sewer Discharges, Connection and Overflow.
Sanitary sewer discharges, connections and overflows (SSO) are prohibited for discharge into the
Storm Drain System. All SSOs must be reported to the Division of Water Quality and to the City’s local
wastewater treatment plant.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
1
CHAPTER 15-05 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
15-05-010. Notification of Spills.
15-05-020. Inspections.
15-05-030. Testing and Monitoring.
15-05-035. Cumulative and Escalating Enforcement.
15-05-040. Removal of Obstruction.
15-05-050. Stop Work Order; Revocation of Permit.
15-05-060. Order Compliance.
15-05-070. Violation and Penalty.
15-05-010. Notification of Spills.
(a) All persons in charge of a project, development, or facility or responsible for emergency
response for a project, development or facility are responsible to train personnel, maintain records of such
training and maintain notification procedures to assure that immediate notification is provided to the City
upon becoming aware of any suspected, confirmed or unconfirmed release of material, pollutants or waste
that creates a risk of discharge into the City’s storm drain system.
(b) As soon as any person in charge of a project, development, or facility or responsible for
emergency response for a project, development or facility has knowledge of any release of materials as
described in Subsection (a), such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the containment and
clean up of such release and shall immediately notify the City Public Works Director of the occurrence (no
later than the next business day).
(c) The notification requirements of this Section are in addition to any other notification
requirements set forth in federal, state or local regulations and/or laws.
15-05-020. Inspections.
Whenever the Public Works Director determines it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
any of the provisions of this Title, or whenever an authorized enforcement official has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which may constitute a
violation of the provisions of this Title, the Public Works Director and/or official may enter such building or
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the official by this
Title; provided that: (1) if such building or premises is occupied, he or she first shall present proper
credentials and request entry; and (2) if such building or premises is unoccupied, he or she first shall
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or
premises and request entry.
15-05-030. Testing and Monitoring.
(a) Whenever the Public Works Director or his or her designee determines that any person
engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility may cause or contribute to stormwater
pollution or illicit discharges to the City’s storm drain system, the Public Works Director or his or her
designee may, by written notice, order that such person undertake such monitoring activities and/or
analyses and furnish such reports as the Public Works Director or his or her designee may recommend.
The written notice shall be served either in person or by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, and shall set forth the basis for such order and shall particularly describe the monitoring
activities and/or analyses and reports required. The burden to be borne by the owner or operator,
including costs of these activities, analyses and reports, shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need
for the monitoring, analyses and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such order shall
undertake and provide the monitoring, analyses and reports within the time frames set forth in the order.
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
2
(b) In the event the owner or operator of a project, development or facility fails to conduct the
monitoring and/or analyses and furnish the reports required by the order in the time frames set forth
therein, the City may cause such monitoring and/or analyses to occur and assess all costs incurred,
including reasonable administrative costs and attorney’s fees, to the facility owner or operator. The City
may pursue judicial action to enforce the order and recover all costs incurred.
15-05-035. Cumulative and Escalating Enforcement.
The provisions of this Chapter are intended to provide the City with a variety of enforcement
options to pursue as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Title,
including, but not limited to, civil and criminal remedies and penalties. All of the remedies and
enforcement provisions of this Title and as otherwise provided by law are intended to be cumulative.
Escalating enforcement and/or fees and penalties may be pursued by the City depending upon the
severity of the violation and/or the recalcitrance of the violator.
15-05-040. Removal of Obstruction.
In addition to any penalties which may be imposed pursuant to this Title, the City may do the
following:
(a) Remove any of the obstructions and any pipelines or other devices installed in violation of
the provisions of this Title;
(b) Give written notice to persons in violation of the provisions of this Title requiring the
removal of offending installations from natural channels or other storm drainage facilities. Notices may be
personally served or may be mailed to violators by registered mail provided that a copy is also posted on
offending installations for a period of ten (10) days. If such installations are not removed within ten (10)
days after notice is given, the City may effect removal at the expense of the person in violation and may
recover its costs and expenses therefor; and/or
(c) Bring an action for the abatement of the nuisance caused by the offending installation,
and/or for the recovery of the City’s costs and expenses incurred in removing the offending installation
pursuant to Subsections (a) or (b), above.
15-05-050. Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit.
In the event that any person holding a Stormwater Permit pursuant to this Title fails to complete
the work required under the Permit, fails to comply with all the requirements, conditions and terms of the
Permit, or violates the terms of the Permit the City may suspend or revoke the Stormwater Permit and/or
the applicable site development permit and issue a stop work order as is necessary to eliminate any
danger to persons or property and to leave the site in a safe condition. The City may also authorize
completion of all necessary temporary or permanent erosion control or stabilization measures, including
use of bond. The Permittee shall be liable to the City for all costs and expenses that may be incurred or
expended by the City in bringing the property into compliance with the requirements of the Permit and any
collection costs, including legal fees, incurred by the City. The City may recover these costs through
appropriate legal action.
15-05-060. Order Compliance.
Whenever the City finds that a person or entity has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this Title, the authorized enforcement official may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation:
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(b) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
Woods Cross City-Stormwater Ordinance September 19, 2017
3
(c) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
(d) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
(e) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
15-05-070. Violation and Penalty.
(a) Violation. Any person who violates any provision of this Title shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and shall be subject to fines as provided in Utah Code Ann. ' 76-3-301, as amended,
and/or imprisonment as provided in Utah Code Ann. ' 76-3-204, as amended.
(b) Civil Penalties. The City may impose civil penalties for any violation of this Title in
accordance with applicable Ordinances regarding the same.
(c) Damages. If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this Title, the City or any
other party suffers damage and is required to make repairs to and/or replace any materials, the cost of the
repair or replacement shall be borne by the party in violation, in addition to any criminal fines and/or
penalties.
(d) Nuisance. In addition to the penalties provided herein, any condition caused or permitted
to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Title shall be considered a threat to the public health,
safety, welfare and the environment, and may be declared and deemed a nuisance by the Public Works
Director, or his or her designee, and may be abated and/or restored by the City in accordance with
nuisance procedures.
(e) Other Relief. This Section shall not limit the authority of any court of competent
jurisdiction to impose any other sanction or order any other relief as may be appropriate and lawful under
local, State or Federal law.
(f) Separate Offense. Each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense.