The Charter
:1

Chapter C
CHARTER
[Printed herein is Acts 1978, ch. 76, as adopted by the General Assembly.
Amendments to the Charter are indicated by history notes following amended
provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains
unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected
without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines
and citations to state statutes has been used.]
CHARTER
C:1

CHAPTER 1
INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES
Sec. 1.1. Incorporation.
The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the present limits of the Town of
Abingdon, as such limits are now or may hereafter be altered and established by law,
shall constitute and continue to be a body politic and corporate, to be known and
designated as the Town of Abingdon, and as such shall have perpetual succession, may
sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, contract and be contracted with, and may
have a corporate seal which it may alter, renew or amend at its pleasure by proper
ordinance.
Sec. 1.2. Form of government.
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "town
manager plan." Pursuant to its provisions, and subject only to the limitations imposed by
the Constitution of Virginia and by this Charter, all powers of the town shall be vested
in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as "the council," which shall enact local
legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the town manager, who shall
execute the laws and administer the government of the town.
Sec. 1.3. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the town shall be as established by the annexation order of the
Circuit Court of Washington County, Virginia, entered in Law Order Book "S," page
173, on the 17th day of April, 1948, and an order of the Circuit Court of Washington
County, Virginia, contracting the corporate limits of the Town of Abingdon as entered
on November 22, 1950, in Law Order Book 27, page 24, which are incorporated herein
by reference and made a part hereof.
Sec. 1.1 CHARTER Sec. 1.3
C:3

CHAPTER 2
POWERS
Sec. 2.1. General grant of powers.
The Town of Abingdon shall have and may exercise all powers which are now or
hereafter may be conferred upon or delegated to towns under the Constitution and laws
of the Commonwealth of Virginia, as fully and completely as though such powers were
specifically enumerated herein, and no enumeration of particular powers by this Charter
shall be held to be exclusive, and the town shall have, exercise, and enjoy all the rights,
immunities, powers and privileges and be subject to all the duties and obligations now
appertaining to and incumbent on the town as a municipal corporation.
Sec. 2.2. Adoption of certain sections of the Code of Virginia.
The powers granted in section 2.1 of this Charter include specifically, but are not limited
to, all powers set forth in Code of Virginia, § § 15.1-837 through 15.1-907, inclusive, as
amended, and all acts in furtherance thereof and supplemental thereto.
Sec. 2.3. Eminent domain.
The powers of eminent domain as set forth in Code of Virginia, Title 15.1 and Title 25,
as amended, are hereby conferred upon the Town of Abingdon.
Sec. 2.1 CHARTER Sec. 2.3
C:5

CHAPTER 3
COUNCIL
Sec. 3.1. Election, qualification and term of office for councilmen.
The Town of Abingdon shall be governed by a town council composed of five
councilmen, all of whom shall be qualified voters of the town, to be elected from the
town at large. Any person qualified to vote in the town shall be eligible for the office of
councilman. The councilmen in office at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall
continue in office until the expiration of the terms for which they were elected or until
their successors are duly elected and qualified. An election for councilmen shall be held
on the first Tuesday in May, 1978, and on the first Tuesday in May of every second year
thereafter. The councilmen elected the first Tuesday in May, 1978, and thereafter shall
enter upon their duties on the first day of July next succeeding their election, and shall
each serve for a term of four years or until their successors have qualified.1
Sec. 3.2. Vacancies on council.
Vacancies on the council shall be filled promptly from among the qualified voters of the
town, by a majority vote of the remaining members of the council.
Sec. 3.3. Council a continuing body.
The council shall be a continuing body, and no measures pending before such body, or
contract or obligation incurred, shall abate or be discontinued because of the expiration
of the term of office or removal of any council members.
Sec. 3.4. Mayor.
At its first meeting, the council shall choose by a majority vote of all the members
thereof one of their number to be mayor and one to be vice-mayor for the ensuing
two years. The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council, have the same
right to speak therein as other members and shall have a vote but no veto. He shall
be recognized as the head of the town government for all ceremonial purposes, the
purposes of military law, and the service of civil process, and shall authenticate by his
signature, such documents or instruments as the council, this Charter, or the laws of
the Commonwealth shall require. The vice-mayor shall in the absence or disability of
the mayor perform the duties of the mayor. In the absence or disability of both mayor
and vice-mayor the council shall, by majority vote of those present choose one of their
number as acting mayor.
Sec. 3.5. Vacancy in office of mayor.
A vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled promptly for the unexpired portion of
the term from among the members of council, by a majority vote of the council.
1. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2021.07.06B, adopted 7-6-2021, provided as follows: "Any Town Council election to be
conducted after January 1, 2022, shall be held on the November general election date. Members of council who were
elected at a May general election and whose terms are to expire as of June 30, 2021, shall continue in office until their
successors have been elected at the November general election and have been qualified to serve."
Sec. 3.1 CHARTER Sec. 3.6
C:7
Sec. 3.6. Meetings of council.
The council shall fix the time of its stated meetings and it shall meet at least once a month
and, except as herein provided, the council shall establish its own rules of procedure
and such rules as are necessary for the orderly conduct of its business not inconsistent
with the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. A journal shall be kept of its official
proceedings, and its meetings shall be open to the public. Three members of the council
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting. Special meetings
may be called at any time by the mayor, by any three members of the council or by the
town manager; provided that the members of the council are given reasonable notice of
such meetings, and no business shall be transacted at a special meeting thereof except
that for which it shall be called. If all members are present, this provision may be waived
by a majority vote of the council. No ordinance, resolution, motion or vote shall be
adopted by the council unless it shall have received the affirmative votes of a majority
of the members present.
Sec. 3.7. Salaries.
The salaries of all councilmen shall be fixed by a commission of five resident taxpayers
according to the procedure in Code of Virginia, § 15.1-939 et seq. The council is hereby
authorized to fix the salaries of all appointed officers and employees of the town.
Sec. 3.6 ABINGDON CODE Sec. 3.7
C:8
CHAPTER 4
APPOINTIVE OFFICERS
Sec. 4.1. Appointments.
At the first meeting in July following each councilmanic election, or as soon thereafter
as practicable, the council shall appoint:
Sec. 4.2. Town manager.
A town manager who shall be the administrative and executive head of the municipal
government. He shall be chosen by the council without regard to political beliefs and
solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. At the time of
his appointment he need not be a resident of the town or the Commonwealth but during
his tenure of office shall reside within the town. His duties shall be as prescribed by the
council.
Sec. 4.3. Town treasurer.
A town treasurer, whose duties shall be as prescribed by the council.
Sec. 4.4. Town clerk.
A town clerk, who also may be the town manager, and/or the town treasurer, whose
duties shall be as prescribed by council.
Sec. 4.5. Town attorney.
A town attorney, who shall be an attorney at law licensed to practice under the laws of
the Commonwealth and shall have actively practiced his profession therein for at least
five years immediately preceding his appointment. He shall receive such compensation
and fees as shall be provided by the council by ordinance or resolution. His duties shall
be as prescribed by the council.
Sec. 4.6. Fire department officers.
Fire department officers, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 27-13, as amended.
Sec. 4.7. Deputies and assistants.
The council may appoint such deputies and assistants to appointive offices as it may
deem necessary.
Sec. 4.8. Term of office.
Appointees hereunder shall serve at all times at the pleasure of the council and may be
dismissed at any time by the council.
Sec. 4.9. Bonds.
Officers, deputies and assistants shall execute such bonds as may be required by
resolution of the council.
Sec. 4.1 CHARTER Sec. 4.10
C:9
Sec. 4.10. Vacancies of office.
The council may fill any vacancy in any appointive office.
Sec. 4.11. Appointment of one person to more than one office.
The council may appoint the same person to more than one appointive office.
Sec. 4.12. Boards and commissions.
The council may, in its discretion, appoint such boards and commissions as it deems
necessary, including the board of zoning appeals.
Sec. 4.10 ABINGDON CODE Sec. 4.12
C:10
CHAPTER 5
COURTS
Sec. 5.1. Jurisdiction of courts within the town.
The Washington County General District Court and the Juvenile and Domestic Relations
Court, and the Circuit Court of Washington County, or their successors, shall have the
same jurisdiction both criminal and civil within the town as provided by law.
Sec. 5.1 CHARTER Sec. 5.1
C:11

CHAPTER 6
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 6.1. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the town shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the
year following.
Sec. 6.1 CHARTER Sec. 6.1
C:13

CHAPTER 7
MISCELLANEOUS
Sec. 7.1. Elections governed by state law.
All town elections shall be held and conducted in the manner prescribed by the laws of
the Commonwealth of Virginia.
Sec. 7.2. Applicability outside town.
All ordinances of the town, so far as they are applicable, shall apply on, in or to all land,
buildings and structures owned by or leased or rented to the town and located outside the
town.
Sec. 7.3. Ordinances continued in force.
All ordinances now in force in the town, not inconsistent with this Charter, shall be and
remain in force until altered, amended or repealed by the council.
Sec. 7.4. Severability of provisions.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this Charter shall for any reason be adjudged
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect,
impair or invalidate the remainder of the Charter but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in
which such judgment shall have been rendered.
Sec. 7.5. Disclosure of interest.
The council is hereby empowered to enact a conflict of interest and disclosure ordinance
to govern elected and/or appointed town officials not inconsistent with the general law.
Sec. 7.6. Legislative procedure.
Except in dealing with parliamentary procedure, the council shall act only by ordinance
or resolution, and with the exception of ordinances making appropriations, or
authorizing the contracting of indebtedness, shall be confined to one general subject.
Sec. 7.1 CHARTER Sec. 7.6
C:15

Adopting Ordinance
Sec. 7.6 CHARTER Sec. 7.6
C:17

Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Sec. 7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Sec. 7.6
AO:1

Municipal Code
Sec. 7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE Sec. 7.6
AO:3

Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. How Code designated and cited. [Code 1985, § 1-1]
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute
and be designated "The Code of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia" and may be so cited.
Such ordinances may also be cited as "Abingdon Town Code."
§ 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction. [Code 1985, § 1-2]
In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the Town,
the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or the context clearly requires
otherwise.
AUTHORITY TO THREE OR MORE — Words purporting to give authority to three or
more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of
such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the provision
giving authority.
BOND — When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.
CODE — The term "Code" or "this Code" shall mean and refer to the Code of the Town
of Abington, Virginia, as designated in § 1-1 and as amended.
CODE OF VIRGINIA — References to the Code of Virginia or to portions thereof,
unless otherwise indicated, shall be to the Code of Virginia, 1950, as now or hereafter
amended and currently in effect.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day be
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
COUNCIL — The words "Council," "the Council," "Town Council" or "the Town
Council" shall mean the Council of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia.
COUNTY — The words "county" or "the county" shall mean the County of Washington
in the State of Virginia.
FOLLOWING — The word "following," when used by way of reference to any section,
shall be construed to mean next following that in which such reference is made.
GENDER — Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The term "health department" means the Washington
County health department.
HEALTH OFFICER — The words "health officer" shall mean the health officer of the
Washington County health department, or his duly authorized agent.
IN THE TOWN — The words "in the Town" shall mean any territory jurisdiction of
which for the exercise of its regulatory power has been conferred on the Town by public
or private law.
Sec. 7.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:1
MAY — The word "may" is permissive.
MONTH — The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
NUMBER — A word importing the singular only may extend and be applied to several
persons or things, as well as to one person or thing; and a word importing the plural only
may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things.
OATH — The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in
which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
OCCUPANT — The word "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall mean any
person who holds a written or oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or a part of
such building or land, either alone or with others.
OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS — Any reference to an
officer, department, board or commission shall be construed as if followed by the words
"of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia."
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD — Whenever particular hours are specified in this Code
relating to the time within which any act shall or shall not be performed by any person,
the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight-saving time, whichever
may be in current use in the Town.
OWNER — The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of such building or land.
PERSON — The word "person" shall include any individual, corporation, partnership,
association, company, business, trust, joint venture or other legal entity.
PRECEDING — The word "preceding," when used with reference to any section, shall
be construed to mean next preceding that in which such reference is made.
PROPERTY — The word "property" shall mean real, personal or mixed property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — The words "public grounds" shall mean the parks and all public
lands owned or leased by the Town, and those parts of public places which do not form
travelled parts of streets as defined in this section.
SHALL — The word "shall" is mandatory.
SIDEWALK — The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the
curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE, SUBSCRIPTION — The words "signature" and "subscription" shall
include a mark when the person cannot write, his name being written near it, and being
witnessed by a person who writes his own name as a witness.
STATE, COMMONWEALTH — The words "state," "the state," "commonwealth" and
"the common- wealth" shall mean the Commonwealth of Virginia.
STREET — The word "street" means the entire width between the boundary lines of
every way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in the
Town, including the streets and alleys, and, for law-enforcement purposes, the entire
width between the boundary lines of all private roads or private streets which have been
specifically designated "highways" by an ordinance adopted by the Council.
§ 1-2 ABINGDON CODE § 1-2
1:2
SWEAR, SWORN — The word "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the word
"affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for
an oath.
TENSE — Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past
and present.
TOWN — The words "Town" or "the Town" shall mean the Town of Abingdon, in the
County of Washington and State of Virginia.
WRITTEN; IN WRITING — The words "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to
include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR — Unless otherwise expressed, the word "year" shall be construed to mean a
calendar year; and the word "year" alone shall be equivalent to the expression "year of
our Lord."
§ 1-3. Provisions considered continuation of existing ordinances. [Code 1985,
§ 1-3]
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the prior
Code entitled the Code of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia, and all ordinances adopted
subsequent thereto and included herein shall be considered as continuations thereof and
not as new enactments.
§ 1-4. Severability of parts of Code. [Code 1985, § 1-4]
If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code, or its application
to any persons or circumstances, is declared to be unconstitutional or invalid for any
reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this Code or its
application.
§ 1-5. Catchlines of sections; history notes, etc.; references to Code. [Code 1985,
§ 1-5]
§ 1-6. Classification of and penalties for violations; continuing violations. [Code
1985, § 1-6; Ord. No. 89-12-3, 12-4-1989]
(a) The catchlines of the sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of
such sections, nor as any part of any section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall
they be so deemed when any section, including its catchline, is amended or
reenacted.
(b) The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are
not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source
of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which
appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in
footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have
no legal effect.
(c) All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and
sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-7. Miscellaneous ordinances and actions not affected by Code. [Ord. of
1-7-1985]
(a) Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the Town or any rule or regulation
promulgated by any officer or agency of the Town, under authority duly vested in
such officer or agency, it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall
constitute a Class 1, 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punished as
follows:
(1) Class 1 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $2,500, or by confinement in
jail for not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and confinement.
(2) Class 2 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $1,000, or by confinement in
jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and confinement.
(3) Class 3 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $500.
(4) Class 4 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $250.
(b) Wherever in any provision of this Code or in any other ordinance of the Town or
any rule or regulation promulgated by an officer or agency of the Town, under
authority duly vested in such officer or agency, any act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is
required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation of such
provision and such violation is not described as being of a particular class of
misdemeanor, such violation shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor and be
punished as prescribed in Subsection (a)(1) of this section.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other section of this
Code, no penalty for a violation of this Code or other ordinance, rule or regulation
of the Town shall exceed that prescribed by general law for a like offense.
(d) Each day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance, rule or regulation
referred to in this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except
where otherwise provided.
(a) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect:
(1) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or
any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this
Code.
(2) Any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered prior
to the effective date of this Code.
(3) Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money
for the Town or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the Town or any
evidence of the Town's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by
the Town.
(4) Any annual tax levy.
§ 1-6 ABINGDON CODE § 1-7
1:4
§ 1-8. Supplementation of Code.
(5) Any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the Town
Council on any person or corporation.
(6) Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; nor shall
it affect any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or
special, although permanent in effect.
(7) Any ordinance relating to the salaries of the Town's officers or employees.
(8) Any ordinance annexing territory to the Town.
(9) Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, accepting or vacating streets or
alleys in the Town.
(10) Any ordinance relating to zoning or subdivisions.
(11) Any ordinance relating to personnel regulations.
(12) Any ordinance relating to traffic or parking regulations at specific locations.
(13) Any ordinance relating to fees or charges.
(b) All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to
the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.
(a) By contract or by Town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and
printed whenever authorized or directed by the Council. A supplement to the Code
shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted
during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the
Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly
into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete
or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have
been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest
ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have
been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in
ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is
necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier
may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other
subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such
catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-9. Town Seal. [Code 1985, § 1-6]
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this
chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections
_____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the
Code which embody substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into
the Code); and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original
meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the
codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material
included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
(a) The seal, of which an impression appears below on this page, is hereby adopted as
the seal of the Town. No other seal shall be used for the Town, and no paper issued
by municipal authority which requires the seal of the Town shall be valid unless the
seal herein prescribed be duly affixed thereto.
(b) No person may make, sell, distribute or in any manner use a reproduction of the
Town seal unless and until such person has obtained from the office of the Town
Clerk a permit setting forth the manner in which a reproduction of the Town seal
may be produced and/or used.
(c) No permit shall be issued by the Town Clerk until the Town Council has, by
appropriate resolution following consideration of the circumstances of any
proposed production and/or use of a reproduction of the Town seal, approved the
proposed production or use and directed the Town Clerk to issue a permit
authorizing the approved production and/or use.
(a) All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way
affect any section or Subsection of this Code, shall be numbered consecutively but
shall refer specifically to the section or subsection affected and printed for inclusion
therein.
(b) Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such
provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following
language: "That section _____ of the Code of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia, is
hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in
full.
(c) If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following
language shall be used: "That the Code of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia, is
hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered _____, which section shall
read as follows:....." The new section shall then be set out in full.
(d) All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be
specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number in the following
§ 1-8 ABINGDON CODE § 1-10
1:6
language: "That section, chapter or article _____ of the Code of the Town of
Abingdon, Virginia, is hereby repealed."
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:7

Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 1-10 ADMINISTRATION § 1-10
2:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 2-1. through § 2-25. (Reserved)
§ 2-1 ADMINISTRATION § 2-1
2:3

ARTICLE II
Council
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 2-26. Meetings generally. [Code 1985, § 2-2]
The Council shall hold its regular meetings on the first Monday of each month, at such
hour as they shall determine; provided, however, that the Council may dispense with any
regular meeting. The place of meeting shall be the municipal building.
§ 2-27. Continued or adjourned meetings. [Code 1985, § 2-3]
Any meetings of the Council may be continued or adjourned from day to day, or for
more than one day, but no continuance or adjournment shall be for a longer period than
until the next regular meeting thereafter.
§ 2-28. Clerk. [Code 1985, § 2-6]
The Town Clerk shall be ex officio clerk of the Council.
§ 2-29. Supervision, control and use of Council chamber. [Code 1985, § 2-25]
The Council chamber shall be under the supervision and control of the clerk when the
Council is not in session. Except as herein provided, it shall be used solely by the
Council and its committees for the transaction of public business of the Town. If not
required for such use, the clerk may permit its use by agencies of the federal, state or
Town governments for the transaction of public business. Any permission so granted
may be cancelled or revoked by the clerk where necessary for the protection of Town
property or the preservation of order.
§ 2-30. through § 2-40. (Reserved)
§ 2-26 ADMINISTRATION § 2-30
2:5

DIVISION 2
Rules of Order
§ 2-41. Procedure for opening meetings. [Code 1985, § 2-4]
§ 2-42. Search for members in absence of quorum. [Code 1985, § 2-5]
If a number less than a quorum shall convene at a regular or special meeting of the
Council, the members present are authorized to send some person for any or all absent
members.
§ 2-43. Control of Clerk, etc., during meetings. [Code 1985, § 2-7]
The clerk and other officers and employees of the Council shall be under the control and
direction of the chair during meetings of the Council.
§ 2-44. Admission of persons within bar of Council chamber. [Code 1985, § 2-8]
No persons except members of the Council and the officers named in the rules set out in
this article and persons invited by the presiding officer of the Council or by vote of the
Council shall be admitted within the bar of the Council chamber.
§ 2-45. Order of business; reading of minutes. [Code 1985, § 2-9]
§ 2-46. Excuse of member during meeting. [Code 1985, § 2-10]
No member of the Council shall leave the Council chamber while in a regular meeting
without permission from the presiding officer.
§ 2-47. Taking and recordation of vote. [Code 1985, § 2-11]
At Council meetings, the vote on every ordinance or resolution and on the appointment
of any officer shall be taken by "ayes" and "noes" and entered in full upon the record.
(a) The Mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the Council to meet, and
shall immediately call the members to order. The roll shall then be called by the
clerk, who shall enter in the minutes of the meeting the names of the members
present.
(b) In case of the absence of the Mayor and vice-Mayor, the clerk shall call the Council
to order and call the roll of the members.
(a) The business of all regular meetings of the Council shall be transacted in the order
determined by the Council.
(b) At each regular meeting the minutes of the preceding regular meeting and any
special meetings shall be read, unless the reading shall be dispensed with by consent
of a majority of the Council members present. If no objection is made to the
minutes, they shall be approved.
§ 2-41 ADMINISTRATION § 2-48
2:7
§ 2-48. Effect of tie vote. [Code 1985, § 2-12]
At a meeting of the Council, in case of a tie in votes on any proposal, the proposal shall
be considered lost.
§ 2-49. General duty of member when speaking. [Code 1985, § 2-13]
When recognized by the chair, a member of the Council shall, in speaking, confine
himself to the question under debate, avoid commentary of a personal nature and refrain
from impugning the motives of any other member's argument or vote.
§ 2-50. Persons other than members of Council, etc., addressing Council or
speaking to member during meeting. [Code 1985, § 2-14]
§ 2-51. Appeal to Council from ruling of presiding officer. [Code 1985, § 2-15]
Any member of the Council may appeal to the Council from a ruling of the presiding
officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member making the appeal may briefly state his
reason for the same, and the presiding officer may briefly explain his ruling, but there
shall be no debate on the appeal and no other member shall participate in the discussion.
The presiding officer shall then put the question, "Shall the decision of the chair be
sustained?" If a majority of the members present vote "aye," the ruling of the chair is
sustained; otherwise, it is overruled.
§ 2-52. Address to Council on question of personal privilege. [Code 1985, § 2-16]
The right of a member to address the Council on a question of personal privilege shall
be limited to cases in which his integrity, character or motives are assailed, questioned
or impugned.
§ 2-53. Member's dissent from or protest against ordinance or resolution. [Code
1985, § 2-17]
Any member of the Council shall have the right to express dissent from or protest against
any ordinance or resolution of the Council and have the reason therefor entered upon the
minutes. Such dissent or protest shall be filed in writing couched in respectful language
and presented to the Council not later than the next meeting following the date of passage
of the ordinance or resolution objected to.
§ 2-54. Entertainment of motions when question is before Council; precedence of
motions. [Code 1985, § 2-18]
(a) Persons other than members of Council and Town officers shall not be permitted to
address Council except upon introduction by the presiding officer.
(b) If anyone other than a Town officer desires to speak to a member of Council while
Council is in session, the member, if agreeable to the request, shall leave his seat
and retire to the rear of the Council chamber or elsewhere until the conversation is
finished.
(a) When a question is before the Council no motion shall be entertained except to:
§ 2-48 ABINGDON CODE § 2-54
2:8
§ 2-55. Stating of motion; withdrawal of motion. [Code 1985, § 2-19]
When, at a Council meeting, a motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated by the
chair before debate. Any member may demand that it be put in writing. A motion may
not be withdrawn by the mover without the consent of the member seconding it and the
approval of Council.
§ 2-56. Motions to lay on table. [Code 1985, § 2-20]
At a Council meeting, a motion to lay on the table shall preclude all amendments or
debate of the subject under consideration. If the motion shall prevail, the consideration
of the subject may be resumed only upon motion of a member voting with the majority
and with the consent of a majority of the members present and voting.
§ 2-57. Division of question. [Code 1985, § 2-21]
At a Council meeting, if a question contains two or more divisible propositions, the
presiding officer may, and upon request of a member shall, divide the same.
§ 2-58. Amendment to amendment; limitation on amendment to motion. [Code
1985, § 2-22]
At a meeting of the Council, a motion to amend an amendment shall be in order but
one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be introduced. An amendment
modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order, but an amendment relating to a
different matter shall not be in order.
§ 2-59. Motions to postpone. [Code 1985, § 2-23]
At Council meetings, all motions to postpone, except motions to postpone indefinitely,
may be amended as to time. If a motion to postpone indefinitely is carried, the principal
question shall be declared lost.
§ 2-60. Reconsideration after decision on any question. [Code 1985, § 2-24]
At a Council meeting, any member of the Council who voted with the majority may
move for a reconsideration of any action on the same or the next succeeding meeting;
provided, that a resolution authorizing or relating to any contract may be reconsidered
(1) Adjourn;
(2) Lay on the table;
(3) Postpone to a certain day;
(4) Refer;
(5) Amend; or
(6) Postpone indefinitely.
(b) These motions shall have precedence in the order indicated. Any such motion
except a motion to amend shall be put to a vote without debate.
§ 2-54 ADMINISTRATION § 2-60
2:9
at any time before the final execution thereof. A motion to reconsider shall require the
same number of votes as is required to adopt an ordinance or resolution. After a motion
for reconsideration has once been acted on, no other motion for a reconsideration thereof
shall be made without unanimous consent.
§ 2-61. Procedure in absence of rule. [Code 1985, § 2-26]
In the absence of a rule set out in this article to govern a point of procedure, reference
shall be made to the approved practice in the Virginia House of Delegates.
§ 2-62. Suspension of rules. [Code 1985, § 2-27]
Any provision of the rules set out in this division may be temporarily suspended at any
meeting of the Council by a majority vote of all members elected. A vote on any such
suspension shall be taken by "ayes" and "noes" and entered upon the minutes.
§ 2-63. through § 2-75. (Reserved)
§ 2-60 ABINGDON CODE § 2-63
2:10
DIVISION 3
Special Committees
§ 2-76. Appointment; composition. [Code 1985, § 2-28]
The Mayor may appoint from time to time such special committees, consisting of at least
three Council members and shall designate the chairman thereof, as in his discretion he
deems desirable, or as may be desired by the Council, to expedite the handling of the
business and affairs of the Town.
§ 2-77. Powers generally. [Code 1985, § 2-29]
No special committee of the Council shall have the power of employing any person for
or on behalf of the Town, or of incurring any expense, unless specially authorized by the
Council. Every special committee shall have the power and authority to send for persons
and papers and to examine witnesses under oath, pursuant to the laws of the state, on
any matter or proceeding referred to or before it, and such examination, together with all
papers and proceedings, shall be returned to the Council.
§ 2-78. Meetings generally. [Code 1985, § 2-30]
Special committees of the Council shall meet on the call of the chairman or any
two members, to be communicated by the clerk, and shall report to Council without
unnecessary delay upon matters referred to them. A majority of the members of a
committee shall constitute a quorum.
§ 2-79. Notice of meetings. [Code 1985, § 2-31]
It shall be the duty of the chairman of special committees of the Council to give notice
of the time and place of meeting to all members of the Town Council, the Town Clerk,
the Town Manager and all other persons known to be interested, in favor of or opposed
to, the particular matters proposed to be considered.
§ 2-80. Reports. [Code 1985, § 2-32]
Reports of special committees of the Council shall be in writing agreed to in committee
assembled and shall not be presented unless signed by a majority of the committee.
Copies of the report shall be available to each member. Documents referred to the
committee shall be returned with the report. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit the introduction of minority reports.
§ 2-81. Relief of special committee of further consideration of matter. [Code 1985,
§ 2-33]
Upon motion, the Council may by a majority vote relieve a special committee of further
consideration of a matter referred to it.
§ 2-82. Secretary. [Code 1985, § 2-34]
The clerk or one of his assistants shall act as secretary to special committees of the
Council and keep a record of the attendance and business transacted at their meetings.
§ 2-76 ADMINISTRATION § 2-83
2:11
§ 2-83. through § 2-95. (Reserved)
§ 2-83 ABINGDON CODE § 2-83
2:12
DIVISION 4
Ordinances and Resolutions
§ 2-96. Generally. [Code 1985, § 2-35; Ord. No. 2020.03.02.A, 3-2-2020]
§ 2-97. Introduction of ordinances. [Code 1985, § 2-36]
Ordinances may be introduced by a Council member and shall be in written form.
§ 2-98. Copies of proposed ordinances. [Code 1985, § 2-37]
The Town Clerk shall prepare copies of all proposed ordinances for distribution to all
members of the Council at the meeting at which the ordinance is to be introduced.
Whenever any member of the Council is absent from such meeting, the Town Clerk shall
arrange to have copies delivered to him.
§ 2-99. Filing of proposed ordinances, resolutions and documents; Clerk's list.
(a) Except in dealing with questions of parliamentary procedure the Council shall act
only by ordinance or resolution, and all ordinances except ordinances making
appropriations, or authorizing the contracting of indebtedness or issuance of bonds
or other evidences of debt, shall be confined to one subject, which shall be clearly
expressed in the title. Ordinances making appropriations or other obligations and
appropriating the money to be raised thereby shall be confined to those subjects
respectively.
(b) The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the Council shall be "Be it ordained
by the Council of the Town of Abingdon." An ordinance passed as an emergency
measure by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of its members present may be passed
without a second reading. Otherwise, all ordinances shall be passed only after two
readings of the ordinance at regular or special meetings not less than seven days
apart, unless the requirements of such second reading have been dispensed with by
the affirmative vote of four of the members of the Council. No ordinance or section
thereof shall be revised or amended by its title or section number only, but the new
ordinance shall contain the entire ordinance, or section as revised or amended. The
ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances or resolutions and
entered upon the journal of the proceedings of the Council and every ordinance or
resolution shall require, on final passage, the affirmative vote of at least three of the
members.
(c) All ordinances and resolutions passed by the Council shall be in effect from the date
of their passage, unless indicated otherwise in the ordinance or resolution.
(d) Every ordinance or resolution upon its final passage shall be recorded in a book
kept for that purpose, and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding
officer and the Town Clerk.
(e) Every member, when present, when a question is put, shall vote unless excused by
the Council. But no member who has any personal or financial interest in the result
of any ordinance or resolution before the Council shall vote thereon unless
permitted by law.
§ 2-96 ADMINISTRATION § 2-99
2:13
[Code 1985, § 2-38]
Every ordinance, resolution and document that comes before the Council for
consideration shall be filed with the Town Clerk before noon of the day on which the
Council meets. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to have ready for delivery by 3:00
p.m. on that day a brief statement setting forth by number and full descriptive title all
ordinances, resolutions and documents to come before the Council for consideration that
evening. This list shall be delivered to any Councilmember upon request after 3:00 p.m.
§ 2-100. Review of proposed ordinances by Attorney. [Code 1985, § 2-39]
All proposed ordinances shall be reviewed by the Town Attorney and bear his certificate
that they are in correct form.
§ 2-101. First reading. [Code 1985, § 2-40]
At a meeting of the Council, the first reading of an ordinance shall be for information. If
there be objections to it, the question shall be: "Shall the proposal be rejected?"
§ 2-102. Amendment generally. [Code 1985, § 2-41]
At a meeting of the Council, it shall be in order to amend an ordinance at any time. If
an ordinance, after its second reading, is amended, it shall be read as the first reading
thereof and laid over for further and final consideration; provided, that this shall not be
construed to apply to emergency measures.
§ 2-103. Repeal not to affect liabilities. [Code 1985, § 2-42]
No new ordinance or resolution shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance or
resolution as to any offense committed against the former ordinance or resolution or as to
any act done or penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or as to any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance or resolution, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance or resolution
takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far as
practicable, to the ordinances or resolutions in force at the time of such proceedings;
and if any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment be mitigated by any provision of the new
ordinance or resolution, such provision may, with the consent of the party affected, be
applied to any judgment pronounced after the new ordinance or resolution takes effect.
§ 2-104. Repeal not to revive former ordinance or resolution. [Code 1985, § 2-43]
When an ordinance or resolution which has repealed another ordinance or resolution
shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance or resolution shall not be revived without
express words to that effect, unless the ordinance or resolution repealing it is passed
during the same meeting.
§ 2-105. Numbering of ordinances. [Code 1985, § 2-44]
All ordinances of the Town shall, as enacted, be consecutively numbered in annual
series, the number of a particular ordinance to consist of the year in which passed and
§ 2-99 ABINGDON CODE § 2-105
2:14
the consecutive number of the ordinance.
§ 2-106. Filing of copies of ordinances with Clerk of County Circuit Court. [Code
1985, § 2-45]
Copies of ordinances passed by the Council shall be filed with the clerk of the circuit
court of the county only when provided by law.
§ 2-107. through § 2-125. (Reserved)
§ 2-105 ADMINISTRATION § 2-107
2:15

ARTICLE III
Officers And Employees
§ 2-126. Town Manager; Treasurer. [Code 1985, § 2-46(a); Ord. No. 2020.01.06.C,
1-6-2020]
At the first meeting in July following each Council election, or as soon thereafter as
practicable, the Council shall appoint a Town Manager who shall be the administrative
and executive head of the municipal government. They shall be chosen by the Council
without regard to political beliefs and solely upon the basis of their executive and
administrative qualifications. At the time of appointment they need not be a resident of
the Town or the commonwealth but during their tenure of office shall reside within the
Town. They shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall hold office during the
pleasure of the Council. They shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by
the Council by ordinance or resolution. They may be bonded as the Council may deem
necessary. During the absence or disability of the Town Manager or in case of a vacancy,
the Council may designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the
office during such absence, disability, or vacancy. No Councilmember shall receive such
appointment during the term for which they shall have been elected, nor within one
year after the expiration of the term. Neither the Council nor any of the members shall
direct or request the appointment, as hereinafter provided, of any person to office by
the Town Manager or by any of their subordinates. Except for the purpose of inquiry,
the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through
the Town Manager and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to
any subordinates of the Town Manager, either publicly or privately. The Town Manager
shall have the authority and it shall be their duty to:
(a) See that all laws, ordinances, resolutions and bylaws of the Council are faithfully
enforced.
(b) Appoint such officers and employees, as the Town Manager shall determine and
authorize as are necessary for the proper administration of the affairs of the Town
with the power to discipline and remove any such officer or employee.
(c) Attend all meetings of the Council, with the right to take part in the discussion, but
having no vote.
(d) Recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as they may deem
necessary or expedient.
(e) Make reports to the Council from time to time upon the affairs of the Town and to
keep the Council fully advised of the Town's financial condition and its future
financial needs.
(f) Prepare and submit to the Council a tentative budget for the next fiscal year as
provided by general law.
(g) Make all contracts on behalf of the Town pursuant to a resolution or an ordinance
of the Council and to act as Town purchasing agent.
(h) Supervise and control all encumbrances, expenditures and disbursements to ensure
that budget appropriations are not exceeded and to appoint, or upon resolution of
§ 2-126 ADMINISTRATION § 2-126
2:17
§ 2-127. Town Clerk. [Code 1985, § 2-46(b); Ord. No. 2020.01.06.C, 1-6-2020]
At the first meeting in July following each Council election, or as soon thereafter
as practicable, the Council shall appoint a Town Clerk, who also may be the Town
Manager, for an indefinite term. They shall receive such compensation as shall be
provided by the Council by ordinance or resolution. Their duties shall include the
following:
§ 2-128. Town Attorney. [Code 1985, § 2-46(c); Ord. No. 2020.01.06.C, 1-6-2020]
At the first meeting in July following each Council election, or as soon thereafter as
practicable, the Council shall appoint a Town Attorney, for an indefinite term, to be
the legal advisor of the Council, the Town Manager and of all departments, boards,
commissions and agencies of the Town in all matters affecting the interests of the Town
and shall upon request furnish a written opinion on any question of law involving their
respective official powers and duties.
the Council to act as, the Town Treasurer with the following duties:
(1) To be the collector and custodian of all funds belonging to the Town and the
school board and to deposit such funds in such depositories as may be
designated by the Council.
(2) To have custody of all investments and invested funds of the Town in a
fiduciary capacity.
(3) To disburse by check all monies payable by the Town or the school board. If
the treasurer be a person other than the Town Manager, all checks shall be
countersigned by the Town Manager.
(4) To protect the interests of the Town by withholding the payment of any claim
or demand by any person against the Town until any indebtedness or other
liability due from such person shall first have been settled and adjusted.
(5) To perform such other duties as may be prescribed or requested by Council.
(a) Be the custodian of the corporate seal.
(b) Give notice of Council meetings.
(c) Keep a journal of Council proceedings.
(d) Authenticate by their signature and record in full in a book kept for the purpose all
ordinances and resolutions.
(e) Serve as the commissioner of the revenue for the Town; prepare the land and
property books and extend assessments; and assess all license taxes required by this
Code and other ordinances of the Town.
(f) Prepare all statements for monies owed the Town for supplies or services rendered.
(g) Perform such other duties as may be prescribed or requested by Council.
§ 2-126 ABINGDON CODE § 2-129
2:18
§ 2-129. Fire Department. [Code 1985, § 2-46(d); Ord. No. 2020.01.06.C, 1-6-2020;
Ord. No. 2020.03.02.B, 3-2-2020]
The Town Manager or designee shall appoint fire department officers, as provided in
Code of Virginia, § 27-13, as may be amended, at times specified in the appointment.
§ 2-130. Enforcement of ordinances, resolutions, laws, rules. [Code 1985, § 2-47;
Ord. No. 2020.01.06.C, 1-6-2020]
All officers and employees of the Town shall enforce obedience to such statutes,
provisions of this Code or any ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations or orders
issued thereunder, as may relate to their regular duties, and any other statutes, provisions
of this Code or ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations or orders with whose
enforcement they are properly chargeable, by any measures provided therein, by the
proper report of any violation thereof and by instituting such proceedings as may be
necessary to such enforcement.
§ 2-131. Right of entry for purposes of inspection. [Code 1985, § 2-48; Ord. No.
2020.01.06.C, 1-6-2020]
Whenever any officer or employee of the Town is required or authorized by statute, the
provisions of this Code, any ordinance or resolution or rules and regulations or orders
issued thereunder, in order to carry out the duties thereunder, to enter any premises or
vehicle for the purpose of making an inspection thereof or of anything therein contained,
such officer or employee shall have the right to enter any such premises or vehicle at any
reasonable time in pursuance of such duties.
§ 2-132. through § 2-150. (Reserved)
§ 2-129 ADMINISTRATION § 2-132
2:19

ARTICLE IV
Finance
§ 2-151. Budget. [Code 1985, § 2-57]
§ 2-152. Independent audit. [Code 1985, § 2-59]
Not later than April 1 of each fiscal year the Council shall contract with qualified
certified public accountants, who, as of the end of the fiscal year, shall make an
independent audit of accounts and other evidence of financial transactions of the Town
government and shall mail a copy of their report to each member of the Town Council
and to the Town Manager. The auditors shall post-audit the books and documents kept
by the treasurer and any separate or subordinate accounts kept by any other office,
department or agency of the Town government.
§ 2-153. through § 2-175. (Reserved)
(a) The fiscal year of the Town shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of the
succeeding year.
(b) On or before April 1, the Town Manager shall submit to the Council separate
current expense budgets for the general operation of the Town government,
hereinafter referred to as the general fund budget, and for each utility operated by
the Town and a capital budget.
§ 2-151 ADMINISTRATION § 2-153
2:21

ARTICLE V
Procurement
§ 2-176. Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, Chapter 43. [Ord.
No. 2020.03.02.C, 3-2-2020]
In order that the Town shall obtain high quality goods and services at reasonable
cost, that all procurement procedures be conducted in a fair and impartial manner with
avoidance of any impropriety or appearance of impropriety, that all qualified vendors
have access to public business and that no offeror be arbitrarily or capriciously excluded,
the Town adopts, and incorporates by reference, the Virginia Public Procurement Act,
Virginia Code § 2.2-4300, et seq., as may be amended, to govern the Town's
procurement of goods and services.
The Town Manager or designee may establish purchasing procedures in writing that do
not require competitive sealed bids or competitive negotiation for certain contracts that
are consistent with the Virginia Public Procurement Act.
§ 2-177. through § 2-300. (Reserved)
§ 2-176 ADMINISTRATION § 2-177
2:23

ARTICLE VI
Planning Commission
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 2-301. Authority. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
§ 2-302. Definitions. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ANNUAL MEETING — The July meeting of the commission.
COMMISSION — The Abingdon Planning Commission.
COMMISSIONER — Member appointed to the commission by the Town Council.
GOVERNING BODY — The Town Council of the Town of Abingdon.
PLANNING DEPARTMENT — The Director of Planning and all professional and
technical staff under his/her supervision.
§ 2-303. Amendments. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
Any proposed amendment, repeal, or alteration, in whole or in part, of these bylaws shall
be presented in writing and placed on the public agenda of the Planning Commission for
a first time at a regular meeting of the commission. Such proposal may be considered
and amended at such meeting, but shall not be acted upon by the commission until
a subsequent regular meeting, or a special meeting called for that purpose. At such
subsequent meeting, the proposal shall be placed on the public agenda of the Planning
Commission a second time, shall be subject to further consideration and amendment, and
may then or later be acted upon.
§ 2-304. through § 2-325. (Reserved)
(a) State authority. The Abingdon Planning Commission operates under authority
delegated to municipalities under Title 15.2, Chapter 22, Code of Virginia (1950),
as amended.
(b) Town authority. The authority for the Planning Commission was established on
March 21, 1947, by ordinance of the Abingdon Town Council.
§ 2-301 ADMINISTRATION § 2-304
2:25

DIVISION 2
Powers and Duties
§ 2-326. Town provisions. [Ord. of 10-2-2006; Ord. No. 2020.05.18.A, 5-18-2020]
(a) Name. There is hereby created a Town Planning Commission, which commission
shall be known as the "Abingdon Town Planning Commission" which may be
referred to in this Code as the Planning Commission.
(b) Composition, qualifications and appointment of members. The Planning
Commission shall consist of not less than seven or more than 15 members, one of
whom may be a member of the Town Council. The remaining members, to be
known as appointed members, shall all be residents of the Town and at least half of
them shall be owners of real property, within the Town. All members shall be
appointed by the Town Council and must have knowledge and experience to make
decisions on questions of community growth and development.
(c) Terms of members; filling vacancies.
(1) With the exception of Council members, the appointed members shall be
appointed for terms of four years, beginning on July 1 and ending on June 30
of the relevant years. Any vacancy in membership may be filled by
appointment by the Town Council. Such appointment in case of an appointed
member shall be for the unexpired term. The term of any Council member
appointed to the Planning Commission shall be a two-year term. The Council
member may serve two consecutive terms.
(2) The Council may appoint any member for two consecutive terms.
(3) To fill a vacancy of an appointed member, the Council may follow this
procedure or any part thereof. The director of planning shall notify the Council
60 days prior to the end of the term or terms to expire. The Council shall not
appoint any member to the commission without having received a letter of
interest and qualification for membership from the candidate. The Council
shall fill any vacancy it may choose to fill, provided the commission shall
never have less than seven members.
(4) In reviewing the qualifications of current appointed members to the Planning
Commission, the Council shall consider the following:
a. Attendance and participation at meetings of the commission or its
committees;
b. Attendance at such annual training programs as the Town Council deems
appropriate and approves.
c. A witnessed knowledge of and experience in dealing with questions of
community growth and development.
(d) Compensation of members. All members of the Planning Commission shall serve
as such without compensation.
(e) Removal of members. Any appointed member of the Planning Commission may be
§ 2-326 ADMINISTRATION § 2-326
2:27
§ 2-327. Code of Virginia. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
The duties of the Planning Commission as set out in the Code of Virginia, are as follows:
§ 2-328. through § 2-350. (Reserved)
removed by the Town Council for malfeasance in office. Such removal may be
made only after a public hearing at which such member is given an opportunity to
appear and be heard on the charges against him/her. In addition, any member who
is absent for more than three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings and whose
absences are deemed unexcused, shall be requested by the Council to voluntarily
relinquish their position.
(f) Powers and duties. The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties
which are now or may hereafter be granted to or imposed upon such commissions
by the Code of Virginia and Town ordinances.
(a) Duties of commissions. To effectuate these bylaws, the local commission shall:
(1) Exercise general supervision of, and make regulations for, the administration
of its affairs;
(2) Prescribe rules pertaining to its investigations and hearings;
(3) Supervise its fiscal affairs and responsibilities, under rules and regulations as
prescribed;
(4) Keep a complete record of its proceedings; and be responsible for the custody
and preservation of its papers and documents;
(5) Make recommendations and a written annual report to the Town Council, to
be presented by the chairman, concerning the operation of the commission and
the status of planning within its jurisdiction;
(6) Prepare, publish and distribute reports, ordinances and other material relating
to its activities;
(7) Prepare and submit an annual budget in the manner prescribed by the
governing body of the county or municipality; and
(8) If deemed advisable, establish an advisory committee or committees.
§ 2-326 ABINGDON CODE § 2-328
2:28
DIVISION 3
Officers and Duties
§ 2-351. Officers. [Ord. of 10-2-2006; Ord. No. 2020.06.15.A, 6-15-2020]
The officers of the commission shall consist of a chairman, vice chairman, and secretary.
§ 2-352. Terms of office. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
Each of the officers shall be elected at the annual meeting of the commission to serve for
a term of one year, unless removed sooner by the commission, or until his/her successor
is elected. Any vacancy occurring in an office shall be filled for the unexpired term
by the commission at the regular monthly meeting following the occurrence of such
vacancy.
§ 2-353. Election. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
No later than the regular monthly meeting preceding the July annual meeting, the
chairman shall appoint a nominating committee of three members of the Planning
Commission to make nominations for the following years officers. Further nominations
may be made by any member at the meeting at which the election is held. Election of
officers shall be by voice vote and the roll call of those voting shall be recorded in the
minutes.
§ 2-354. Chairman. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the commission at which he or she is
present, and may participate in the discussion and may vote on all questions. He/she
shall be responsible for the implementation of the internal policies established and the
actions taken by the commission and shall have all of the powers and duties customarily
pertaining to the office of chairman; and shall perform such further duties as may be
assigned to him/her by the commission.
§ 2-355. Vice chairman. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
The vice chairman shall, in the event of the absence of the chairman, or of his or her
incapacity to perform any of the duties of his/her office or to exercise any of his or
her powers, perform such duties and possess such powers as are conferred upon the
chairman, and shall perform such other duties as may from time to time by assigned to
him or her by the chairman or by the commission.
§ 2-356. Secretary. [Ord. of 10-2-2006; Ord. No. 2020.06.15.A, 6-15-2020]
The secretary shall provide to the members notice of all regular and special meetings
of the commission, and shall attend all such meetings and keep a record of their
proceedings, which shall be a public record. Minutes shall be distributed before the next
succeeding regular meeting of the commission. In general, the secretary shall perform
all of the duties incident to the office of the secretary and such other duties as may from
time to time be assigned by the chairman or the commission. The secretary may, with the
permission of the commission, be Town staff who is not a member of the commission or
a member of the commission and delegate certain of his/her duties and responsibilities
§ 2-351 ADMINISTRATION § 2-356
2:29
to available Town staff.
§ 2-357. Execution of instruments. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
The chairman of the commission or the director of planning, upon authorization by the
commission, shall have power to sign in its behalf any document or other instrument
to be executed by the commission. Unless otherwise provided, he or she shall sign all
official correspondence of the commission.
§ 2-358. through § 2-375. (Reserved)
§ 2-356 ABINGDON CODE § 2-358
2:30
DIVISION 4
Meetings and Voting
§ 2-376. Regular meetings. [Ord. of 10-2-2006; Ord. of 10-8-2008]
§ 2-377. Special meetings. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
Special meetings may be called by the chairman at his discretion or by any two members
of the commission. The director of planning shall mail to all members, and citizens and
organizations requesting notification, at least 10 days in advance of a special meeting, a
written notice fixing the time and place of the meeting and the purpose thereof. Written
notice of a special meeting is not required if the time of the special meeting has been
fixed at a regular meeting or if all members are present at the special meeting or file a
written waiver of notice.
§ 2-378. Public hearings. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
The commission shall hold such public hearings as required by law. The purpose, time,
and place of such public hearings shall be published according to the Code of Virginia.
(a) Schedule.
(1) Regular monthly meetings of the commission shall be held at 5:30 p.m. on the
fourth Monday of each month in the municipal building or another suitable
public meeting place; and
(2) Should a conflict arise that would require rescheduling of the meeting date and
time, so as to secure a quorum for the meeting, that the director of planning
shall set the meeting date and time and notify each board member as soon as
is reasonably possible of the amended date and time.
(b) The agenda at all regular meetings shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Roll call;
(2) Approval of minutes of previous meeting;
(3) Public addresses;
(4) Unfinished business;
(5) New business; and
(6) Adjournment.
(c) All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public and records of the
commission shall be a public record as required by the Virginia Freedom of
Information Act. The commission may meet in closed sessions only for the
purposes stated in that Act.
§ 2-376 ADMINISTRATION § 2-379
2:31
§ 2-379. Quorum. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
A majority of the appointed members shall constitute a quorum.
§ 2-380. Voting. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
Each member of the commission shall be entitled to one vote on matters before the
commission and all members present shall vote on all matters unless prevented by law
from doing so. Further, each member shall adhere to the State and Local Government
Conflict of Interest Act under Title 2.2 Chapter 31 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as
amended. All actions of the commission shall require a majority vote of all members
present and voting.
§ 2-381. Parliamentary procedure. [Ord. of 10-2-2006]
In all matters of parliamentary procedure not specifically governed by these bylaws,
Roberts' Rules of Order shall apply.
§ 2-379 ABINGDON CODE § 2-381
2:32
ARTICLE VII
Boards, Commissions, And Committees
§ 2-382. Establishment generally. [Ord. No. 2020.01.06.A, 1-6-2020]
The Council has in the past established, and may in the future establish, by provisions
in this Code, certain boards, commissions, and committees. As set out hereafter in
this article, the Council does establish certain permanent boards, commissions, and
committees. The Council may also, from time to time, establish ad hoc committees to
serve specific purposes. If there is any conflict between this Article and other sections of
the Code, other law or internally adopted bylaws for boards, commission, committees,
then the other sections of the Code, other law or internally adopted bylaws shall control.
§ 2-383. Appointment and qualifications of members. [Ord. No. 2020.01.06.A,
1-6-2020]
§ 2-384. Notice of meetings. [Ord. No. 2020.01.06.A, 1-6-2020]
Unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance, all boards, commissions, and
committees, established by the Council, which are required, under the terms of the
Virginia Freedom of Information Act ("FOIA"), to hold public meetings, shall give
notice of regular or special meetings consistent with FOIA requirements.
(a) Members of boards, commissions, and committees established by the Council shall
be selected, after review of application to serve is completed and filed with the
clerk, by appointment by the Council upon an affirmative vote by at least four
members of the Council. All such nominations shall be required to complete an
application. In completing such application, it shall be recognized that the nominee
is willing to serve, if appointed. If so requested by any one member of the Council,
any such appointment shall be made only after the appointee has been interviewed
by the Town Manager and/or designee.
(b) Membership on boards, commissions, and committees shall, except where required
for a specific reason or an unusual circumstance, be given priority to Town
residents and/or affiliation to organizations and/or business located in the Town.
(c) Appointments by the Council to boards, commissions, and committees shall be
based upon qualifications acquired through experience, training and education,
interest, willingness to serve and dedication to promoting the best interests of the
Town and its residents. Membership shall not be restricted by race, creed, color, sex
or religion. It is the intent of Council to have a membership balance among the
various interests in the Town, and, it being the further intent of Council to achieve
balanced representation of the various neighborhoods and sections of the Town on
permanent boards, commissions, and committees to which Council makes
appointments, Council shall, in making appointments, give due consideration to the
geographic location of the proposed appointee's residence and existing geographic
representation on the board, commission, or committee to which appointment is
proposed.
§ 2-382 ADMINISTRATION § 2-385
2:33
§ 2-385. Vacation of office because of absences. [Ord. No. 2020.01.06.A, 1-6-2020]
Absence of any member from three consecutive regular meetings, or three out of five
regular meetings, of any permanent board, commission, or committee, absent exigent
circumstances which shall be approved by Council, shall vacate such member's position
on such board, commission, or committee. The chairman of each permanent board,
commission, or committee or his designee, who may be a staff person or other
nonmember of such board, commission, or committee, shall keep a record of attendance
of members at each meeting of such board, commission, or committee, and the chairman
shall make a written report to the Council of any occurrence of a member of such board,
commission, or committee absent from three consecutive regular meetings, or three
out of five regular meetings, together with any statement concerning the circumstances
surrounding such absences as may be obtained from such member.
§ 2-386. Removal of office. [Ord. No. 2020.01.06.A, 1-6-2020]
Any person appointed to a board, commission, or committee by the Council may be
removed by the Council for neglect of duty or violations of this article or any other
provision of law consistent with the requirements of law.
§ 2-387. Joint meetings with Town Council. [Ord. No. 2020.01.06.A, 1-6-2020]
It is expected that, from time to time, it will be beneficial for certain boards,
commissions, or committees established by the Council to meet with the Council, in joint
session. Each such board, commission, or committee, and the Council itself, may request
that there be a joint meeting held of the Council and any one of such entity consistent
with the requirements of law.
§ 2-388. Reports to Council; filing of minutes. [Ord. No. 2020.01.06.A, 1-6-2020]
(a) Each permanent board, commission or committee established by Council shall
make a written report to the Council within 60 days of the conclusion of each fiscal
year which shall summarize the work of such board, authority, commission or
committee for such fiscal year. Such report shall include therein a report on
attendance of its membership at regular and special meetings of such body for the
previous fiscal year. Such reports shall be filed with the Town Clerk and forwarded
to the members of Council by that office. Each board, authority, commission or
committee shall also file copies of its minutes with the Town Clerk, and copies of
such minutes shall be kept on file in that office for public inspection.
(b) Ad hoc committees and commissions appointed by Council shall make periodic
reports to the Council as to the progress of their assigned duties and responsibilities.
§ 2-385 ABINGDON CODE § 2-388
2:34
Chapter 6
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
§ 2-388 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 2-388
6:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 6-1. through § 6-25. (Reserved)
§ 6-1 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 6-1
6:3

ARTICLE II
Pool Rooms
§ 6-26. Presence of minors. [Code 1985, § 3-6]
§ 6-27. View of room to be unobstructed. [Code 1985, § 3-7]
Pool or billiard tables in a pool room or billiard parlor shall be kept in one open room
opening on a public street, with glass doors and windows and no partition or screens.
§ 6-28. through § 6-50. (Reserved)
(a) No person under 21 years of age shall frequent, play in or loiter in any public pool
room or billiard room operated in conjunction with any establishment licensed
under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Code of Virginia, tit. 4.1); nor shall any
person under 18 years of age frequent, play in or loiter in any other public pool
room or billiard room; nor shall the proprietor of any public pool room or billiard
room or his agent permit any person to frequent, play in or loiter in any such place
in violation of the foregoing provisions of this section.
(b) Any such person or any such proprietor or agent violating the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.
(c) The term public pool room, as used in this section, shall not be construed to include
an establishment in which not more than three miniature pool tables that operate on
the coin-in-the-slot principle are exclusively kept or played.
§ 6-26 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 6-28
6:5

ARTICLE III
Dancehalls
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 6-51. Definitions. [Ord. of 10-5-1987]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
PUBLIC DANCEHALL — Any place open to the general public where dancing is
permitted.
§ 6-52. License; administrative fee; tax. [Ord. of 10-5-1987]
§ 6-53. Regulations. [Ord. of 10-5-1987]
(a) Any person who operates or conducts a public dancehall in the Town shall obtain a
license from the Town Clerk and pay the tax therefor to the treasurer; however, no
license shall be issued until a permit is issued hereunder by Council.
(b) The following shall apply:
(1) Administrative fee, which shall accompany the application, as authorized by
the Town Council from time to time.
(2) License tax, as authorized by the Town Council from time to time.
(c) If the permit is revoked under Section 6-70 there shall be no refund of any fee under
this section.
(a) No dancehall shall remain open later than 12:00 midnight on Saturday night until
7:00 p.m. on Monday night, and during any other night no dancehall shall operate
as such except between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 1:00 a.m.
(b) Members of the Town police force shall have the right to enter such dancehall at all
reasonable hours to ensure that the peace and quiet of the Town is preserved.
(c) It shall be unlawful to indulge in or to permit any conduct at any public dance that
violates any state law or Town ordinance.
(d) The holder of a permit issued under this article shall provide adequate security
protection for the building grounds and parking area to ensure that there is no
excessive noise or disturbance to adjoining residents.
(e) No person shall be admitted to the dancehall or permitted to remain therein who
violates any state law or Town ordinance or who is in a drunken condition by reason
of alcohol or drugs.
(f) It shall be unlawful to conduct a dancehall in any hall or place which does not have
at least two exits of four feet or more or which is not in full compliance with the
§ 6-51 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 6-53
6:7
§ 6-54. Exemption. [Ord. of 10-5-1987]
Dances held for benevolent or charitable purposes, or when the same are conducted
under the auspices of religious, educational, civic or military organizations, are
exempted from the provisions of this article.
§ 6-55. Penalty. [Ord. of 10-5-1987]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3
misdemeanor.
§ 6-56. through § 6-65. (Reserved)
Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (BOCA).
§ 6-53 ABINGDON CODE § 6-56
6:8
DIVISION 2
Permit
§ 6-66. Required. [Ord. of 10-5-1987]
It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct a public dancehall in the Town without having
first obtained a permit therefor from the Town Council.
§ 6-67. Application. [Ord. of 10-5-1987]
Application for a permit required by this division shall be made to the Town Council
in writing and shall specify the location of the proposed dancehall and the name and
address of the person or organization sponsoring the same.
§ 6-68. Public hearing. [Ord. of 10-5-1987]
The Town Council will place the application for a permit under this division on its
agenda for the next regularly scheduled Council meeting for a public hearing. Notice of
the public hearing shall be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Town at least seven days prior to the hearing. The Council may request the Chief of
Police to make or cause to be made an investigation into the character of each applicant,
including any criminal violations, and report the results of such investigation to the
Town Council.
§ 6-69. Issuance. [Ord. of 10-5-1987]
The Council, in its discretion, may grant or refuse a dancehall permit, which permit shall
expire one year from the date of issuance. No such permit shall be issued to a person
who is not of good moral character, nor to a corporation or organization which is not
represented by a person of good moral character. No person shall be issued a permit for a
location that is not suitable for such permit. In considering the suitability of the location
for a dancehall, the Council shall consider:
§ 6-70. Revocation. [Ord. of 10-5-1987]
The permit issued under this division may be revoked by the Town Council at its
discretion for good cause for a violation of any provision of this article or regulations
of the Town. Before revoking the permit, five days' notice of intent to do so, together
with the reason or reasons therefor, showing the date, time and place of the revocation
hearing, shall be mailed by registered mail to the permit holder at his last known address.
The Council shall hear evidence of the permittee as well as that of complainants before
making a decision on revocation.
(a) Its proximity to church, synagogue, hospital, school, playground, recreational
facilities and whether it will adversely affect or interfere with the normal and
orderly conduct of the same.
(b) Whether the place to be occupied by the applicant is so situated with respect to any
residence or residential area so that the dancehall will not adversely affect real
property values or substantially interfere with the usual peace, tranquility or
enjoyment of the residence or residential area.
§ 6-66 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS § 6-70
6:9

Chapter 10
ANIMALS
§ 6-70 ANIMALS § 6-70
10:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 10-1. Diseased animals. [Code 1985, § 4-4]
§ 10-2. Bees. [Code 1985, § 4-5]
No person shall keep, other than on his own premises, any hive of bees within 100 feet
of any inhabited or occupied residence, hospital, sanatorium, public eating place, school,
church, office building, store, hotel, apartment house, rooming house or any other place
of habitation.
§ 10-3. through § 10-25. (Reserved)
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor in the Town any animal
suffering or afflicted with any infectious or contagious disease, after knowledge of
the condition of such animal.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (a) of this section, any dog or cat
showing active signs of rabies or suspected of having rabies shall be confined as
required by law.
§ 10-1 ANIMALS § 10-3
10:3

ARTICLE II
Animals Running At Large
§ 10-26. Livestock. [Code 1985, § 4-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any livestock to run at large in the Town or
to obstruct the streets in any manner.
§ 10-27. Fowl. [Code 1985, § 4-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town to permit fowl kept by him or under his
control to stray or escape from his premises onto the streets or sidewalks or upon the
property of others.
§ 10-28. Vicious animals. [Code 1985, § 4-3]
§ 10-29. Dogs. [Code 1985, § 4-3.1]
§ 10-30. through § 10-50. (Reserved)
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town to keep any vicious animal unless
such vicious animal be confined.
(b) As used in this section, "vicious animal" means an animal that has bitten, attacked
or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal.
(a) In accordance with Section 2.1 of the Town Charter, it is hereby prohibited for dogs
to run at large within the corporate limits.
(b) For the purposes of this section, a dog shall be deemed to run at large while running,
roaming or self-hunting off the property of its owner or custodian, and not under its
owner's or custodian's immediate control. It shall be the duty of the county animal
warden to enforce the provisions of this section. Any person whose dog is found to
be running at large shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this section
and shall be punished in accordance with the penalties prescribed under Section
4-17(c) of the County Code.
§ 10-26 ANIMALS § 10-30
10:5

ARTICLE III
Animal Waste Disposal
§ 10-51. Animal waste disposal. [Ord. of 2-5-2007; Ord. of 8-1-2011]
(a) Any person who is the owner, possessor or custodian of any animal shall
immediately collect, remove and dispose of all feces left by such animal on any
public property or on any private property not owned and/or lawfully occupied by
such person.
(b) Any person, business or special event/parade participant using animals properly for
business or special event purposes upon Town properties (such as horse-drawn
wagons, carts or carriages) shall make provisions to equip the animal and/or
apparatus with an appropriate and effective manure-catching device, thereby
preventing the dropping and spread of animal waste on public properties, with
special exception made in accordance with the Virginia Creeper Trail, Section
54-53 and Section 54-76 of the Code of Ordinances for the Town of Abingdon,
Virginia.
(c) Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4
misdemeanor.
§ 10-51 ANIMALS § 10-51
10:7

Chapter 14
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
§ 10-51 BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS § 10-51
14:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 14-1. Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. [Ord. of 6-3-2013]
Volumes I, II and III of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, current edition
as adopted by the Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development, shall
control all matters concerning the design, construction, alteration addition, enlargement,
repair, removal, demolition, conversion, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of
buildings, and all other functions which pertain to the installation of systems vital to
buildings and structures in their service equipment as defined by the Virginia Uniform
Statewide Building Code, and shall apply to buildings or other structures in the Town.
§ 14-2. Code officials. [Ord. of 6-3-2013]
The building official, as appointed by the Town Manager, shall be code official
responsible for inspections, under, enforcement of and administration of, all provisions
of part I and II of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. The building official
is hereby authorized to delegate authority to other qualified persons to inspect under, and
enforce or administer, all of the provisions of part I and II of the building code.
The maintenance code official, as appointed by the Town Manager, shall be the code
official responsible for inspections under, and enforcement and administration of, those
provisions of part III of the Virginia Statewide Building Code relating to the
maintenance and repair of existing structures and equipment, as the same may be
amended from time to time. The maintenance code official is hereby authorized to
delegate authority to other qualified persons to inspect under, and enforce or administer,
part III of the building code.
§ 14-3. Appeals. [Ord. of 6-3-2013]
Appeals from decisions of a code official shall be made to the local board of building
code appeals in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Virginia Uniform
Statewide Building Code.
§ 14-4. Penalties. [Ord. of 6-3-2013]
Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person who shall violate any provisions of
this chapter or any provision of the building code adopted by Section 14-1, or who shall
fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter
or repair a building or structure or do any other work in and about a building or structure
in violation of an approved plan or directive of the building official or the building
maintenance code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of
such code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable in accordance with the Code
of Virginia, § 36-106.
§ 14-5. through § 14-25. (Reserved)
§ 14-1 BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS § 14-5
14:3

ARTICLE II
Housing Numbers
§ 14-26. Uniform system adopted. [Code 1985, § 5-7; Ord. of 6-3-2013]
A uniform system of numbering properties and buildings, as shown on the map identified
by the title "Abingdon, Virginia — Property Numbering System," which is on file in the
office of the building official, is hereby adopted for use in the Town. All properties or
parcels of land in the Town shall be identified by reference to such uniform numbering
system.
§ 14-27. Enforcement of article. [Code 1985, § 5-6; Ord. of 6-3-2013]
The building official shall be responsible for maintaining the Town numbering system.
In the performance of this duty, he shall be guided by the provisions of this article.
§ 14-28. Grid lines identified. [Code 1985, § 5-8; Ord. of 6-3-2013]
Any line shown on the map adopted under this article, at which a new series of numbers,
by hundreds, begins shall be called a grid line.
§ 14-29. Numbering according to frontage. [Code 1985, § 5-9; Ord. of 6-3-2013]
A separate number shall be assigned for each 20 feet of frontage of property, except
where grid lines are more than 1,000 feet apart, in which case a maximum of 26 feet
shall be allowed.
§ 14-30. Determination of building numbers. [Code 1985, § 5-10; Ord. of
6-3-2013]
§ 14-31. Assignment of odd and even numbers. [Code 1985, § 5-11; Ord. of
6-3-2013]
All properties fronting on the north and west sides of streets shall be assigned odd
numbers, and all properties on the south and east sides of streets shall be assigned even
numbers.
(a) The number of any building or of each separate front entrance shall be determined
by the distance between the entrance and the first grid line lying on the axis side of
that entrance.
(b) Each principal building shall bear the number assigned to the frontage on which the
front entrance of such building is located; provided, that where more than one
business or family dwelling unit occupies a principal building, each separate front
entrance of such building shall bear a separate number; and provided, that where an
outbuilding on the lot of the principal building is occupied by a business or family
dwelling unit, the front entrance of each such outbuilding shall bear a separate
number on the frontage on which such front entrance is located; and provided, that
the building official may vary the requirements of this section when strict
compliance therewith would work an undue hardship on a property owner.
§ 14-26 BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS § 14-32
14:5
§ 14-32. Record of numbers assigned. [Code 1985, § 5-12; Ord. of 6-3-2013]
There shall be kept in the office of the building official a record of all numbers assigned
under this article.
§ 14-33. Issuance of numerals by Building Official. [Code 1985, § 5-13; Ord. of
6-3-2013]
The building official shall issue to any property owner in the Town, without charge, upon
request, a set of numerals for each building or separate front entrance to such building.
He shall issue to such person only such numerals as conform to the number assigned to
such building under the provisions of this article. He shall issue additional numerals in
accord with the official numbering system whenever property has been subdivided or a
new front entrance opened.
§ 14-34. Posting of numerals. [Code 1985, § 5-14; Ord. of 6-3-2013]
Numerals indicating the official number for each building or front entrance as required
by this article shall be posted in such manner as to be visible from the street on which
the property fronts.
§ 14-35. Use of ornamental numerals. [Code 1985, § 5-15; Ord. of 6-3-2013]
Ornamental numbers may be substituted for those issued by the building official if such
numerals are a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of
one-half inch (12.7 mm).
§ 14-36. through § 14-50. (Reserved)
§ 14-32 ABINGDON CODE § 14-36
14:6
ARTICLE III
Spot Blight Abatement
§ 14-51. Purpose. [Amd. of 8-4-2003; Ord. of 6-3-2013]
This article is created in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 36-49.1:1, as amended, for
the general purpose providing the Town with the power to hold, clear, repair, manage,
dispose, or acquire blighted property as defined herein.
§ 14-52. Definitions. [Amd. of 8-4-2003; Ord. of 6-3-2013]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
BLIGHTED PROPERTY — A building or buildings, which by reason of dilapidation,
obsolescence, overcrowding, faulty arrangement or design, lack of ventilation, light or
sanitary facilities, excessive land coverage, deleterious land use or obsolete layout, or
any combination of these or other factors, are detrimental to the safety, health, morals or
welfare of the community.
§ 14-53. Preliminary determination of blight. [Amd. of 8-4-2003; Ord. of
6-3-2013]
§ 14-54. Hearing before Planning Commission. [Amd. of 8-4-2003; Ord. of
6-3-2013]
(a) The Town Manager shall make a preliminary determination that a property is
blighted within the meaning of this article. Once determined to be blighted, the
Town Manager shall provide written notice to the owner of said property that a
determination of blight has been made. Within any such notice the Town Manager
shall describe the condition of the property and the reason for making the
determination that the property is blighted.
(b) The owner of the property determined to be blighted shall have 30 days from the
date of the notice from the Town Manager to present a plan to take measures to cure
or eliminate the conditions upon which the preliminary determination of blight was
made. The owner's plan to cure or eliminate the blight, if accepted by the Town
Manager, shall be performed in such reasonable time period as the Town manger,
in his discretion, deems necessary under the circumstances.
(a) Procedure. If the owner of a property that has been preliminarily determined to be
blighted fails to timely present the plan set forth above, or fails to carry out a plan
to cure or eliminate the blight within the time period acceptable by the Town
Manager, the Town Manager may request that the Planning Commission conduct a
public hearing and make findings and recommendations regarding the property. If
such a hearing is requested, the Town Manager shall present to the Commission a
plan for the repair, disposal or acquisition of the property.
(b) Notice of public hearing.
(1) Not less than three weeks prior to the public hearing before the Planning
§ 14-51 BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS § 14-54
14:7
§ 14-55. Hearing before Town Council. [Amd. of 8-4-2003; Ord. of 6-3-2013]
Commission, the Town Manager shall cause a notice of the date, time, place
and purpose of the hearing to be sent by regular and certified mail, to the
following: the owner of the blighted property at the owner's last known address
or to the agent designated by him for receipt of service of notices concerning
the payment of real estate taxes; each of the abutting property owners in
each direction, including those property owners immediately across the street
or road from the blighted property; and to the representative neighborhood
association, if any, for the immediate area. Within said notice the Town
Manager shall include the plan that he has prepared on behalf of the Town for
the repair, disposal or acquisition of the blighted property.
(2) Notice of the hearing shall also be published at least twice, with not less than
six days elapsing between the first and second publication in the newspaper
published or having general circulation in the locality in which the property is
located. The notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing at which
persons affected may appear and present their views, not less than six days nor
more than 21 days after the second newspaper publication.
(3) Notice of the hearing shall also be posted on the blighted property.
(c) Planning Commission findings.
(1) Following the public hearing the Planning Commission shall make the
following determinations:
a. Whether the owner has failed to cure the blight or present a reasonable
plan to do so;
b. Whether the property is blighted;
c. Whether the plan for repair or other disposition of the property is in
accordance with the locally adopted comprehensive plan, zoning
ordinances, and other applicable land use regulations; and
d. Whether the property is located within an area listed on the National
Register of Historic Places. If so, the Planning Commission shall consult
with the Architectural Review Board regarding the appropriateness of the
repair or other disposition of the blighted property.
(2) The Planning Commission shall report its findings to the Town Council for
final determination.
(a) Action on Planning Commission findings. Upon receipt by the Town Council of the
findings and recommendations of the Planning Commission, the Council may, after
an advertised public hearing, affirm, modify or reject the said findings and
recommendations. If the repair, disposal or acquisition of the property is approved
by the Council, the Town Manager shall carry out the repair, disposal or acquisition
in accordance with the approved plan.
(b) Displacement of residents. Unless specifically authorized under Code of Virginia,
tit. 36, as amended, the Town Council shall not approve any plan for acquisition of
§ 14-54 ABINGDON CODE § 14-55
14:8
§ 14-56. Recovery of costs and lien on property. [Amd. of 8-4-2003; Ord. of
6-3-2013]
§ 14-57. Other statutes and ordinances. [Amd. of 8-4-2003; Ord. of 6-3-2013]
The provisions of this article shall be cumulative and shall be in addition to all other
remedies available to the Town for spot blight abatement that are authorized by law.
Nothing in this article should be construed to relieve the owner of blighted property
from complying with other applicable statutes and ordinances relating to the use,
development, or maintenance of property.
blighted property that is occupied for personal residential purposes if the plan
will result in the displacement of any person or persons living on the premises of
the blighted property. However, this shall not apply to the acquisitions under an
approved plan where the property has been condemned for human habitation for
more than one year. In exercising its powers of eminent domain, in accordance
with Code of Virginia, tit. 25, as amended, the Town may provide for temporary
relocation of any person living in the blighted property provided that the relocation
is within the financial means of such person.
(a) Costs. The Town may assess and recover against the owner of the blighted property
all costs, including an administrative fee of $100, that it expends or incurs in
repairing the property to bring it into compliance with applicable building codes
and/or for all costs expended or incurred in the disposal of the property under the
Town Council's approved plan. Costs shall be assessed against the record owner of
the property at the time of the repair and/or disposal. [Amended 5-20-2021 by Ord.
No. 2021.05.03.B]
(b) Lien on property. The Town shall have a lien, on any blighted property on which it
repairs and/or disposes of under the Town Council's approved plan, for all costs that
it expends or incurs in repairing or disposing of the property. All liens asserted
herein shall be placed of record in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of
Washington County, and shall be subordinate to all prior recorded liens. If the
governing body through eminent domain acquires the blighted property, the costs
of repair may be recovered from the proceeds of sale when the Town sells or
disposes of the property.
§ 14-55 BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS § 14-57
14:9

Chapter 18
BUSINESSES
§ 14-57 BUSINESSES § 14-57
18:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 18-1. through § 18-25. (Reserved)
§ 18-1 BUSINESSES § 18-1
18:3

ARTICLE II
Licenses
§ 18-26. Conflicting ordinances; applicability. [Ord. of 1-6-19972
]
Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the commonwealth, and
notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by this governing
body, whether or not compiled in the Town Code, to the extent of any conflict, the
following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of
licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and
upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within this locality.
§ 18-27. Definitions. [Ord. of 1-6-1997]
(a) For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise required by the context:
AFFILIATED GROUP —
One or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock
ownership with a common parent corporation, which is an includable
corporation if:
Stock possessing at least 80% of the voting power of all classes of stock
and at least 80% of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the
includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned
directly by one or more of the other includable corporations; and
a.
The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least
80% of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80% of
each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other includable
corporations. As used in this subsection, the term "stock" does not include
nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The
term "includable corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated
group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term
"receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income.
b.
(1)
Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates
or trusts own stock possessing:
At least 80% of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock
entitled to vote or at least 80% of the total value of shares of all classes of
the stock of each corporation; and
a.
More than 50% of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock
entitled to vote or more than 50% of the total value of shares of all classes
of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of
each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with
respect to each such corporation.
b.
(2)
(3) When one or more of the includable corporations, including the common
2. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former §§ 18-26 — 18-35, which contained similar provisions and derived
from §§ 9-1 — 9-6, 9-8, 9-9, 9-11, and 9-12 of the 1985 Code.
§ 18-26 BUSINESSES § 18-27
18:5
ASSESSMENT — A determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to
which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional
or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made
pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer
upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall
be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is
delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing
official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall
be deemed made when a return is filed or, if no return is required, when the tax
is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for
the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day
specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be.
ASSESSOR or ASSESSING OFFICIAL — The Town Manager.
BASE YEAR — The calendar year preceding the license year, except for
contractors subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715, and except
for beginning businesses which shall use their probable gross receipts for the
current license year as the basis for their license tax.
BUSINESS — A course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of
the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies
a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated
transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following
acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business:
CONTRACTOR — Shall have the meaning prescribed in Code of Virginia,
§ 58.1-3714.B, as amended, whether such work is done or offered to be done by
day labor, general contract or subcontract.
DEFINITE PLACE OF BUSINESS — An office or a location at which occurs
a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more. A
definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location
leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis,
and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be
a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained
elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant.
FINANCIAL SERVICES —
parent corporation, is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this
definition shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership
voting rights, as is appropriate to the context.
Advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in
a particular business; or
(1)
Filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons
engaged in a trade or business.
(2)
The buying, selling, handling, managing, investing, and providing of advice
regarding money, credit, securities and other investments and shall include the
service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker
or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange,
(1)
§ 18-27 ABINGDON CODE § 18-27
18:6
GROSS RECEIPTS — The whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed
privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of Code of
Virginia, tit. 58.1, ch. 37.
LICENSE YEAR — The calendar year for which a license is issued for the
privilege of engaging in business.
unless such service is otherwise provided for in this chapter.
BROKER — An agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks,
bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis.
a.
COMMODITY — Staples, such as wool, cotton, etc., which are traded
on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures.
b.
DEALER — Any person engaged in the business of buying and selling
securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any
person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either
individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular
business.
c.
SECURITY — For purposes of this article, shall have the same meaning
as in the Securities Act (Code of Virginia, § 13.1-501 et seq.) or in similar
laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities.
d.
Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation,
the following:
Buying installment receivables
Chattel mortgage financing
Consumer financing
Credit card services
*Credit unions
Factors
Financing accounts receivable
Industrial loan companies
Installment financing
Inventory financing
Loan or mortgage brokers
Loan or mortgage companies
Safety deposit box companies
Security and commodity brokers and services
Stockbroker
Working capital financing
* Federal credit unions are not subject to state or local license taxation under
the Federal Credit Union Act, 12 U.S.C. 1768, are hereby declared exempt.
(2)
§ 18-27 BUSINESSES § 18-27
18:7
PERSONAL SERVICES — Rendering for compensation any repair, personal,
business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or
professional service" under this article, or rendered in any other business or
occupation not specifically classified in this article unless exempted from local
license tax by Code of Virginia, tit. 58.1.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Services performed by architects, attorneys-atlaw, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons,
veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing
with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical
or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations,
and no others, as the state department of taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines
promulgated pursuant to Code of Virginia § 58.1-3701. The department shall
identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge
of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of
specialized instruction and study, is used by its practical application to the affairs
of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests
or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The word "profession"
implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and
the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit.
PURCHASES — All goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each
definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include
the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by
any wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. Such merchant
may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares
and merchandise if it cannot determine or chooses not to disclose the cost of
manufacture.
REAL ESTATE SERVICES — Rendering a service for compensation as lessor,
buyer, seller, agent, or broker and providing a real estate service, unless the service
is otherwise specifically provided for in this article, and such services include, but
are not limited to, the following:
Appraisers of real estate
Escrow agents, real estate
Fiduciaries, real estate
Lessors of real property
Real estate agents, brokers and managers
Real estate selling agents
Rental agents for real estate
RETAILER or RETAIL MERCHANT — Any person or merchant who sells goods,
wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose
other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to
institutional, commercial and industrial users.
COMMISSION MERCHANT — Any person buying or selling any kind of
goods, wares, or merchandise for another on commission.
(1)
§ 18-27 ABINGDON CODE § 18-27
18:8
PEDDLER — Any person who carries from place to place any goods, wares,
or merchandise and offers to sell or actually sells and delivers at the same
time. Any person who does not keep a regular place of business, whether it be
a house or a vacant lot or elsewhere, with regular business hours, but at that
place offers to sell goods, wares, and merchandise, is a peddler. Any person
who keeps a regular place of business, with regular business hours at the same
place, who other than at that regular place of business, personally or through
agents, offers for sale or sells and, at the time of such offering for sale, delivers
goods, wares and merchandise is a peddler.
(1)
ITINERANT MERCHANT — Any person who engages in, does or transacts
any temporary or transient business in the state, either in one locality or in
traveling from place to place in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise,
and who for that purpose of carrying on such business hires, leases, uses or
occupies any building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, car, boat or public
room or any part thereof, including rooms in hotels, lodging houses, or houses
of private entertainment, or in any street, alley, or public place in any city or
Town, or in any public road in any county, for a period of less than one year,
for the exhibition of or sale of such goods, wares, or merchandise.
A charitable institution or other not-for-profit organization that engages
in the business of buying and selling merchandise may be subject to
a local license tax as a retail or wholesale merchant, even though the
proceeds are subsequently used for charitable purposes.
a.
A lunch counter operated by an organization open to members only,
the proceeds from which are used to maintain the organization, may be
subject to a local license tax.
b.
Any hotel, motel, boardinghouse, or lodging house which also furnishes
or sells food or merchandise for compensation is engaged in retail sales
as to the sales of the food or merchandise.
c.
A person is not subject to local license tax if his business in this state
is limited solely to the solicitation of orders by catalogs mailed from
outside this state to mail-order buyers in this state and who fills orders
from outside this state; however, if the catalogs are distributed by a state
resident by mail or in person or if the person engaged in the mail-order
business has a definite place of business in this state at which mail orders
are received or filled, the mail order business may be treated the same as
any other retail or wholesale business for purposes of local license taxes.
d.
Any person who merely fills prescriptions for or fits corrective lenses
and eyeglass frames is a retail merchant; however, any practitioner who
examines eyes is engaged in rendering a professional service.
e.
Any practitioner of a profession who sells goods, wares, or merchandise
in connection with the practice of the profession may be engaged in
making retail sales depending on the nature of the products sold and the
service performed. Examples in this area are as follows:
1. A medical doctor who engages in the sale of drugs or other goods,
f.
(2)
§ 18-27 BUSINESSES § 18-27
18:9
§ 18-28. License required. [Ord. of 1-6-1997]
SERVICES — Things purchased by a customer which do not have physical
characteristics, or which are not goods, wares, or merchandise.
WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE MERCHANT — Any person or merchant who
sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the
goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for
sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial, government and industrial
users which, because of the quantity, price, or other terms, indicate that they are
consistent with sales at wholesale.
wares or merchandise as well as the practice of medicine is a
merchant as to those sales; however, a medical doctor is not a
merchant as to the drugs used in giving an immunization to a patient.
A chiropodist who sells shoes in connection with his practice is a
retail merchant as to such sales.
2.
A job printer is a manufacturer and is engaged in either retail or wholesale
sales as to the sales of the items printed.
g.
The sales price alone is not determinative of whether the sale is at retail
or wholesale. The fact that a person sells goods, wares or merchandise
at wholesale prices, at cost, or at less than cost does not prevent the
person from being classified as a retail merchant if the sales fall within he
definition of a retail sale.
h.
Any person who purchases rough stone already cut and who then
polishes, glazes and cuts lettering in the stone is not a manufacturer and
is engaged in either retail or wholesale sales.
i.
Any person who sells goods at retail through a commission merchant may
be held liable for a local license tax as to such sales.
j.
(a) Conditions for application; separate licenses.
(1) Every person engaging within the Town in any business, trade, profession,
occupation or calling (collectively hereinafter "a business") as defined in this
article, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license for each
such business if:
a. Such person maintains a definite place of business within the Town;
b. Such person does not maintain a definite office anywhere but does
maintain an abode in the Town, which abode, for the purposes of this
article, shall be deemed a definite place of business; or
c. There is no definite place of business but such person operates
amusement machines; is engaged as a peddler or itinerant merchant,
carnival or circus as specified in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3717,
58.1-3718, or 58.1-3728, respectively; or is a contractor subject to Code
of Virginia, § 58.1-3715; or is a public service corporation subject to
§ 18-27 ABINGDON CODE § 18-28
18:10
Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731.
(2) A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business. A
person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the
same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses
and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied:
a. Each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied
any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the
ordinances of the Town;
b. All of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if
subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all
businesses and professions at the highest rate; and
c. The taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the Town Manager
may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their
gross receipts.
(3) Exclusions:
a. No license tax shall be imposed upon or collected from any person for
selling farm or domestic or nursery products, ornamental or otherwise, or
for the planting of nursery products as an incident to the sale thereof,
provided such products are grown or produced by such person.
b. No license tax shall be required for the privilege or right of printing or
publishing any newspaper or for the privilege or right of operating or
conducting any radio or television broadcasting station.
c. No license tax shall be required for the business of renting, as the owner
of such property, real property, other than hotels, motels, motor lodges,
auto courts, tourist courts, trailer parks, lodging houses, rooming houses,
and boardinghouses.
d. No license tax shall be required for the manufacturing and selling of
goods, wares, or merchandise at the place of manufacture.
(b) Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning
business, if he was not subject to licensing in the Town on or before January 1 of
the license year, or no later than March 1 of the current license year if he had been
issued a license for the preceding license year. The application shall be on forms
prescribed by the Town Manager.
Every application for a license shall have incorporated therein or annexed thereto
the affidavit of the applicant to the effect that the statements contained in the
application are true. If the applicant is an individual, the affidavit must be made
by him, if by one of the members and, if a corporation, by the officer having
knowledge of the correctness of the statements made in the application.
(c) The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on
gross receipts. If the tax is measured by the gross receipts of the business, the tax
shall be paid on or before March 1 of each calendar year.
§ 18-28 BUSINESSES § 18-28
18:11
(d) The Town Manager may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 90 days, in which
to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause. The extension shall be
conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate
tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension, together
with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with
the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of 10%
of the portion paid after the due date.
(e) A penalty of 10% of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application
or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty
shall be imposed by the Town Manager if both the application and payment are late;
however, both penalties may be assessed if the Town Manager determines that the
taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional
tax made by the Town Manager, if the application and, if applicable, the return were
made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud,
reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late
payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the
Town Manager is not paid within 30 days, the Town Manager may impose a 10%
late payment penalty. The penalties shall not be imposed or, if imposed, shall be
abated by the official who assessed them, if the failure to file or pay was not the
fault of the taxpayer. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show
that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control.
(1) "Acted responsibly" means that:
a. The taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person
would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing
obligations for the business; and
b. The taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure,
such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting
to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment
once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment
was removed or the failure discovered.
(2) "Events beyond the taxpayer's control" include, but are not limited to, the
unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence
(e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility
for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon
erroneous written information from the Town Manager, who was aware of the
relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the
erroneous information.
(f) Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the
date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an
assessment of additional or omitted tax by the Town Manager is found to be
erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the
assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded, together with interest on the
refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall
be paid on the refund of any tax paid under this article from the date of payment or
due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other
§ 18-28 ABINGDON CODE § 18-28
18:12
§ 18-29. Situs of gross receipts. [Ord. of 1-6-1997]
reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under Code of
Virginia, § 58.1-3916.
No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability
at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on
a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment
is made not more than 30 days from the date of the payment that created the refund,
or the due date of the tax, whichever is later.
(g) Any person who knowingly falsifies gross receipts or other material fact to obtain a
license as required herein for an amount less than that which should be paid
hereunder shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(h) As one of the means of ascertaining the amount of any license tax, the Town
Manager may propound interrogatories to each applicant and use such other
evidence as he may procure. Such interrogatories shall be answered under oath, and
any applicant refusing to answer such interrogatories under oath shall be fined not
less than $50 nor more than $100 for each offense.
(a) General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this article is measured by gross
receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross
receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of
business within the Town. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite
place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts
shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are
initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different
classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of
business or offices as follows:
(1) The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of
business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not
performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business
from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is
subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715.
(2) The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite
place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales
solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the
definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed
or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license
tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the
definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased
goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is
subject to license tax in two or more localities and who is subject to multiple
taxation because the localities use different measures may apply to the
department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of
purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality.
§ 18-28 BUSINESSES § 18-29
18:13
§ 18-30. Limitations and extensions. [Ord. of 1-6-1997]
(3) The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be
attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal
property is rented, or if the property is not rented from any definite place of
business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such
property is managed.
(4) The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the
definite place of business at which the services are performed, or if not
performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business
from which the services are directed or controlled.
(b) Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it
is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross
receipts should be attributed under the general rule (and the affected jurisdictions
are unable to reach an apportionment agreement), except as to circumstances set
forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3709, the gross receipts of the business shall be
apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross
receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some
activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from,
such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of
business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to the Town solely because
the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the
definite place of business in such other jurisdiction.
(c) Agreements. The Town Manager may enter into agreements with any other political
subdivision of the state concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be
apportioned among definite places of business; however, the sum of the gross
receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts
attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon
being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is
fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in
which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or
is likely to, result in taxes on more than 100% of its gross receipts from all locations
in the affected jurisdictions, the Town Manager shall make a good faith effort to
reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved.
When localities cannot reach an agreement over how gross receipts from a given
business should be apportioned among them, the taxpayer or assessing official may
seek an advisory opinion from the department of taxation. In cases where the
taxpayer is able to demonstrate to a court that double assessment has occurred, the
court shall enter such orders pending resolution of the litigation as are necessary to
ensure that the taxpayer is not required to pay multiple assessments.
(a) Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any
license tax imposed pursuant to this article, both the Town Manager and the
taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be
assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period
so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before
the expiration of the period previously agreed upon.
§ 18-29 ABINGDON CODE § 18-30
18:14
§ 18-31. Appeals and rulings. [Ord. of 1-6-1997]
(b) Notwithstanding Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3903, the Town Manager shall assess the
local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the
current license year and the six preceding years (this applies to only 1997 and later;
prior to 1997 is current plus three preceding years).
(c) The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period
specified in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3940, two years after the date of assessment if
the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this subsection, two years
after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed
pursuant to subsections 18-31(b) or 18-31(d) of this article, or two years after the
final decision in a court application pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984, or
similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later.
(a) Any person assessed with a licensing tax under this article as the result of an audit
may apply within 90 days from the date of the assessment to the Town Manager for
a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and
sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in
the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts
relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The Town Manager may hold a conference
with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional
information and documents, further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for
a proper and equitable determination of the applications. The assessment shall be
deemed prima facie correct. The Town Manager shall undertake a full review of the
taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position.
Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written
explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to
be followed in the Town (e.g., the name and address to which an application should
be directed).
(b) Provided an application is made within 90 days of an assessment, collection activity
shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the Town Manager,
unless the Town Manager determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay
or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a
reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection 18-28(f) of this article, but no further penalty shall be imposed while
collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding
that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires to:
(1) Depart quickly from the locality;
(2) Remove his property therefrom;
(3) Conceal himself or his property therein; or
(4) Do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially
ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question.
(c) Any person assessed with a license tax under this article as a result of an audit may
apply within 90 days of the determination by the Town Manager on an application
pursuant to Subsection 18-31(a) above to the tax commissioner for a correction of
§ 18-30 BUSINESSES § 18-31
18:15
§ 18-32. Recordkeeping and audits. [Ord. of 1-6-1997]
Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to
enable the Town Manager to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years
assessable and to enable the Town Manager to ascertain what is the correct amount of
tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts, and
other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the Town Manager
in order to allow the Town Manager to establish whether a particular receipt is directly
such assessment. The tax commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer
within 90 days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the
Town Manager are notified that a longer period will be required. The application
shall be treated as an application pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1821, and
the tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to
Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1822. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or
the Town Manager may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to Code
of Virginia, § 58.1-3984; however, the burden shall be on the party making the
application to show that the ruling of the tax commissioner is erroneous. Neither
the tax commissioner nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an
application to correct an assessment merely because the tax commissioner has ruled
on it.
(d) On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the tax commissioner under
Subsection 18-31(c) above, the Town Manager shall further suspend collection
activity until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the
Town Manager determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the
taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable
time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 18-28(f),
but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The
term "jeopardized by delay" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Subsection
18-31(b) above.
(e) Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of the tax to a
specific situation from the Town Manager. Any person requesting such a ruling
must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for
the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any
misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as
presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written
ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if there is a change in the law and/
or a court decision, or the Town Manager notifies the taxpayer of a change in the
policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based; however, any person who
acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted
in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. Anything herein
to the contrary notwithstanding, each person or entity who receives gross receipts
from the operation of any business, trade, profession, occupation, or calling, as
defined in this article, is subject to a license tax. Where two or more persons or
entities receive gross receipts from the operation of any such business, trade, or
profession, each such person or entity shall pay a license tax in proportion to the
share of gross receipts attributable to such person or entity, unless such persons
have clearly and unequivocally agreed otherwise.
§ 18-31 ABINGDON CODE § 18-32
18:16
attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within the Town. The Town Manager shall
provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business
office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside
of the Town, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the Town
Manager's office upon demand.
§ 18-33. Exclusions and deductions from gross receipts. [Ord. of 1-6-1997]
(a) General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount
not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or
profession in the ordinary course of business or profession.
(b) The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts:
(1) Amounts received and paid to the United States, the commonwealth, or any
county, city or Town for the state retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales
tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, or for any federal or state excise taxes
on motor fuels.
(2) Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another
asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously
taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have
been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and
factoring are a regular part of its business).
(3) Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its
customer.
(4) Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is
the obligor.
(5) Receipts representing the return of principal or a loan transaction in which the
licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a
capital asset.
(6) Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the
licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase
certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the
recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and
services, shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall
be included in the licensee's gross receipts, together with any handling or other
fees related to the incentive.
(7) Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and
for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of
assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for
federal income tax purposes.
(8) Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a
licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This
exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to
interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own
§ 18-32 BUSINESSES § 18-33
18:17
§ 18-34. License fee and taxes. [Ord. of 1-6-1997]
Every person or business subject to licensure under the article shall be assessed and
required to pay annually such fees and taxes as set out under Article 9 of the ordinance
from which this article derives and as determined from time to time by the Town
Council.
§ 18-35. through § 18-55. (Reserved)
funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed
privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar
income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in
the regular course of business.
(c) The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would
otherwise be taxable:
(1) Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a United
States federal or state government entity, provided that such property was
purchased within two years of the sale to such entity by the original purchaser,
who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell
such property to a state or federal government entity. This deduction shall not
occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the
property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of
the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale
contract if it is not resold to a state or federal government entity in accordance
with the original contract obligation.
(2) Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or foreign
country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon
income.
§ 18-33 ABINGDON CODE § 18-35
18:18
ARTICLE III
Health Clubs
§ 18-56. Definitions. [Code 1985, § 10-3]
§ 18-57. Authority. [Code 1985, § 10-1]
This article is enacted pursuant to Section 2.1 of the Town Charter, for the purpose of
securing and promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the Town.
§ 18-58. Legislative declaration. [Code 1985, § 10-2]
It is hereby declared that the business of operating health clubs is a business affecting
the public health, safety and general welfare.
§ 18-59. Permit required. [Code 1985, §§ 10-4(a), 10-12]
§ 18-60. Permit qualifications. [Code 1985, § 10-4(b), (c)]
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
HEALTH CLUB — Any establishment which offers service in the form of
massage, baths, exercises or similar services, in combination to club members, or
to the public for a charge. The term "health club" does not include:
MASSEUR and MASSEUSE — A person who practices any one or more of the
arts of body massage, whether by hand or mechanical apparatus, oil rubs, corrective
gymnastics, mechanotherapy, dietetics, hot packs, cabinet, tub, shower, sitz, vapor,
steam or any other special type of bath.
Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or the office or quarters of a
physician, a surgeon or an osteopath;
(1)
Exercise clubs exclusively for members or clientele of one sex alone, where
the services, without massage in any form, are performed by persons of the
same sex as the members or clientele; or
(2)
(3) Barbershops and beauty parlors.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a health club without
a permit, or in violation of any requirements or prohibitions set forth in this chapter
or any regulation issued pursuant thereto.
(b) Permit forms are obtainable and are processed in the office of the Town Manager.
(a) No permit shall be issued for any health club, except to an owner or manager who
is:
(1) A physician;
(2) A registered nurse with at least two years' nursing experience;
§ 18-56 BUSINESSES § 18-60
18:19
§ 18-61. Specific training requirements for masseurs and masseuses. [Code 1985,
§ 10-5]
(3) A licensed practical nurse with at least four years' nursing experience; or
(4) A registered physical therapist.
(b) The Town Manager shall maintain a list of approved schools of instruction and
training.
(a) No person shall give or offer or hold himself or herself out to offer a massage as a
masseur or masseuse within the meaning of this article or employ, or engage as an
independent contractor, any masseur or masseuse who gives, offers or holds himself
or herself out to offer a massage, unless such person shall have satisfactorily
completed a course of study in body massage in an approved school of instruction
or training within the following criteria and guidelines:
(1) Such courses shall pertain to anatomy, physiology, hygiene, first aid, exercise
therapy, massage techniques and related aspects of the art and science of body
massage.
(2) A course of study in body massage shall constitute 1,000 hours of study in
connection with an approved school, as follows:
a. Five hundred hours shall be accredited instructional hours pertaining to:
1. Classroom or clinical training in therapeutic massage and
reflexology techniques.
2. Classroom or clinical instruction or contraindications for massage.
3. Classroom or clinical or laboratory instruction to develop a
knowledge of the anatomy and physiology of the systems of the
body, with emphasis on the muscular and skeletal systems.
b. The additional 500 hours may be accomplished simultaneously with the
academic, clinical or classroom or laboratory training by virtue of what is
commonly known as "on the job training," or may be certified to by an
employer of a masseur or masseuse by sworn affidavit as having been
accomplished before or after February 3, 1983. Such training shall pertain
to understanding the benefits of massage and assisting the students in
developing an awareness of massage as a therapeutic process.
(b) Any school or educational institution licensed to do business as a school or
educational institution in the state in which it is located and providing requisite
training shall constitute an approved school.
(c) Any school recognized by or approved by or affiliated with the American Massage
and Therapy Association, Inc., shall constitute an approved school.
(d) Compliance with this section shall first be determined by the Chief of Police with
the same rights of appeal and hearing to the Town Manager as elsewhere granted in
this article.
§ 18-60 ABINGDON CODE § 18-62
18:20
§ 18-62. General equipment standards. [Code 1985, § 10-6]
§ 18-63. Building plans and approval; toilets and lavatories generally. [Code 1985,
§ 10-7]
§ 18-64. Sanitation; access of inspectors. [Code 1985, § 10-8]
§ 18-65. Health certificate; hygiene. [Code 1985, § 10-9]
(a) All tables, tubs, shower stalls and floors, except reception and administrative areas,
shall be made of nonporous materials which may be readily disinfected.
(b) Closed containers shall be provided for wet towels and waste material.
(a) No health club shall begin operations until the building occupied or to be occupied
shall have been approved by the Town Manager, who shall establish procedures for
investigations and reports by the administrative officers of the building, plumbing,
electrical and fire prevention codes.
(b) An applicant for a permit to operate a health club shall submit to the Town Manager
plans and specifications of the quarters proposed to be occupied. Such plans shall
show details of entrances, partitions, windows, openings, ventilation, plumbing
fixtures, water supply and waste and vent connections.
(c) Each health club shall be equipped with toilet and lavatory facilities for patrons and
separate, readily available toilet and lavatory facilities for personnel. Each
operating area shall be equipped with a hand lavatory.
(d) Either the club quarters or the floor of the building on which the quarters are located
shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial services.
(a) All equipment, shower stalls, toilets, lavatories and any other such accoutrements
of the establishment shall be regularly treated with disinfectants and shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
(b) Health, plumbing, electrical and other inspectors shall be given access to any part
of the quarters of a health club for purposes of inspection at all reasonable times.
(a) No person shall practice any of the services of a health club without a certificate of
good health issued by a duly licensed physician, commensurate with the nature of
the services rendered. Such certificate shall be renewed every six months.
(b) No health club shall knowingly serve any patron infected with any fungus or other
skin infections, nor shall service be performed on any patron exhibiting skin
inflammation or eruptions; provided, that a duly licensed physician may certify that
a person may be safely served, prescribing the conditions thereof.
(c) All personnel shall wash their hands in hot running water, using a proper soap or
disinfectant, before giving any service or treatment to each separate patron.
(d) All towels and tissues and all sheets or other coverings shall be used singularly for
each patron and discarded for laundering or disposal immediately after use.
§ 18-62 BUSINESSES § 18-65
18:21
§ 18-66. Use for or connection with sleeping quarters; violations of state law.
[Code 1985, § 10-10]
§ 18-67. Massage, etc., by a person who is not a licensed masseuse or masseur;
penalties; violations of Code. [Code 1985, § 10-11; Ord. of 12-5-1994]
§ 18-68. Conflicts. [Code 1985, § 10-13]
This article shall be construed to be compatible with and not in conflict with Article II
of this chapter and Chapter 50 of this Code.
(e) Nondisposable tools of the trade shall be disinfected after use upon one patron.
(a) No part of any quarters of any health club shall be used for, or connected with, any
bedroom or sleeping quarters, nor shall any person sleep in such health club, except
for limited periods incidental to and directly related to a massage or bath. This
provision shall not preclude the location of a health club in separate quarters of a
building housing a hotel or other separate businesses or clubs.
(b) No owner or manager of a health club shall tolerate in his establishment any activity
or behavior prohibited by the laws of the state, particularly, but not exclusively,
Code of Virginia, § 18.2-344 et seq., proscribing prostitution, crimes against nature,
a bawdy place, adultery, fornication, any lewd and lascivious cohabitation, etc., and
Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372 et seq., being the state law on obscenity, dealing with
shameful or morbid interest in nudity or sex, which appeals to prurient interest, and
which covers obscene items, exhibitions, performances, indecent exposure, illicit
photographs or photographic activity and illicit modeling.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any establishment, whether private or public, to operate a
massage salon, bath parlor or any similar type business where any physical contact
with the recipient of such services is provided by a person unless such services are
provided by a person who is a licensed or certified masseur or masseuse at the time
such services are rendered. Any person violating the provision of this subsection
shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in this section, and, in addition to
such penalty, it shall be the duty of the Town Manager to revoke the license of the
owner or manager of the establishment wherein the provisions of this subsection
shall have been violated. Violations of this subsection, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine not less than $25 nor more than $500, or by imprisonment of less
than 10 days nor more than one year in the county jail, or by both such fine and
confinement.
(b) No owner or manager shall tolerate in his establishment any activity or behavior
which violates this Code, particularly, but not exclusively, those sections which
parallel state law on immorality and obscenity as detailed in Section 18-66.
(c) Any conviction of any employee of a health club of a violation of such statutes or
this Code shall devolve upon the owner or manager of such club, it being
specifically declared hereby that following such a conviction of any employee, the
owner or manager of the club shall be prosecuted as an accessory to such violation.
§ 18-65 ABINGDON CODE § 18-69
18:22
§ 18-69. Penalty. [Code 1985, § 10-13]
A person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
§ 18-70. through § 18-90. (Reserved)
§ 18-69 BUSINESSES § 18-70
18:23

ARTICLE IV
Dealers in Precious Metals and Gems
§ 18-91. Definitions.
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
COIN — Any piece of gold, silver or other metal fashioned into a prescribed shape,
weight and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of a government with certain
marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money.
DEALER —
Any person engaged in the business of:
a. Purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems;
Removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured
articles not then owned by the person;
b.
Buying, acquiring, or selling precious metals or gems removed from
manufactured articles.
"Dealer" includes all employers and principals on whose behalf a
purchase is made, and any employee or agent who makes any purchase
for or on behalf of his employer or principal.
c.
(1)
The definition of "dealer" shall not include persons engaged in the following:
Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers,
manufacturers, or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories,
provided that the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this
article.
a.
Purchases of precious metals or gems from a qualified fiduciary who is
disposing of the assets of an estate being administered by the fiduciary.
b.
Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold
by the retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for tradein.
c.
Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if such
activities are within his normal course of business.
d.
Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and
manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail
merchants, wholesalers, dealers, or by mail originating outside the
commonwealth.
e.
Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and processing
nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may contain traces of
precious metals recoverable as a by-product.
f.
(2)
§ 18-91 BUSINESSES § 18-91
18:25
§ 18-92. Records to be kept; copy furnished to local authorities.
§ 18-93. Officers may examine records or property; warrantless search and
seizure authorized.
Every dealer or his employee shall admit to his place of business during regular business
hours the Chief of Police or his designee of the Town or any law-enforcement officer of
the state or federal government. The dealer or his employee shall permit the officer to:
§ 18-94. Credentials and statement of ownership required from seller.
GEMS — Any item containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily used
in jewelry.
PRECIOUS METALS — Any item except coins composed in whole or in part of
gold, silver, platinum, or platinum alloys.
(a) Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of
each purchase of precious metals or gems. The record of each purchase shall be
retained by the dealer for at least 24 months and shall set forth the following:
(1) A complete description of all precious metals or gems purchased from each
seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers or other
identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight or
carat of any gem, and the price paid for each item;
(2) The date, time and place of receiving the items purchased;
(3) The full name, residence address, work place, home and work telephone
numbers, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, hair and eye color, and other
identifying marks;
(4) Verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued
identification card such as a driver's license or military identification card. The
record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency,
and the number thereon; and
(5) A statement of ownership from the seller.
(b) The information required by Subdivisions (1) through (3) of Subsection (a) of this
section shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased
by a dealer, and a copy shall be mailed or delivered within 24 hours of the time of
purchase to the Chief of Police.
(a) Examine all records required by this article and any article listed in a record which
is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen; and
(b) Search for and take into possession any article known to him to be missing, or
known or believed by him to have been stolen.
(a) No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first ascertaining the
identity of the seller by requiring an identification issued by a governmental agency
with a photograph of the seller thereon, and at least one other corroborating means
§ 18-91 ABINGDON CODE § 18-94
18:26
§ 18-95. Prohibited purchases.
§ 18-96. Dealer to retain purchases.
§ 18-97. Record of disposition.
Each dealer shall maintain for at least 24 months an accurate and legible record of the
name and address of the person to which he sells any precious metal or gem in its
original form after the waiting period required by Section 18-96. This record shall also
show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased the item.
§ 18-98. Bond or letter of credit required of dealers when permit obtained.
§ 18-99. Private action on bond or letter of credit.
Any person aggrieved by the misconduct of any dealer which violated the provisions of
this article may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against
the dealer and his surety. Recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the
judgment which is unsatisfied by the dealer.
of identification, and obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller.
(b) The Council may determine the contents of the statement of ownership.
(a) No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the
age of 18.
(b) No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who the dealer
believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such items, unless the seller
has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and
directing such sale.
(a) The dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of ten
calendar days from the date on which a copy of the bill of sale is received by the
Chief of Police. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter, or
dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the Town.
(b) If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain
the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a
period of ten calendar days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems.
(a) Every dealer shall secure a permit as required by Section 18-100, and each dealer
at the time of obtaining such permit shall enter into a recognizance to the
commonwealth secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this
commonwealth, in the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned upon due observance of
the terms of this article. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank
authorized to do business in the commonwealth a letter of credit in favor of the
Town Council for $10,000.
(b) A single bond upon an employer or principal may be written or a single letter of
credit issued to cover all employees and all transactions occurring at a single
location.
§ 18-94 BUSINESSES § 18-100
18:27
§ 18-100. Permit requirements, procedures.
§ 18-101. Exemptions.
§ 18-102. Penalty; revocation.
(a) No person shall engage in the activities of a dealer under this article without first
obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police.
(b) To obtain a permit under this section, the dealer shall file with the Chief of Police
an application form which includes the dealer's full name, any aliases, address, age,
date of birth, sex, and fingerprints; the name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant's employer, if any; and the location of the dealer's place of business. Upon
filing this application and the payment of an application fee as authorized from time
to time by the Town Council, the dealer shall be issued a permit by the Chief of
Police or his designee, provided that the applicant has not been convicted of a
felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven years prior to the date of
application. The permit shall be denied if the applicant has been denied a permit or
has had a permit revoked under this article.
(c) Before a permit may be issued, the dealer must have all weighing devices used in
his business inspected and approved by local or state weights and measures officials
and present written evidence of such approval to the Chief of Police.
(d) This permit shall be valid for one year from the date issued and may be renewed in
the same manner as such permit was initially obtained with an annual permit fee as
authorized by the Town Council from time to time. No permit shall be transferable.
(e) If the business of the dealer is not operated without interruption, with Saturdays,
Sundays, and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the Chief of
Police of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of a dealer shall
be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in his
application for a permit.
(a) The Chief of Police, or his designee, may waive by written notice implementation
of any one or more of the provisions of this article, except Section 18-95, for
particular numismatic, gem, or antique exhibitions or craft shows sponsored by
nonprofit organizations, provided that the purpose of the exhibitions is nonprofit in
nature, notwithstanding the fact that there may be casual purchases and trades made
at such exhibitions.
(b) The provisions of this article shall not apply to the sale or purchase of coins.
(c) The provisions of this article shall not apply to any bank, branch thereof, trust
company or bank holding company, or any wholly owned subsidiary thereof,
engaged in buying and selling gold and silver bullion.
(a) Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty
of a Class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense. Upon conviction of any subsequent
offense he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
(b) Upon the first conviction of a dealer for violation of any provision of this article,
§ 18-100 ABINGDON CODE § 18-102
18:28
§ 18-103. through § 18-125. (Reserved)
the Chief of Police may revoke the dealer's permit for one full year from the date
the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory upon a second
conviction.
§ 18-102 BUSINESSES § 18-103
18:29

ARTICLE V
Garage and Yard Sales
§ 18-126. Definitions. [Code 1985, § 16-20]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
GARAGE OR YARD SALE — Any sale operated out of a single-family dwelling, or a
two-family dwelling or a multifamily dwelling, including but not limited to a sale on the
premises thereof, being of two hours or more duration.
GOODS — Any goods, wares, merchandise or any other property capable of being the
object of a sale regulated under this article.
§ 18-127. Conduct. [Code 1985, § 16-21]
The following general operating requirements shall apply to all garage and yard sales:
§ 18-128. Permits. [Code 1985, § 16-22]
No garage or yard sale shall be held until the person conducting such sale shall have
first obtained a sale permit from the office of the Town Clerk. A fee as established by
the Town Council from time to time shall be paid to the Town Clerk before the issuance
of such permit. Application for more than two permits for the same address within one
year shall be reason for the denial of a permit by the Town Clerk. Such permit shall be
conspicuously displayed upon the premises during the time of the sale.
§ 18-129. Penalty. [Code 1985, § 16-23]
Any person conducting a business, occupation, profession or activity for the conduct
of which a permit is required under this article without first obtaining such permit and
any other person violating any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 4
misdemeanor.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to hold more than two such sales at the same
location within one year of the date of the first such sale.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct such sale for longer than three
consecutive days.
(c) No signs advertising the sale or giving directions to its location shall be used,
erected or allowed within public rights-of-way.
(d) Any goods offered for sale must be the property of the person conducting the sale
and shall not have been purchased for the purpose of resale.
§ 18-126 BUSINESSES § 18-129
18:31

ARTICLE VI
Peddlers, Vendors and Canvassers
§ 18-130. Permit required. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler, vendor or
canvasser as defined in this article, within the limits of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia,
without first obtaining a permit as provided herein.
§ 18-131. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006; Ord. of 10-1-2012]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
CHARITABLE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION(S) — Any organization(s) currently
recognized by the Internal Revenue Code of the United States of America as a charitable
nonprofit organization.
FAIR — A gathering of buyers and/or sellers for the purpose of exhibiting and selling
goods, accompanied by amusements, contests, entertainment and the like.
HEALTH DIRECTOR or DIRECTOR — The Director of the County Health District.
HEALTH DIRECTOR or HEALTH OFFICER — The chief health officer of the county
health department, its successor agencies, or a qualified person designated by such chief
health officer.
PEDDLER — One who moves from place to place within the Town and offers
merchandise, goods, food or services for sale or barter.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THE STATE — The county; the corporation Town of
Abingdon; any body politic created under the Constitution of Virginia or by the Act of
the General Assembly of Virginia as described by statute; and/or all groups operating on
behalf of, under the through the political subdivisions referenced and described in this
definition.
SERVICE ROAD (FRONTAGE ROAD) — A roadway contiguous to and generally
paralleling a street or highway designed to collect and distribute traffic desiring to cross,
enter, or leave such street or highway, and to furnish access to property which would
otherwise be isolated due to the controlled access design of the street or highway.
TOWN MANAGER — The Town Manager of Abingdon, Virginia or a duly authorized
agent of the Town Manager.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn including any wheeled conveyance.
VENDOR — One who offers merchandise, goods, food or services for sale or barter
from a stationary but temporary site within the Town. "Vending" is the act of offering
merchandise, goods, food or services for sale or barter from a stationary but temporary
site within the Town.
YOUTH ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION — An organization or group thereof whose
purpose and function are to schedule, manage and supervise athletic events primarily for
the participation of people under the age of 18 years.
§ 18-130 BUSINESSES § 18-132
18:33
§ 18-132. Exemption from permit requirements. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006; Ord.
of 10-1-2012]
(a) The following shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this article:
(1) Persons selling fresh farm products;
(2) Persons selling newspapers;
(3) Persons selling for wholesale concerns who only solicit orders from or sell to
retail dealers in Abingdon for resale or other commercial purposes or to
manufacturers for manufacturing or other commercial purposes; and
(4) Peddlers or vendors of religious, political or written materials.
(5) Exemptions. The provisions of Code of Virginia, § 35.1-1 et seq., or any
successor statute shall not apply to:
a. Food booths at fairs, if such booths are promoted or sponsored by any
political subdivision of the commonwealth or by any charitable nonprofit
organization or group thereof.
b. Concession stands at youth athletic activities, if such stands are promoted
or sponsored by either a youth athletic association or by any charitable
nonprofit organization or group thereof which has been recognized as
being a part of the recreational program of the political subdivision where
the association or organization is located by an ordinance or resolution of
such political subdivision.
c. Organizations that are exempt from taxation under § 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code that hold occasional fund-raisers for the duration
of the event at which food is prepared by such organization and is offered
for sale to the public.
(6) Supervision of food sales. Supervision of the sale of food as contemplated in
this article shall be made by the chief health officer of the Town or a qualified
person designated by such officer. Such supervision shall include:
a. A requirement of notice from the food concessionaire as to the time and
place of the sale of food;
b. Meetings as necessary with the representatives of such organizations to
provide information and assistance, where necessary, to provide a healthy
environment for the sale of food;
c. Inspections, as necessary, to determine if such operations are being
conducted in a healthy environment and to provide assistance in
remediation, if necessary;
d. Inspections, as necessary, to determine if the authorized organizations are
operating such food concessions; and
e. No other supervision unless directed by future ordinance of the Town
Council.
§ 18-132 ABINGDON CODE § 18-133
18:34
§ 18-133. Application for permit. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006]
§ 18-134. Investigation and issuance. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006]
Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the Town Manager,
who shall make an investigation of the applicant's business responsibility and character.
(a) Applicants for permits under this article must file with the Town Manager an
application in writing on a form to be furnished by the Town, which shall give the
following information:
(1) Name, social security number (optional), and description of the applicant.
(2) Address.
(3) Name and address of Virginia registered agent, if there is a registered agent for
the business.
(4) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.
(5) Proof of all applicable federal, state and local permits or the licenses for the
business.
(b) At the time of the filing of the application, a fee of as authorized from time to time
by the Town Council shall be paid to the Town Manager to cover the cost of
investigation and processing of the application.
(a) Unless the Town Manager determines otherwise after his investigation, he shall
within 45 days following the date of the filing of the application, issue the applicant
a license.
(b) After investigation and finding that the health, safety, and welfare of the public so
demands, the Town Manager may refuse to issue a license to an applicant for
reasons including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Conviction of any felony or crime of moral turpitude (including, by way of
illustration and not limitation, crimes of sexual misconduct and distribution of
controlled substances or paraphernalia) within the five years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or intentional false statement of material or relevant
facts contained in the application.
(3) Lack of necessary permits or licenses to conduct the business proposed to be
conducted.
(c) The Town Manager shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a permit
addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and deliver
to the applicant his permit. Such permit shall contain the signature of the issuing
officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of said applicant, the kind
of goods to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance and the length of time the same
shall be operative, as well as the license number and other identifying description
of any vehicle used in such peddling, vending or canvassing. The Town Manager
shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued.
§ 18-133 BUSINESSES § 18-134
18:35
§ 18-135. Transfer. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006]
No permit or exemption letter issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be used
by any person other than the one to whom it was issued.
§ 18-136. Renewal. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006]
Permits issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for the period requested,
which shall in no event exceed one year. The holder of any permit may seek renewal
thereof upon the filing of a written renewal application. The renewal application shall
reflect any information changed from the previous year's application and it shall be
approved upon verification by the Town Manager that the applicant for renewal has
complied with the laws of the Town of Abingdon and the commonwealth.
§ 18-137. Use of the streets and other public places — vending or canvassing from
a stationary location. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006]
(d) In determining whether the applicant's character and business responsibility is
satisfactory, the Town Manager, or his authorized agent, shall consider evidence
revealed by the investigation which shows honesty, reliability, and knowledge of
the business to be engaged in. A license shall be denied or revoked if the applicant
is shown to be dishonest, immoral or substantially lacking in business reliability
and responsibility. In the event the result of the initial investigation are unclear as
to the nature of the applicant's character and business responsibility, an additional
investigation of the applicant shall be made.
(a) No peddler, vendor, or canvasser shall have any exclusive right to any location on
public property; nor shall be or she:
(1) Operate at any location within the Town until he possesses a license to operate
his business which has been approved by the local health department;
(2) Be permitted a stationary location on any sidewalk unless at least five feet of
the sidewalk remains clear for pedestrian traffic;
(3) Be permitted a stationary location closer than 10 feet from any crosswalk,
intersection, entrance to a building, taxi stand, or other vendor's stationary
location.
(4) Be permitted to occupy a space greater than 10 feet long, five feet wide, and
eight feet high on a sidewalk, excluding umbrellas;
(5) Display any sign visible to vehicular traffic if operating from a stationary
location on a street, sidewalk, or other public place, except for signs that are
actually imprinted on the exterior body of a licensed motor vehicle;
(6) Make any sale or delivery to any person while such person is standing in the
roadway;
(7) Make any sale, offer or delivery to any driver or passenger in a motor vehicle
while the motor vehicle is stopped at a red light or while in a moving traffic
lane;
§ 18-134 ABINGDON CODE § 18-137
18:36
§ 18-138. Exhibition of permit or exemption letter. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006]
Peddlers, vendors, or canvassers are required to conspicuously display their permits
at their vehicles or temporary stands or if they have none, to exhibit their permits or
exemption letter upon request.
§ 18-139. Records. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006]
The Town Manager shall maintain a record for each permit issued, and record the reports
of violation thereon.
§ 18-140. Revocation of permit. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006]
§ 18-141. Appeal. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006]
(8) Conduct business from any highway service road or center median strip of any
street;
(9) Restrict access to any legally parked vehicle;
(10) Operate in any other way that would restrict the flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic;
(11) Conduct any business on any public street or sidewalk between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; or
(12) Leave any cart or table unattended on any public street or sidewalk between
the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(b) Each peddler, vendor, or canvasser shall provide receptacles for the disposal of
waste materials or other litter created in the immediate area of any stationary
location from which sales, offers of sales or deliveries are taking place, and they
shall request customers to place all waste and litter in the receptacles and they shall
remove and dispose of the waste materials and litter.
(a) Permits issued under the provision of this article may be revoked by the Town
Manager after notice and hearing of any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or intentional false statement contained in the
application for permit.
(2) Conviction of a felony or crime of moral turpitude (including, by way of
illustration and not limitation, crimes of sexual misconduct and distribution of
controlled substances or paraphernalia).
(3) Conviction of any crime involving fraud in the conduct of his or her business.
(4) Any violation of this article or of Article II of this chapter.
(b) Notice for revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically
the grounds for the revocation. Such notice shall be mailed, certified mail return
receipt requested, to the permit holder at his last known address.
§ 18-137 BUSINESSES § 18-141
18:37
§ 18-142. Penalty for violation of chapter. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-06]
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
§ 18-143. Severance clause. [Ord. No. 2-2006, 2-6-2006]
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section,
sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall, for any reason, be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections,
sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, but they shall remain in effect, it being the
legislative intent that this article shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
(a) Any person aggrieved by the action of the Town Manager, or his authorized agent,
in the denial of an application for a permit or in the decision with reference to the
revocation of a permit shall have the right of appeal. Such appeal shall be taken by
filing with the clerk of the Town Council within 10 days after the notice of the
denial of an application has been mailed to such person's last known address, a
written statement setting forth fully the grounds of appeal.
(b) Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, the clerk shall schedule a public hearing
before the Town Council at a time not more than 30 days after the receipt of the
notice. Such hearing shall be advertised at the expense of the appellant and notice
given once a week for two successive weeks in some newspaper published or
having general circulation in the Town, specifying the time and place of hearing at
which persons affected may appear and present their views, not less than five days
nor more than 21 days after the second advertisement appears in such newspaper.
§ 18-141 ABINGDON CODE § 18-143
18:38
ARTICLE VIA
Pawnbrokers
[Added 2-4-2013]
§ 18-144. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
PAWNBROKER — Any person who lends or advances money or other things for profit
on the pledge and possession of personal or other valuable things, other than securities
or written or printed evidences of indebtedness or title, or who deals in the possession of
personal property or other valuable things on condition of selling the property or other
things back to the seller at a stipulated price.
§ 18-145. License.
(a) No person shall engage in the business of pawnbrokering within the corporate limits
of the Town of Abingdon without first having a valid license issued by the Town.
The Town may issue the aforementioned license upon grant of authority from the
Washington County Circuit Court, which shall require the following of the
applicant:
(b) Prior to the issuance of the license, the applicant shall furnish to the Town Manager:
(1) An order of the Washington County Circuit Court issued pursuant to the Code
of Virginia, § 54.1-4001, as amended, authorizing the Town to issue the
license; and
(2) Evidence of a bond on a form furnished by the Chief of Police which shall
require the applicant to furnish the following information:
a. Full name, aliases, address, date of birth, driver's license number, sex,
fingerprints and photograph;
b. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer;
c. Sworn statement of affirmation disclosing any criminal convictions or
any pending criminal charges whether within or without the
commonwealth;
d. Proposed location of the applicant's place of business;
e. Statement of whether the applicant will purchase, sell or take possession
of firearms; and
f. Certification from the Town's Director of Planning or his designee that
the operation of the business of a pawnbroker at the proposed location is
a permitted use of the premises.
(c) Upon furnishing the court order, filing the application, paying an application fee of
$200, and acceptance of said requirements by the Town, the applicant shall be
§ 18-144 BUSINESSES § 18-145
18:39
§ 18-146. Limitation on number of pawnshops.
No business of a pawnbroker shall be located closer than one mile to any other.
State law reference: Authority to establish limitation on number of pawnshops,
Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4002
§ 18-147. Bond required, private action on bond.
§ 18-148. Memorandum to be given pledgor; fee; lost ticket charge.
Every pawnbroker shall at the time of each loan deliver to the person pawning or
pledging anything a memorandum or note, signed by him, containing the information
required by § 18-151, below. A lost-ticket fee of $5 may be charged, provided that the
pawner is notified of same on the ticket.
State law reference: Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4004
§ 18-149. Sales of goods pawned.
No pawnbroker shall sell any pawn or pledge item until it has been in his possession for
issued a license by the Town Manager. The license may be denied if the applicant
has been denied a license or has had a license revoked under any ordinance similar
in substance to this article.
(d) The license shall be valid for 12 months from the date thereof, and may be renewed
in the same manner as the initial license was obtained, with an annual license fee of
$200. No license shall be transferable.
(e) The license shall designate the building in which the licensee shall carry on
business. No person shall engage in the business of a pawnbroker in any location
other than the one designated in his license, except with the consent of the
Washington County Circuit Court which authorized issuance of the license and
upon written notification of the Town Manager.
(f) Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
State law reference: License issuance, requirements, Code of Virginia,
§ 54.1-4001
(a) No person shall be licensed as a pawnbroker or engage in the business of a
pawnbroker without having in existence a bond with surety in the minimum amount
of $50,000 to secure the payment of any judgment recovered under the provisions
of Subsection (b), below.
(b) Any person who recovers a judgment against a licensed pawnbroker for the
pawnbroker's misconduct may maintain an action in his own name upon the bond
of the pawnbroker if the execution issued upon such judgment is wholly or partially
unsatisfied.
State law reference: Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4003
§ 18-145 ABINGDON CODE § 18-149
18:40
the minimum term set forth in the memorandum, but not less than 30 days, plus a grace
period of 15 days and a statement of ownership is obtained from the pawner. If a motor
vehicle is pawned, the owner of the motor vehicle shall comply with the requirements
of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-637. In the event of default by the pawner, the pawnbroker
shall comply with the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-633. Otherwise, the
pawnbroker shall comply with the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-636 et seq.
All sales of items pursuant to this section may be made by the pawnbroker in the
ordinary course of his business.
State law reference: Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4005
§ 18-150. Interest chargeable.
§ 18-151. Records to be kept; credentials of person pawning goods; fee; penalty.
(a) No pawnbroker shall ask, demand or receive a greater rate of interest than 10% per
month on a loan of $25 or less, or 7% per month on a loan of more than $25 and
less than $100, or 5% per month on a loan of $100 or more, secured by a pledge of
tangible personal property. No loan shall be divided for the purpose of increasing
the percentage to be paid the pawnbroker. Loans may be renewed based on the
original loan amount. Loans may not be issued that compound the interest or
storage fees from previous loans on the same item.
(b) An annual percentage rate computed and disclosed under the provisions of the
federal Truth-in-Lending Act3
shall not be deemed a violation of this section.
State law reference: Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4008
(a) Every pawnbroker shall keep at his/her place of business an accurate and legible
record of each loan or transaction in the course of his business, including
transactions in which secondhand goods, wares or merchandise are purchased for
resale. The account shall be recorded at the time of the loan or transaction and shall
include:
(1) The description, serial number, and a statement of ownership of the goods,
article or thing pawned or pledged or received on account of money loaned
thereon, or purchased for resale;
(2) The time, date and place of the transaction;
(3) The amount of money loaned thereon at the time of pledging the same or paid
as the purchase price;
(4) The rate of interest to be paid on such loan;
(5) The fees charged by the pawnbroker, itemizing each fee charged;
(6) The full name, residence address, telephone number, and driver's license
number or other form of identification of the person pawning or pledging or
selling the goods, article or thing, together with a particular description,
including the height, weight, date of birth, race, gender, hair and eye color, and
3. Editor's Note: See 15 USCA § 1601 et seq.
§ 18-149 BUSINESSES § 18-151
18:41
§ 18-152. Daily reports.
any other identifying marks, of such person;
(7) Verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued
identification card such as a driver's license or military identification card. The
record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency,
and the number thereon;
(8) As to loans, the terms and conditions of the loan, including the period for
which any such loan may be made; and
(9) All other facts and circumstances respecting such loan or purchase.
(b) A pawnbroker may maintain at his place of business an electronic record of each
transaction involving goods, articles or things pawned or pledged or purchased. If
maintained electronically, a pawnbroker shall retain the electronic records for at
least one year after the date of the transaction and make such electronic records
available to any duly authorized law enforcement officer upon request.
(c) For each loan or transaction, a pawnbroker may charge a service fee for making the
daily electronic reports to the appropriate law enforcement officers required by
Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4010, creating and maintaining the electronic records
required under this section, and investigating the legal title to property being
pawned or pledged or purchased. Such fee shall not exceed 5% of the amount
loaned on such item or paid by the pawnbroker for such item or $3, whichever is
less. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor.
(d) The Superintendent of State Police shall promulgate regulations specifying:
(1) The nature of the particular description for the purposes of Subsection (a)(6)
of this section; and
(2) The nature of identifying credentials of the person pawning, pledging, or
selling the goods. Such identifying credentials shall be examined by the
pawnbroker and an appropriate record thereof retained.
State law reference: Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4009
(a) Every pawnbroker shall prepare a daily report of all goods, articles or things
pawned or pledged with him or sold to him that day and shall file such report by
noon of the following day with the Town Chief of Police. The report shall include
the pledgor's or seller's name, residence, and driver's license number or other form
of identification, and a description of the goods, articles or other things pledged or
sold and, unless maintained in electronic format, shall be in writing and clearly
legible to any person inspecting it. A pawnbroker may compile and maintain the
daily report in an electronic format and, if so maintained, shall file the required
daily reports electronically with the Town Chief of Police through use of a disk,
electronic transmission, or any other electronic means of reporting approved by the
Town Chief of Police.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall
§ 18-151 ABINGDON CODE § 18-152
18:42
§ 18-153. Officers may examine records or property; warrantless search and
seizure authorized.
§ 18-154. Property pawned or purchased not to be disfigured or changed.
No property received on deposit or pledged or purchased by any pawnbroker shall be
disfigured or its identity destroyed or affected in any manner:
§ 18-155. Care of tangible personal property; evaluation fee.
§ 18-156. Penalties; violation of Virginia Consumer Protection Act.
be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor.
State law reference: Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4010
(a) Every pawnbroker and every employee of the pawnbroker shall admit to the
pawnbroker's place of business during regular business hours, any duly authorized
Town law enforcement officer, or any law enforcement official of the county, state
or federal government. The pawnbroker or employee shall permit the officer to:
(1) Examine all records required by this article or Code of Virginia, Title 54.1, Ch.
40 (Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4000 et seq.), as amended, and any article listed
in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen; and
(2) Search for and seize any article known to him to be missing, or known or
believed by him to have been stolen.
(b) However, the officer shall not take possession of any article without providing to
the pawnbroker a receipt.
State law reference: Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4011
(a) So long as it continues in pawn or in the possession of the pawnbroker while in
pawn; or
(b) In an effort to obtain a serial number or other information for identification
purposes.
State law reference: Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4012
(a) Pawnbrokers shall store, care for and protect all of the tangible personal property in
the pawnbroker's possession and protect the property from damage or misuse.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to mean that pawnbrokers are insurers of
pawned property in their possession.
(b) A pawnbroker may charge a monthly storage fee for any items requiring storage,
which fee shall not exceed 5% of the amount loaned on such item.
State law reference: Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4013
(a) Criminal penalty. Any licensed pawnbroker who violates any of the provisions of
this article, except as otherwise provided in § 18-145, shall be guilty of a Class 4
§ 18-152 BUSINESSES § 18-156
18:43
§ 18-157. through § 18-159. (Reserved)
misdemeanor.
(b) Suspension or revocation of license. In addition to the penalty provided in
Subsection (a) of this section, the court may revoke or suspend the pawnbroker's
license for second and subsequent offenses.
(c) Violation of Virginia Consumer Protection Act. Any violation of the provisions of
this article shall constitute a prohibited practice in accordance with the Code of
Virginia, § 59.1-200, and shall be subject to any and all of the enforcement
provisions of the Virginia Consumer Protection Act (Code of Virginia, § 59.1-196
et seq.).
§ 18-156 ABINGDON CODE § 18-157
18:44
ARTICLE VII
Homestay Regulation
§ 18-160. Definitions. [Ord. of 7-10-2017]
As used in this article, unless the context requires a different meaning, terms used herein
shall be defined as follows:
BOOKING TRANSACTION — Any transaction in which there is a charge to a transient
by a host for the occupancy of any dwelling, sleeping, or lodging accommodations.
GUEST or TRANSIENT — A person who occupies a HomeStay unit.
HOMESTAY — The accessory or secondary use of a residential dwelling unit or a
portion thereof by a host to provide room or space that is intended for short term
transient rental purposes in exchange for a charge for the occupancy. The primary use
of the HomeStay unit shall remain residential and owner inhabited. For each booking
transaction, all applicable taxes must be collected and remitted to the Town of Abingdon
as required by Article V, Lodging Tax, § 66-146, by the host. Such accessory or
secondary use shall not create a landlord/tenant relationship.
HOST — The person who is the primary resident of a HomeStay unit offered for
HomeStay lodging. In determining compliance with these regulations, the host has the
burden of demonstrating that the dwelling unit is owner occupied and is his or her
primary residence.
HOSTING PLATFORM — Any person or entity that is not a host but facilitates
reservations or collects payments for any booking transaction on behalf of a host through
an online digital platform, such as Airbnb, et al.
PRIMARY RESIDENT — The owner of the HomeStay unit who occupies the property
as his or her principal place of residence and domicile.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT — A residence where one or more persons
maintain a household.
SHORT-STAY RENTAL — The provision of a room or space suitable for sleeping or
lodging for less than 30 consecutive days in exchange for a charge for the occupancy.
TYPE A RENTALS — Rentals where the host is present during the HomeStay and no
more than two bedrooms of the HomeStay unit are rented.
TYPE B RENTALS — All other rentals, including ones where more than two bedrooms
of the HomeStay unit are rented or the host is not present during the stay.
§ 18-161. Registration and other requirements. [Ord. of 7-10-2017]
(a) No host shall operate a HomeStay unit or advertise a residential property for
HomeStay use without the host first having registered with the departments of
business; Planning/Zoning and Building in the Town of Abingdon Offices at 133
W. Main Street, Abingdon, Virginia. Upon the applicant's initial visit with the
Town offices, he/she will be furnished with a packet which will contain registration
materials and forms.
(b) The registration form and packet shall require the following information/response
from applicant:
§ 18-160 BUSINESSES § 18-161
18:45
(1) The complete contact information of the host, including name, telephone
number, address, and e-mail address of the host;
(2) Proof of ownership of primary residence;
(3) Payment of $25 administrative fee beginning October 1, 2017;
(4) State tax ID information and/or Social Security number;
(5) Completion of a Town's business license application;
(6) Complete information regarding physical description of space which will be
made available for HomeStay use, including proximity to neighbors, shared
driveways or parking, etc.;
(7) Planning/zoning and building approval;
(8) Official insurance coverage information and proof with regard to the
HomeStay unit, the host and the guests; and
(9) If the HomeStay unit shares a common wall or a common driveway with
another property owner, proof of written notification to such neighboring
property owner(s) prior to filing the registration application.
(c) Additional initial reminders/requirements shall include the following:
(1) Signs, advertising, or any other exterior display on the property indicating that
the HomeStay unit is being utilized, in whole or in part, as a HomeStay are not
permitted;
(2) The host shall register with the finance department to collect and remit the
Town's transient lodging tax as set forth in Article V, Lodging Tax, § 66-146;
(3) A host may register and operate only one residential dwelling unit as a
HomeStay in the Town;
(4) The registration shall be valid January 1st (or from whatever date the
registration first occurs) through December 31st of the calendar year, and shall
be renewed annually, on or before March 1st;
(5) A valid registration will permit a maximum 90 days of type A and type B
rentals in each calendar year. Of these 90 days of rentals, no more than 30 days
may be type B rentals. On each lodging tax return form filed with the
Treasurer, the number of type A and type B rentals shall be listed;
(6) Said current safety issues must be made available and convenient to every
room made available to guests, in the path of either ingress or egress within
the sleeping room, including basements;
(7) Interior directional "EXIT" signs;
(8) Any sleeping area must have one other adequate method of egress or escape
beyond the entrance point;
(9) Posted information regarding proper trash/garbage disposal;
§ 18-161 ABINGDON CODE § 18-161
18:46
§ 18-162. Safety. [Ord. of 7-10-2017]
§ 18-163. Use regulations. [Ord. of 7-10-2017]
(10) Posted placard with full contact information regarding owner;
(11) For purposes of Alcohol Beverage Control Act, HomeStay certain property
rented on a short-term basis is considered a bed and breakfast establishment
for purposes of alcohol beverage control licensing and that the exception from
alcohol beverage control licensing for serving alcoholic beverages to guests in
a residence does not apply if the guest is a short-term lessee of the residence.
(a) Prior to opening to the public, each host shall comply with all current safety issues,
including but not limited to Underwriters Laboratory standards for smoke alarms
and carbon monoxide detectors as follows:
(1) In all sleeping areas;
(2) In every room in the path of the means of egress from the sleeping area to the
door leading from the sleeping unit;
(3) In each story within the sleeping unit, including basements;
(b) Any/all sleeping areas must have one other adequate method of egress beyond the
entrance point.
(c) As part of the registration process, the host shall certify that the HomeStay unit
meets the requirements of this section. The registration forms shall also provide
that, as part of the registration, the host is agreeing to permit annual inspections of
the home (at reasonable times and after notice has been provided) to address
complaints. The failure to permit such an inspection is grounds for registration
suspension.
(a) No recreational vehicles, buses, or trailers shall be parked on the adjoining or
adjacent streets in conjunction with the HomeStay use. No commercial event,
weddings and/or receptions shall be held during the stay.
(b) The dates for trash and recycling collection shall be posted prominently in the
HomeStay unit.
(c) During each stay at the HomeStay unit, a principal guest shall be designated as the
contact person for Town officials in the event of safety or behavioral issues at the
unit. The host shall provide this information upon request to authorized Town
officials.
(d) The host shall not permit occupancy of a HomeStay unit for a period of less than 24
hours.
(e) The name and telephone number of the host or the host's responsible party shall be
conspicuously posted within the HomeStay unit. The host shall answer calls 24
hours a day, seven days a week for the duration of each short term rental to address
any problems associated with the HomeStay unit.
§ 18-161 BUSINESSES § 18-163
18:47
§ 18-164. Registration suspension or cancellation. [Ord. of 7-10-2017]
§ 18-165. Penalty. [Ord. of 7-10-2017]
It shall be unlawful to operate a HomeStay without registering as required by this
article, after a registration has been suspended or cancelled or in violation of any other
requirement of this article; the penalty shall be a fine of $250 for the first occurrence and
$500 for each subsequent occurrence thereafter payable to the Treasurer for the Town of
Abingdon.
(f) The principal guest of a HomeStay unit shall be at least 18 years of age.
(g) The maximum number of guests in a HomeStay unit is limited to six.
(h) Hosts, guests and third parties shall be subject to and shall adhere to all federal,
state and local ordinances statutes and/or applicable laws.
(a) A registration may be suspended or cancelled for the following reasons:
(1) Failure to collect and/or remit the transient occupancy tax.
(2) Three or more substantiated complaints (including, but not limited to, parking
on grass, noise, excess trash) within a twelve-month period.
(3) The failure of any HomeStay host to maintain his or her principal place of
residence or domicile at the dwelling unit used as a limited residential lodging.
(b) Before any suspension or cancellation can be effective, a duly designated officer of
the Town shall give written notice to the HomeStay host. The notice of suspension
or cancellation issued under the provisions of this chapter shall contain:
(1) A description of the violations constituting the basis of the suspension or
cancellation;
(2) If applicable, a statement of acts necessary to correct the violation; and
(3) A statement that if no request for a hearing is made within 10 days from the
date of the notice, the registration will be suspended or cancelled.
(c) The notice shall be given to the host by delivering a copy of the notice in person. If
the host cannot be found, such notice shall be sent by:
(1) Certified mail or e-mail to the addresses in the registration form; and
(2) A copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
(d) If requested, a hearing shall be held before the Town Manager and/or his designee.
It is the burden of the host to demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, why
the suspension or cancellation should not go into effect. The decision of the Town
Manager and/or his designee may be appealed to the Town Council.
§ 18-163 ABINGDON CODE § 18-165
18:48
Chapter 22
CIVIC AND CULTURAL FACILITIES AND AFFAIRS
§ 18-165 CIVIC AND CULTURAL FACILITIES AND AFFAIRS § 18-165
22:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 22-1. through § 22-25. (Reserved)
§ 22-1 CIVIC AND CULTURAL FACILITIES AND AFFAIRS § 22-1
22:3

ARTICLE II
Museum Advisory Committee
§ 22-26. Created, composition. [Ord. of 9-13-1993]
There is hereby created the Abingdon Museum Advisory Committee composed of seven
members appointed by the Town Council who shall serve without compensation.
§ 22-27. Terms. [Ord. of 9-13-1993]
The terms of office of the members of the museum advisory committee shall be for
three years or until their successors are appointed and qualified; the term of two or three
members shall expire annually. Vacancies in such committee occurring otherwise than
by expiration of the term shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired term.
§ 22-28. Organization. [Ord. of 9-13-1993]
Immediately after their appointment, the members of the museum advisory committee
shall meet and organize by electing one of their members chairman and such other
officers as may be necessary.
§ 22-29. Duties and responsibilities generally. [Ord. of 9-13-1993]
§ 22-30. Financial duties and responsibilities. [Ord. of 9-13-1993]
§ 22-31. Planning duties and responsibilities. [Ord. of 9-13-1993]
(a) The museum advisory committee shall make recommendations for approval by the
Town Council involving the establishment of a Town heritage museum.
(b) The museum advisory committee shall advise in the acceptance by the Town of any
grant, gift, bequest or donation of any personal or real property offered or made
available for museum purposes and which is judged to be of present or possible use
for the intended museum.
(c) The committee shall interpret the needs and purpose of the museum to the
community and interpret the needs and desires of the community to the Town
Council.
(d) The committee shall determine and establish the general policies to be followed in
carrying out the purpose for which the committee was established.
(a) The museum advisory committee shall have no authority to enter into any contract
or incur any obligation binding the Town.
(b) The committee shall assist the designated Town officials in development and
preparation of an annual budget for the museum to be submitted to the Town
Manager.
(c) The committee shall assist the designated Town officials in the development and
preparation of an annual budget for capital improvements (acquisition and
development) in accordance with the master plan for the Town museum.
§ 22-26 CIVIC AND CULTURAL FACILITIES AND AFFAIRS § 22-31
22:5
§ 22-32. through § 22-40. (Reserved)
(a) The museum advisory committee, with the assistance of appropriate Town
agencies, shall prepare a master plan for the acquisition of items and development
of the museum and update such plan annually consistent with the Town's
comprehensive plan. The master plan shall be submitted to the Town Council for
their review and approval.
(b) The committee shall investigate and determine the needs and interests of the
community for museum facilities and programs and recommend a program to meet
those needs.
§ 22-31 ABINGDON CODE § 22-32
22:6
ARTICLE III
Arthur Campbell Community Service Award
§ 22-41. Purpose. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Hereby established is the Arthur Campbell Community Service Award, an award and
medal that shall be presented to individuals who, at the sole discretion of the majority
opinion of the Council for the Town of Abingdon, have made extraordinary
contributions to the Town, specifically discussed below.
§ 22-42. Medal. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The medal, created and authorized herein by this article, shall be the design product of
the Council and whatsoever design craftsmen or consultants it collectively decides to
employ for advice in arriving at its final product.
§ 22-43. Council to receive annual nominations and name recipient(s). [Ord. of
2-7-2011]
The medal(s) shall be given on an annual basis at an event designated by Council.
The medal(s) shall be awarded to individuals who have first been duly nominated via
completion of a nomination packet made available to the public. Recipients shall be
those chosen from nominees who are deemed by the majority of the Council to have met
the qualifications set forth herein. While the medal may be awarded posthumously, it
shall be the intent of Council to make the award whenever possible when it is deemed
that worthy nominees are reaching the pinnacle of their respective careers.
The medal(s) shall be considered the highest award presented by the Town of Abingdon
and while there shall be no set maximum or minimum per annum with regard to
recipients, it shall be awarded with great scrutiny as it is intended exclusively for
extraordinary service and achievement as set forth herein.
§ 22-44. Recipient qualifications, eligibility. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Recipients shall be those persons who have either made extraordinary contributions
to the Town and/or people of Abingdon, Virginia, southwest Virginia or those from
Abingdon who have made extraordinary contributions on a state or national level. The
medal shall be presented for service and achievement in areas including, but not limited
to:
Government/Public Service
The Arts (Performing and/or Visual)
Literature
Education
Science
Medicine
Humanitarian Service
Philanthropy
§ 22-41 CIVIC AND CULTURAL FACILITIES AND AFFAIRS § 22-44
22:7
Athletic Achievement
Heroism
§ 22-45. Recipients to become Arthur Campbell Society Fellows. [Ord. of
2-7-2011]
The medal shall be awarded subject to a resolution by Council which shall state the
basis for creation of the award and provide the basis for its presentation. Recipients shall
be named "Arthur Campbell Fellows" and be automatically added as members of the
"Arthur Campbell Society." All Arthur Campbell Fellows shall be invited to a Town of
Abingdon social event, the time and location of which shall be determined by Council
on an annual basis.
§ 22-44 ABINGDON CODE § 22-45
22:8
Chapter 26
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
§ 22-45 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT § 22-45
26:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 26-1. through § 26-25. (Reserved)
§ 26-1 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT § 26-1
26:3

ARTICLE II
Tourism Advisory Committee
§ 26-26. Creation; composition; appointment; compensation. [Ord. of 11-4-1991;
Ord. of 3-7-2011]
There shall be a tourism advisory committee in the Town, which shall be composed of
up to 15 members appointed by the Council who shall serve without compensation.
§ 26-27. Terms; vacancies. [Ord. of 11-4-1991]
The terms of office of the members of the tourism advisory committee shall be for three
years or until their successors are appointed and qualified; the term of three members
shall expire annually thereafter. Vacancies in such committee occurring otherwise than
by expiration of the term shall be filled by the Council for the unexpired term.
§ 26-28. Organization. [Ord. of 11-4-1991]
Immediately after their appointment, the members of the tourism advisory committee
shall meet and organize by electing one of their members chairman and such other
officers as may be necessary.
§ 26-29. Duties and responsibilities generally. [Ord. of 11-4-1991]
The duties and responsibilities of the tourism advisory committee shall be to:
§ 26-30. Financial duties and responsibilities. [Ord. of 11-4-1991]
§ 26-31. Planning duties and responsibilities. [Ord. of 11-4-1991]
The tourism advisory committee shall investigate and determine the needs and interests
of the community for tourism facilities and programs and recommend a tourism program
(a) Encourage and support the goals and objectives of the Town.
(b) Provide an official channel of input on tourism issues from attractions and
businesses to the office of tourism, Town management and the Town Council.
(c) Provide resources and support to the director of tourism by sharing information and
experiences on tourism issues.
(d) Cultivate cooperative efforts in advertising, publicity, research and other aspects of
the promotion of tourism.
(e) Coordinate tourism development with other agencies in order to avoid duplication
of efforts.
(a) The tourism advisory committee shall have no authority to enter into any contract
or incur any obligation binding the Town.
(b) The committee shall assist the director of tourism in development and preparation
of an annual budget for the division to be submitted to the Town Manager and
subsequently to the Town Council, at the time designated by the Town Manager.
§ 26-26 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT § 26-31
26:5
to meet those needs.
§ 26-32. through § 26-40. (Reserved)
§ 26-31 ABINGDON CODE § 26-32
26:6
ARTICLE III
Economic Development Authority
§ 26-41. Political subdivision — created. [Ord. of 6-2-1997; amended 1-7-20134
]
There is hereby created a political subdivision of the commonwealth with such public
and corporate powers as are set forth in the Industrial Development and Revenue Bond
Act (Code of Virginia, Title 15.2, Chapter 4900, as amended), including such powers as
may hereafter be set forth from time to time in such Act.
§ 26-42. Same — Name. [Ord. of 6-2-1997; amended 1-7-2013]
The name of the political subdivision of the commonwealth created hereby shall be the
Economic Development Authority of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia (the Authority").
§ 26-43. Membership. [Ord. of 6-2-1997; amended 1-7-2013]
The Town shall appoint seven members to serve on the initial board in accordance with
the aforesaid Act.
4. Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended the title of this article, which was formerly Industrial Development
Authority.
§ 26-41 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT § 26-43
26:7

Chapter 30
ENVIRONMENT
§ 26-43 ENVIRONMENT § 26-43
30:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 30-1. through § 30-29. (Reserved)
§ 30-1 ENVIRONMENT § 30-1
30:3

ARTICLE II
Noise
§ 30-30. Generally. [Ord. of 5-6-20195
]
In order to promote the public policy of the Town in providing an environment for its
citizens that is free from noise at levels which can jeopardize their health or welfare or
which degrades the quality of life, the creation and continuation of any noise at such
loud and disturbing levels, as specified within this article, in the Town limits are hereby
prohibited.
§ 30-31. Definitions. [Ord. of 5-6-2019]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
DEVICE — Any mechanism which is intended to, or which actually produces excessive
noise when operated or handled.
DISCERNIBLE — The sound is sufficiently distinct such that its source can be clearly
identified.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from
immediate exposure to danger, including work performed by public service companies
when emergency inspection, repair of facilities or restoration of services is required for
the immediate health, safety or welfare of the community.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — Any sound which reaches a level that annoys or disturbs
humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological
effect on human beings. Specific examples of prohibited excessive noise are set forth in
Section 30-32 of this chapter.
INSTRUMENT — Any musical instrument, radio, phonograph, compact disc player,
amplifier or any other device, which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound.
MIXED USE AREA — The parcel on which one or more residential dwellings and at
least one other non-residential use are located and any contiguous rights-of-ways, roads,
streets, lanes, sidewalks, or other such means of egress and ingress to any such parcel.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is self-propelled or designated for selfpropulsion, but not limited to, passenger car, trucks, truck-trailer, semi-trailer,
recreational vehicles, motorboats and racing vehicles; and any motorcycle (including
but not limited to motor scooters and mini-bikes) as defined in the Code of Virginia,
§ 46.2-100.
NOISE — The intensity, frequency, duration or character of sounds from a single source
or multiple sources that may degrade the public health, safety or welfare.
PERSONS — Any individual, corporation, cooperative, company, partnership, firm,
association, trust, estate, private institution, group, agency, or any legal successor,
5. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former Art. II, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived
from Ord. of 7-1-10(1), § 3.
§ 30-30 ENVIRONMENT § 30-31
30:5
representative, agent or agency thereof. This term shall not include the federal, state,
county, Town, city or local government, or any agency or institution thereof.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be heard clearly by a person using his or
her unaided hearing faculties. When music is involved, the detection of rhythmic bass
tones shall be sufficient to be considered plainly audible sound.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, alley or public
space, which is owned or controlled by a public governmental entity.
QUIET ZONE — Whenever the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
so require, after a duly advertised public hearing, the Town Council may designate
any geographical area of the Town as a "quiet zone." Such designation shall include a
description of the subject area, the reasons for its designation as a quiet zone and shall
prescribe the level of noise which shall be permitted in such a quiet zone.
RESIDENTIAL — Refers to single-unit, two-unit and multiunit dwellings, and
residential areas of planned residential zoning district classifications, as set out in the
Zoning Ordinance, Appendix B, the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Abingdon,
Virginia, as amended.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — Any street, highway or alley in the Town where 60% of the
improved property is occupied by dwellings not used for business purposes.
RESTAURANT — Any building or structure where in the normal course of business
food or drink is available for eating on the premises, in consideration for payment. For
purposes of this chapter, the term restaurant includes, but is not limited to, banquet
halls, bars, lounges, taverns, coffee shops, nightclubs, cafeterias, cafes and similar dining
facilities (including associated commercial kitchens).
SOUND — A temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical quantity, in
a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium,
and which propagates at a finite to distance point. The description of sound may include
any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND PRESSURE — The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and
the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space.
STATIONARY NOISE SOURCE — Any equipment or facility, fixed or movable that
is capable of emitting sound beyond the property boundary of the property on which it is
used.
ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION — Refers to the scheme of land use
classification.
§ 30-32. Specific prohibitions. [Ord. of 5-6-2019]
(a) The following acts are declared to be noise disturbances in violation of this article
and are prohibited within the Town 24 hours a day, subject to the exemptions
provided in Section 30-33:
(1) No motor vehicle shall be loaded with materials likely to create excessive
noises by materials striking together without using every reasonable effort to
prevent or eliminate the noise.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person in operating a motor vehicle within the
§ 30-31 ABINGDON CODE § 30-32
30:6
Town on public or private property to create in the operation thereof any
excessive noise. In operating such vehicle, the following acts are deemed to be
in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be exclusive:
a. To make, continue to make, or cause to be made, through use of a motor
vehicle, an excessive noise disturbance within the Town;
b. The use of a vehicle so out of repair as to cause excessive noise such as
grating, grinding, rattling or any/all such excessive noises;
c. The practice of unnecessarily racing or accelerating the motor of a vehicle
while standing or moving, thereby causing excessive noise from such
motor;
d. The practice of unnecessarily retarding the spark to the motor of a vehicle
and thereby causing excessive noise, or back-fire from the motor;
e. In starting the vehicle from a standing position, the practice of gaining
speed unnecessarily quickly and thereby causing excessive noise from the
motor and/or the screening of tires;
f. The practice of coming to an unreasonably quick stop with a vehicle and
thereby causing excessive noise through unnecessary grinding of brakes
and/or the screening of tires;
g. The operating of vehicles off-road creating excessive noise plainly
audible across property boundaries; and
h. The sounding of any horn, whistle or signaling device on any motor
vehicle, except as a danger warning;
i. Operating or permitting another to operate any radio receiving set, soundamplifying equipment or other device for the production of sound in or
on motor vehicles within the Town in such a manner to create excessive
noise which is plainly audible 50 feet from such motor vehicle;
j. The operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle within the Town with a
gutted muffler, muffler cutout, straight exhaust, or without an exhaust in
good working order, as provided by Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1047 and
46.2-1049.
(3) To create noise in excess of that prescribed within an area designated as a
"quiet zone" provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in adjacent or
contiguous streets indicating that the area is a "quiet zone."
(b) The following acts are prohibited in the Town between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.:
(1) Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio,
television, record, tape or compact disc player, drum, musical instrument, or
similar device for the production of sound in such a manner as to be plainly
audible and discernible across a residential real property boundary or through
partitions common to two residences within one building; or
§ 30-32 ENVIRONMENT § 30-32
30:7
§ 30-33. Exemptions. [Ord. of 5-6-2019]
(2) The operation of any equipment or other noise making device in such a manner
as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet or more from the building in
which it is located; or
(3) The operation of any device emitting noise in such a manner that it is plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet from its source.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in construction work in the Town
to excavate, demolish or engage in alteration or repair of any building or
improvement between the aforementioned hours, 11:00 p.m. — 7:00 a.m.
except in the case of emergency and under a permit granted by the Town
Manager. In considering the granting, conditioning or denial of the permit, the
Town Manager shall be guided by the following standards:
a. Nature of the emergency;
b. Proposed extended hours of operation;
c. Duration of period of requested extended hours;
d. Character of the area surrounding the construction site; and
e. Number of residential units which would be impacted.
(5) Owning, keeping possessing or harboring any animal which frequently or
habitually howls, barks, meows, squawks, or makes such other noise that is
plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from its source or through partitions
common to two residences within one building.
(6) Excessive noise created by yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or
any other means of creating such on the public street which is plainly audible
at a distance of 50 feet from its source.
(a) The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this article:
(1) The use of intercoms or paging systems by businesses located in commercial
areas, provided that the sound system is used for paging purposes only.
(2) Sound amplifying equipment used at public parks or recreation fields,
provided the operation has been approved by the park or field management.
(3) Clock chimes, bells and music played for a call to worship between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(4) Motor vehicles driven in wedding processions are exempted from the
provisions of Section 30-32(a)(1) only.
(5) Motor vehicles driven in duly authorized parades.
(6) The provisions of this article shall not apply to the emission of sound in the
purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, nor the emission
of sound in the performance of emergency work.
§ 30-32 ABINGDON CODE § 30-33
30:8
§ 30-34. Issuance of permits. [Ord. of 5-6-2019]
§ 30-35. Enforcement and penalties. [Ord. of 5-6-2019]
(7) The use of a loudspeaker, on a motor vehicle for making auction sales on
streets or highways directly in front of property being sold and entirely outside
of the business districts of the Town, provided said use is for the sale of such
property only.
(8) The use of a loudspeaker for making auction sales on the property being sold
provided such use is for the sale of said property only.
(9) Commercial establishments located in areas zoned for mixed use as defined
herein between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m.
(a) The Town Manager in his discretion, except as restricted below, shall be authorized
to grant or issue permits to persons allowing said persons to deviate from the
prohibitions of this article, provided however, that the issuance of said permit is for
an otherwise lawful purpose.
(b) Any permit issued by the Town Manager for the use of sound-amplifying
equipment shall be subject to the following:
(1) The only sound permitted is music and human speech.
(2) The person granted the permit may only operate during the hours specified by
the Town Manager in the permit.
(3) Human speech and music amplified shall not be lewd, indecent, slanderous or
inciting to riot or other unlawful conduct.
(4) Must operate within any restrictions as noted on the permit by the Town
Manager.
(a) The criminal provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Town police
department, who may administer measurement procedures, issue orders and
regulations with regard to such enforcement. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imposing a fine of not less than $300
for the first offense, $500 for the second offense within a twelve-month period, and
$1,000 for any subsequent offense within the same twelve-month period. Each day
the violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(b) Instead of the criminal enforcement of this chapter the Town may bring a suit for
injunction, abatement, penalty or other appropriate civil or criminal remedies that
may be available to it. Each separate finding of violation of this ordinance shall
impose a civil penalty liability of $250 for the first offense and $500 for subsequent
offenses.
(c) Citizens of the Town believing that excessive noise constituting a public nuisance
exists may utilize the procedure set forth in Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended
§ 48-1 et seq., or any other legal civil or criminal remedies that may be available to
§ 30-33 ENVIRONMENT § 30-35
30:9
§ 30-36. through § 30-50. (Reserved)
them.
§ 30-35 ABINGDON CODE § 30-36
30:10
ARTICLE III
Nuisances
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 30-51. (Reserved)6
§ 30-52. Definitions. [Ord. of 3-7-2005]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
NUISANCE — As used in this article means and includes, but is not limited to,
dangerous or unhealthy substances which have escaped, spilled, been released, or which
have been allowed to accumulate in or on any place, the accumulation of weeds on
private and public property, the accumulation of snow on sidewalks, the accumulation
of offensive, unwholesome, unsanitary or unhealthy substances in or on any place or
premises, and all unsafe, dangerous, or unsanitary public or private buildings, walls, or
structures which constitute a menace to the health and safety of the occupants thereof or
the public.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — As used in this article means and includes, but is not limited
to, the owner, occupier, or possessor of the premises where a nuisance as defined above
is located. The owner or agent of the owner of the material which escaped, spilled or
was released and the owner or agent of the owner who was transporting or otherwise
responsible for such material and whose acts or negligence caused such public nuisance.
§ 30-53. Prohibition. [Ord. of 3-7-2005]
§ 30-54. through § 30-60. (Reserved)
(a) It shall be unlawful for any responsible party to create or allow to be maintained
within the Town any activity or condition which constitutes a nuisance as
previously defined in this article.
(b) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000. Each
day's continuance of a nuisance after notice to abate shall constitute a separate
offense.
6. Editor's Note: Former § 30-51, which pertained to determination and derived from Code 1985, § 8-6, was repealed
3-7-2005.
§ 30-51 ENVIRONMENT § 30-54
30:11

DIVISION 2
Abatement
§ 30-61. through § 30-64. (Reserved)7
§ 30-65. Powers and duties of Town Manager. [Ord. of 3-7-2005]
When a designated Town official shall declare any condition or activity in the Town
to be a nuisance, the Town Manager is hereby vested with the authority to require the
abatement or removal of all nuisances, employing all methods of abatement allowable
by law.
§ 30-66. Abatement procedure. [Ord. of 3-7-2005]
§ 30-67. through § 30-85. (Reserved)
(a) Whenever a nuisance is found by a designated Town official to exist on premises in
the Town, it shall be his duty to provide reasonable notice to abate to the
responsible party who created or maintained the nuisance. The responsible party
shall cause such nuisance to be abated within 30 days of proper reasonable notice
being given, and if he fails to do so, the same may be abated, razed or removed by
the Town at the expense of the responsible party. All costs of said abatement, razing
or removal will be collected in any manner provided by law for the collection of
state or local taxes.
(b) If the identity of such responsible party cannot be ascertained, the written notice to
abate may be posted in a conspicuous location upon the property on which the
nuisance is located and by publication of the said notice in a local newspaper having
general circulation within the Town.
(c) Every charge of abatement in excess of $200 which is assessed to the owner of any
such property to which a nuisance is sought to be abated shall constitute a lien
against such property, and all such liens shall have the same priority as other unpaid
local taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner as provided by state law.
The Town may waive such liens in order to facilitate the sale of the property;
however, such liens may only be waived as to a purchaser who is unrelated by blood
or marriage to the owner and who has no business, association with the owner. All
such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner of the property at the time
the liens were imposed.
(d) Notwithstanding the abatement procedures set forth previously herein, the Town
may maintain an action to compel a responsible party to abate, raze or remove a
public nuisance, or to recover the costs of said abatement, razing or removal of the
public nuisance.
7. Editor's Note: Former §§ 30-61 through 30-64, which pertained to powers and duties of the Town Manager, notice,
court proceedings, and penalties, and which derived from Code 1985, §§ 8-7 through 8-9, were repealed 5-7-2005.
§ 30-61 ENVIRONMENT § 30-67
30:13

ARTICLE IV
Erosion And Sediment Control
§ 30-86. Purpose, and authority. [Ord. of 4-4-1977; Ord. of 1-9-1995; Ord. of
9-10-2001; Ord. of 4-7-20148
]
This article shall be known as the Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance of the Town
of Abingdon. The purpose of this article is to prevent degradation of properties, stream
channels, waters and other natural resources of the Town of Abingdon by establishing
requirements for the control of soil erosion, sediment deposition and nonagricultural
runoff and by establishing procedures whereby these requirements shall be administered
and enforced. This article is authorized by the Code of Virginia, title 62.1, Chapter 3.1,
Article 2.4 (sec. 62.1-44.15:54 et seq.), known as the Virginia Erosion and Sediment
Control Law.
§ 30-87. Definitions. [Ord. of 4-4-1977; Ord. of 1-9-1995; Ord. of 9-10-2001; Ord.
of 4-7-2014]
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
AGREEMENT IN LIEU OF A PLAN — A contract between the VESCP authority
and the owner that specifies erosion and sediment control measures and other
conservation measures that must be implemented in the construction of a singlefamily residence in lieu of a formal site plan.
APPLICANT — Any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan for
approval or requesting the issuance of a permit, when required, authorizing landdisturbing activities to commence.
BOARD — The state water control board.
CERTIFIED INSPECTOR — An employee or agent of the VESCP authority who
holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of project inspection or
is enrolled in the board's training program for project inspection and successfully
completes such program within one year after enrollment.
CERTIFIED PLAN REVIEWER — An employee or agent of the VESCP authority
who holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of plan review, is
enrolled in the board's training program for plan review and successfully completes
such program within one year after enrollment, or is licensed as a professional
engineer, architect, landscape architect, or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1
(§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of title 54.1, or professional soil scientist as
defined in § 54.1-2200.
CERTIFIED PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR — An employee or agent of the
VESCP authority who holds a certificate of competence from the board in an
area of program administration or is enrolled in the board's training program for
program administration and successfully completes such program within one year
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. IV, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from
Ord. of 4-4-1977, Ord. of 1-9-1995, Ord. of 6-10-2001 and Ord. of 9-10-2001.
§ 30-86 ENVIRONMENT § 30-87
30:15
after enrollment.
CLEARING — Any activity which removes the vegetative ground cover including,
but not limited to, root mat removal or top soil removal.
COUNTY — The County of Washington, Virginia.
DEPARTMENT — The department of environmental quality.
DEVELOPMENT — Land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with
the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation,
transportation, or utility facilities or structures, or the clearing of land for nonagricultural or non-silvicultural purposes.
DIRECTOR — The director of the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN or PLAN — A document
containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or
group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and
water plan inventory and management information with needed interpretations, and
a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain
all major conservation decisions to ensure that the entire unit or units of land will
be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives.
EROSION IMPACT AREA — An area of land not associated with current landdisturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of
sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not
apply to any lot or parcel of land of 10,000 square feet or less used for residential
purposes.
EXCAVATING — Any digging, scooping or other methods of removing earth
materials.
FILLING — Any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials.
GRADING — Any excavating or filling of earth material or any combination
thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled conditions.
LAND DISTURBING PERMIT — A permit issued by the VESCP authority for the
clearing, filling, excavating, grading, transporting of land or for any combination
thereof or for any purpose set forth herein.
LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY — Any man-made change to the land surface
that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments
into state waters or onto lands in the commonwealth, disturbing 10,000 square feet
or more, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting
and filling of land, except that the term shall not include:
Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home
landscaping, repairs and maintenance work;
(1)
(2) Individual service connections;
Installation, maintenance, or repair of any underground public utility lines
when such activity occurs on an existing hard surfaced road, street or sidewalk
provided the land-disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street
or sidewalk that is hard surfaced;
(3)
§ 30-87 ABINGDON CODE § 30-87
30:16
NATURAL CHANNEL DESIGN CONCEPTS — The utilization of engineering
analysis and fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore, or
stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating or recreating a
stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its banks and allows larger
flows to access its bankfull bench and its floodplain.
OWNER — The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor,
trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property.
PEAK FLOW RATE — The maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm
condition at a particular location.
Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for landdisturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the
septic tank system;
(4)
Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas
operations and projects conducted pursuant to title 45.1; of the Code of
Virginia;
(5)
Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops,
or livestock feedlot operations; or as additionally set forth by the board in
regulation, including engineering operations as follows: construction of
terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches,
strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land
drainage and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to
harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is
reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, or is converted to bona
fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Subsection B of
§ 10.1-1163; of the Code of Virginia;
(6)
Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, right-of-way, bridges, communication
facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company;
(7)
Agricultural engineering operations including but not limited to the
construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes,
ponds not required to comply with the provisions of the Dam Safety Act,
Article 2 (§ 10.1-604 et seq.) Chapter 6 of the Code of Virginia ditches,
strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land
drainage and land irrigation;
(8)
(9) Disturbed land areas of less than 10,000 square feet in size;
Installation of fence and signposts or telephone and electric poles and other
kinds of posts or poles;
(10)
Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and emergency repairs;
however, if the land-disturbing activity would have required an approved
erosion and sediment control plan, if the activity were not an emergency, then
the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the
requirements of the Town.
(11)
§ 30-87 ENVIRONMENT § 30-87
30:17
PERMITTEE — The person to whom the permit authorizing land-disturbing
activities is issued or the person who certifies that the approved erosion and
sediment control plan will be followed.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or
private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution,
utility, cooperative, county, city, Town or other political subdivision of the
commonwealth, governmental body, including a federal or state entity as
applicable, any interstate body, or any other legal entity.
PLAN-APPROVING AUTHORITY — The VESCP authority including the Town
of Abingdon staff person or department responsible for administering the VESCP
on behalf of the Town of Abingdon.
PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR, (hereinafter referred to as "Administrator") —
The representative of the Town who is responsible for administering the VESCP on
behalf of the Town of Abingdon.
RESPONSIBLE LAND DISTURBER (RLD) — An individual from the project or
development team, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out a landdisturbing activity covered by an approved erosion and sediment control plan or
agreement in lieu of a plan, who (i) holds a responsible land disturber certificate
of competence, (ii) holds a current certificate of competence from the board in
the areas of combined administration, program administration, inspection, or plan
review, (iii) holds a current contractor certificate of competence for erosion and
sediment control, or (iv) is licensed in Virginia as a professional engineer, architect,
landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1 (sec. 54.1-400 et seq.) of
Chapter 4 of title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia.
RUNOFF VOLUME — The volume of water that runs off the land development
project from a prescribed storm event.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE — A detached, freestanding building containing
a single dwelling unit, i.e., a building that has no attachment or connection by a
common party wall to another similar building.
STATE PERMIT — An approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the
state board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued
under a state general permit or an approval issued by the state board for stormwater
discharges from an MS4. Under these state permits, the commonwealth imposes
and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations,
the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and the regulations.
STATE WATERS — All waters on the surface and under the ground wholly or
partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdictions.
TOWN — The incorporated Town of Abingdon, Virginia.
TRANSPORTING — Any moving of earth materials from one place to another
place other than such movement incidental to grading, when such movement results
in destroying the vegetative ground cover either by tracking or the buildup of earth
materials to the extent that erosion and sedimentation will result from the soil or
earth materials over which such transporting occurs.
VIRGINIA EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PROGRAM AUTHORITY
§ 30-87 ABINGDON CODE § 30-87
30:18
§ 30-88. Local program generally. [Ord. of 4-4-1977; Ord. of 1-9-1995; Ord. of
9-10-2001; Ord. of 4-7-2014]
or VESCP AUTHORITY — An authority approved by the board to operate a
Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Program. An authority may include a state
entity, including the department; a federal entity; a county, city, or Town; or
for linear projects subject to annual standards and specifications, electric, natural
gas and telephone utility companies, interstate and intrastate natural gas pipeline
companies, railroad companies, or authorities created pursuant to § 15.2-5102 of
the Code of Virginia. As used in this article the VESCP authority shall refer to the
Town of Abingdon, Virginia.
VIRGINIA EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PROGRAM or VESCP —
A program approved by the board that has been established by a VESCP authority
for the effective control of soil erosion, sediment deposition, and nonagricultural
runoff associated with a land-disturbing activity to prevent the unreasonable
degradation of properties, stream channels, waters, and other natural resources
and shall include such items where applicable as local ordinances, rules, permit
requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines,
technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement
where authorized in this ordinance, and evaluation consistent with the requirements
of this ordinance and its associated regulations.
VIRGINIA STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AUTHORITY or
VSMP AUTHORITY — An authority approved by the state board after September
13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program.
VIRGINIA STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM or VSMP — A
program approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, that has been
established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from
land-disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules,
permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines,
technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement,
where authorized in this ordinance, and evaluation consistent with the requirements
of this article and associated regulations.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME — The volume equal to the first one-half inch of
runoff multiplied by the impervious surface of the land development project.
(a) The Town shall have a soil erosion and sediment control program consistent with
the state program and regulations for erosion and sediment control.
(b) To carry out its program, the Town shall adopt regulations consistent with the state
program. The regulations may be revised from time to time as necessary. Before
adopting or revising regulations, the Town shall give due notice and conduct a
public hearing on the proposed or revised regulations, except that a public hearing
shall not be required when the Town is amending its program to conform to
revisions in the state program. However, a public hearing shall be held if the Town
proposes or revises regulations that are more stringent than the state program.
(c) Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:54 of the Code of Virginia, the Town hereby adopts the
regulations, references, guidelines, standards and specifications promulgated by the
§ 30-87 ENVIRONMENT § 30-88
30:19
§ 30-89. Regulated land-disturbing activities; submission and approval of plans;
contents of plans. [Ord. of 4-4-1977; Ord. of 1-9-1995; Ord. of 9-10-2001; Ord. of
4-7-2014]
board, for the effective control of soil erosion and sediment deposition to prevent
the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other
natural resources. Said regulations, references, guidelines, standards and
specifications for erosion and sediment control are included in but not limited to the
"Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations" and the Virginia Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook, as amended from time to time.
(d) The Town hereby designates the Department of Public Works or its appointee as
the program administrator.
(e) The program and regulations provided for in this article shall be made available for
public inspection at the office of the director of public works.
(f) Pursuant to, § 62.1-44.15:53 of the Code of Virginia an erosion control plan shall
not be approved until it is reviewed by a certified plan reviewer. Inspections of
land-disturbing activities shall be conducted by a certified inspector. The erosion
control program of the Town shall contain a certified program administrator, a
certified plan reviewer, and a certified inspector, who may be the same person.
(a) Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity
until he or she has submitted to the department of public works, an erosion and
sediment control plan for the land- disturbing activity, and such plan has been
reviewed and approved by the plan-approving authority. Where land-disturbing
activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one VESCP authority,
an erosion and sediment control plan, at the option of the applicant, may be
submitted to the board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction
concerned. Where the land-disturbing activity results from the construction of a
single-family residence, an agreement in lieu of a plan may be substituted for an
erosion and sediment control plan if executed by the administrator.
(b) The standards contained within the "Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control
Regulations," the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook as amended
are to be used by the applicant when making a submittal under the provisions of this
ordinance and in the preparation of an erosion and sediment control plan. The plan
approving authority, in considering the adequacy of a submitted plan, shall be
guided by the same standards, regulations and guidelines. When the standards vary
between the publications, the state regulations shall take precedence.
Stream restoration and relocation projects that incorporate natural channel design
concepts are not man-made channels and shall be exempt from any flow rate
capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels as defined
in any regulations promulgated pursuant to this section, § 62.1-44.15:54, or
62.1-44.15:65 of the Code of Virginia.
Any plan approved prior to July 1, 2014, that provides for stormwater management
that addresses any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or manmade channels shall satisfy the flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for
§ 30-88 ABINGDON CODE § 30-89
30:20
natural or man-made channels if the practices are designed to (i) detain the water
quality volume and to release it over 48 hours; (ii) detain and release over a twentyfour-hour period the expected rainfall resulting from the one year, twenty-fourhour storm; and (iii) reduce the allowable peak flow rate resulting from the 1.5,
2, and ten-year, twenty-four-hour storms to a level that is less than or equal to
the peak flow rate from the site assuming it was in a good forested condition,
achieved through multiplication of the forested peak flow rate by a reduction factor
that is equal to the runoff volume from the site when it was in a good forested
condition divided by the runoff volume from the site in its proposed condition,
and shall be exempt from any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for
natural or man-made channels as defined in any regulations promulgated pursuant
to § 62.1-44.15:54 or 62.1-44.15:65 of the Code of Virginia. For plans approved
on and after July 1, 2014, the flow rate capacity and velocity requirements of
this subsection shall be satisfied by compliance with water quantity requirements
in the Stormwater Management Act, title 62.1, Chapter 3.1, Article 2.3 (sec.
62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia and attendant regulations, unless such
land-disturbing activities are in accordance with 9VAC25-870-48 of the Virginia
Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) permit regulations.
(c) The VESCP authority shall review conservation plans submitted to it and grant
written approval within 60 days of the receipt of the plan if the administrator
determines that the plan meets the requirements of the board's regulations and if the
person responsible for carrying out the plan certifies that he will properly perform
the conservation measures included in the plan and will conform to the provisions
of this article. In addition, as a prerequisite to engaging in the land-disturbing
activities shown on the approved plan, the person responsible for carrying out the
plan shall provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, to
the administrator, as provided by § 62.1-44.15:54, of the Virginia Erosion and
Sediment Control Law, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out
the land-disturbing activity. Failure to provide the name of an individual holding a
certificate of competence prior to engaging in land-disturbing activities may result
in revocation of the approval of the plan and the person responsible for carrying out
the plan shall be subject to the penalties provided in this ordinance. However, the
administrator may waive the certificate of competence requirement for an
agreement in lieu of a plan for construction of a single-family residence. If a
violation occurs during the land-disturbing activity, then the person responsible for
carrying out the agreement in lieu of a plan shall correct the violation and provide
the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, as provided by
§ 62.1-44.15:52 of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law. Failure to
provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence shall be a
violation of this ordinance.
(d) The plan shall be acted upon within 60 days from receipt thereof by either
approving said plan in writing or by disapproving said plan in writing and giving
specific reasons for its disapproval. When a plan is determined to be inadequate,
written notice of disapproval stating the specific reasons for disapproval shall be
communicated to the applicant within 45 days. The notice shall specify the
modifications, terms and conditions that will permit approval of the plan. If no
action is taken by the administrator within the time specified above, the plan shall
be deemed approved and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed
§ 30-89 ENVIRONMENT § 30-89
30:21
activity. The Town shall act on any erosion and sediment control plan that has been
previously disapproved within 45 days after the plan has been revised, resubmitted
for approval, and deemed adequate.
(e) The administrator may require changes to an approved plan in the following cases:
(1) The inspection reveals that the plan is inadequate to satisfy applicable
regulations; or
(2) The person responsible for carrying out the plan finds that because of changed
circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan cannot be effectively
carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the
requirements of this ordinance, are agreed to by the administrator and the
person responsible for carrying out the plans.
(f) Variances: The Town may waive or modify any of the standards that are deemed to
be too restrictive for site conditions, by granting a variance. A variance may be
granted under these conditions:
(1) At the time of plan submission, an applicant may request a variance to become
part of the approved erosion and sediment control plan. The applicant shall
explain the reasons for requesting variances in writing. Specific variances
which are allowed by the VESCP authority shall be documented in the plan.
(2) During construction, the person responsible for implementing the approved
plan may request a variance in writing from the administrator. The
administrator shall respond in writing either approving or disapproving such a
request. If the administrator does not approve a variance within 10 days of
receipt of the request, the request shall be considered to be disapproved.
Following disapproval, the applicant may resubmit a variance request with
additional documentation.
(g) In order to prevent further erosion, the administrator may require approval of a plan
for any land identified in the local program as an erosion impact area.
(h) When land-disturbing activity will be required of a contractor performing
construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the preparation, submission,
and approval of an erosion and sediment control plan shall be the responsibility of
the owner.
(i) In accordance with the procedure set forth by § 62.1-44.15:55(E) of the Code of
Virginia, any person engaging, in more than one jurisdiction, in the creation and
operation of wetland mitigation or stream restoration banks, which have been
approved and are operated in accordance with applicable federal and state guidance,
laws, or regulations for the establishment, use, and operation of wetland mitigation
or stream restoration banks, pursuant to a mitigation banking instrument signed by
the Department of Environmental Quality, the Marine Resources Commission, or
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, may, at the option of that person, file general
erosion and sediment control specifications for wetland mitigation or stream
restoration banks annually with the board for review and approval consistent with
guidelines established by the board.
§ 30-89 ABINGDON CODE § 30-89
30:22
§ 30-90. Permits; fees; security for performance. [Ord. of 4-4-1977; Ord. of
1-9-1995; Ord. of 9-10-2001; Ord. of 4-7-2014]
(j) State agency projects are exempt from the provisions of this article, except as
provided for in Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:56.
(k) A minimum of three copies or an adequate number as specified by the
administrator, of the final approved erosion and sediment control plan and all
supporting data shall be submitted to the administrator for project distribution.
(a) Agencies authorized under any other law to issue grading, building, or other permits
for activities involving land-disturbing activities regulated under this ordinance
may not issue any such permit unless the applicant submits with his application an
approved erosion and sediment control plan and certification that the plan will be
followed and, upon the development of an online reporting system by the
department but no later than July 1, 2014, evidence of Virginia Stormwater
Management State Permit coverage where it is required.
(b) A person shall not conduct any land-disturbing activity until he or she has submitted
a permit application to the Town that includes a state VSMP permit registration
statement and, after July 1, 2014, a stormwater management plan, and has obtained
Town approval to begin land disturbance.
(c) A plan review and inspection fee in the amounts authorized by the Town Council
from time to time shall be paid to the Town at the time of submission of the erosion
and sediment control plan.
(d) No land-disturbing permit shall be issued until the applicant submits with his
application an approved erosion and sediment control plan, and certification that
the plan will be followed. All control measures shall be undertaken at the expense
of the owner, or his agent. Pending such actual provision thereof, the owner or his
agent shall file with the Town prior to the issuance of the land-disturbing permit an
agreement and bond with surety in the amount determined by the Town in a sum
equal to the approximate total cost of providing erosion and sedimentation control
improvements. The bond, as stated below, shall guarantee proper control measures
will be properly and satisfactorily undertaken and maintained by the permittee.
(e) All applicants, excluding state and federal entities, for permits shall provide to the
Town a performance bond, cash escrow, or an irrevocable letter of credit, any
combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to the Town
Manager, or his designee, to ensure that measures could be taken by the Town at
the applicant's expense should the applicant fail, after proper notice, within the time
specified to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation measures required of him
as a result of his land-disturbing activity. Should it be necessary for the Town to
take such conservation action, the Town may collect from the applicant any costs
in excess of the amount of the surety held. Within 60 days of adequate stabilization,
as determined by the administrator, or his designee, such bond, cash escrow or letter
of credit, or other legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion
thereof shall be either refunded to the applicant or terminated. These requirements
are in addition to all other provisions relating to the issuance of permits and are not
intended to otherwise affect the requirements for such permits.
§ 30-89 ENVIRONMENT § 30-91
30:23
§ 30-91. Monitoring, reports, and inspections. [Ord. of 4-4-1977; Ord. of 1-9-1995;
Ord. of 6-10-2001; Ord. of 4-7-2014]
(a) The person responsible for carrying out the plan will monitor and maintain the landdisturbing activity and will maintain records of these inspections and maintenance
to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the
measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation.
(b) The department of public works, or its designee, shall periodically inspect the landdisturbing activity in accordance with § 9VAC25-840-60 of the Virginia Erosion
and Sediment Control Regulations to ensure compliance with the approved plan and
to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling
erosion and sedimentation. The owner, permittee, or person responsible for carrying
out the plan shall be given notice of the inspection. The department, the Town,
where authorized to enforce this article, or any duly authorized agent of the
department or such VESCP authority may, at reasonable times and under
reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or
private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or
investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. In
accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any
combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement, a VESCP authority may also
enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of
initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit
conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper
notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified.
If the administrator, or his designee determines that there is a failure to comply
with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee, or person responsible for
carrying out the plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in
the permit application or in the plan certification, or by delivery at the site of the
land-disturbing activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. The
notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify
the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply
within the specified time, the permit may be revoked and the permittee, certified
land disturber, or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be deemed to
be in violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties
provided by this article.
(c) Upon determination of a violation of this article, the Town Manager, or his
designee, may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified
in this article, issue an order requiring that all or part of the land-disturbing
activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures
have been taken.
If land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan, the Town
Manager, or his designee, may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to
comply as provided in this article, issue an order requiring that all or part of the
land-disturbing activities be stopped until an approved plan or any required permits
are obtained.
Where the alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing
§ 30-91 ABINGDON CODE § 30-91
30:24
§ 30-92. Penalties, injunctions, and other legal actions. [Ord. of 4-4-1977; Ord. of
1-9-1995; Ord. of 6-10-2001; Ord. of 4-7-2014]
harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds
of the commonwealth, or where the land-disturbing activities have commenced
without an approved erosion and sediment control plan or any required permits,
such an order may be issued without regard to whether or not the alleged violator
has been issued a notice to comply as specified in Subsection (b) of this section.
Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the alleged violator has failed to
comply with such a notice to comply.
The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall
remain in effect for a period of seven days from the date of service pending
application by the enforcing authority or alleged-violator for appropriate relief to
the circuit court of the county.
If the alleged violator has not obtained an approved erosion and sediment control
plan or any required permits within seven days from the date of service of the order,
the Town Manager or his designee may issue an order to the owner requiring that all
construction and other work on the site, other than corrective measures, be stopped
until an approved erosion and sediment control plan and any required permits have
been obtained. Such an order shall be served upon the owner by registered or
certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or the land records
of the VESCP authority.
The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the circuit court of the county or
other appropriate court.
Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey an order issued by
the Town Manager or his designee may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in
the circuit court of the county to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction,
mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion and approval of
corrective action or obtaining an approved plan or any required permits, the order
shall immediately be lifted.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the Town Manager or his designee from taking
any other action authorized by this article.
(a) Violators of this article shall be assessed a civil penalty. The civil penalty for any
one violation shall be not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, except that the civil
penalty for commencement of land-disturbing activities without an approved plan
shall be $1,000. Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall
constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising
from the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of
$10,000, except that a series of violations arising from the commencement of landdisturbing activities without an approved plan for any site shall not result in civil
penalties which exceed a total of $10,000. This subsection shall be in lieu of
criminal sanctions and shall preclude the prosecution of violations as
misdemeanors.
(b) The Town Manager, or his designee, or the owner of property which has sustained
§ 30-91 ENVIRONMENT § 30-92
30:25
§ 30-93. Appeals and judicial review. [Ord. of 4-4-1977; Ord. of 1-9-1995; Ord. of
9-10-2001; Ord. of 4-7-2014]
damage or which is in imminent danger of being damaged, may apply to the county
circuit court to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this article, without
the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist; however,
an owner of property shall not apply for injunctive relief unless (i) he has notified
in writing the person who has violated the VESCP, and the VESCP authority,
that a violation of the VESCP has caused, or creates a probability of causing,
damage to his property, and (ii) neither the person who has violated the VESCP,
nor the VESCP authority has taken corrective action within 15 days to eliminate the
conditions which have caused, or create the probability of causing, damage to his
property.
(c) In addition to any criminal penalties provided under this article, any person who
violates any provision of this article may be liable to the Town in a civil action for
damages.
(d) Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this section, any person
violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or
other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of
the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed $2,000 for each violation. A civil action
for such violation or failure may be brought by the Town. Any civil penalties
assessed by a court shall be paid into the treasury of the Town, except that where
the violator is the locality itself, or its agent, or other VESCP authority, or where
the penalties are assessed as the result of an enforcement action brought by the
department, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury.
(e) With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to
obey any regulation or condition of a permit or any provision of this ordinance, the
Town may provide for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums,
not to exceed the limit specified in Subsection (d) of this section. Such civil charges
shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under
Subsection (a) or (d) of this section.
(f) The Town Attorney shall, upon request of the Town, take legal action to enforce
the provisions of this article.
(g) Compliance with the provisions of this article shall be prima facie evidence in any
legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion, siltation or
sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met, and the complaining
party must show negligence in order to recover any damages.
(a) Any applicant under the provision of this article who is aggrieved by any action of
the Town or its agent shall have the right to apply for and receive a review of such
action by the Town Council provided an appeal is filed within 30 days from the date
of the action. Any applicant who seeks an appeal hearing before the Town Council
shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled Town Council public hearing
provided that the Town Council and other involved parties have at least 30 days'
prior notice. In reviewing the agent's actions, the Town Council shall consider
evidence and opinions presented by the aggrieved applicant and agent. After
§ 30-92 ABINGDON CODE § 30-93
30:26
§ 30-94. through § 30-99. (Reserved)
considering the evidence and opinions, the Town Council may affirm, reverse or
modify the action. The Town Council's decision shall be final, subject only to
review by the Circuit Court of Washington County, Virginia.
(b) Final decisions of the Town Council under this ordinance shall be subject to review
by the Circuit Court of Washington County, Virginia provided an appeal is filed
within 30 days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights,
duties, or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in landdisturbing activities.
§ 30-93 ENVIRONMENT § 30-94
30:27

ARTICLE V
Stormwater Management
§ 30-100. Purpose and authority. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
Pursuant to 9VAC25-870-20 and 9VAC25-870-40, the purpose of this ordinance is to
ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Abingdon
(hereinafter "Town") and protect the quality and quantity of state waters from the
potential harm of unmanaged stormwater and to provide the framework for the
administration, implementation and enforcement of the provisions of the Virginia
Stormwater Management Act (§ 62.1-44.15:24 et seq., Code of Virginia) and delineates
the procedures and requirements to be followed in connection with permits issued by the
Town.
This article is adopted pursuant to the requirement of the State Water Control Law
(§ 62.1-44.15.27 et seq., Code of Virginia), the Virginia Stormwater Management Act,
and their attendant regulations.
In any case where the requirements of this ordinance conflict with any other provision
of this Code or existing state or federal regulations, whichever imposes more stringent
restrictions shall apply.
§ 30-101. Definitions. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
In addition to the definitions set forth in 9VAC25-870-10 of the Virginia Stormwater
Management Regulations, as amended, which are expressly adopted and incorporated
herein by reference, the following words and terms used in this ordinance have the
following meanings unless otherwise specified herein. Where definitions differ, those
incorporated herein shall have precedence.
ADMINISTRATOR — The VSMP authority including the Town of Abingdon staff
person or department responsible for administering the VSMP on behalf of the Town.
AGREEMENT IN LIEU OF A PERMIT — A contract between the Town of Abingdon
and the permittee that specifies conservation measures that shall be implemented in the
construction of a single-family residence; such contract may be executed by the Town in
lieu of a Virginia Stormwater Management Program permit.
APPLICANT — Any person submitting an application for a permit or requesting
issuance of a permit under this ordinance.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP — Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures,
and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and
groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities.
CLEAN WATER ACT or CWA — The federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public
Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any
subsequent revisions thereto.
COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE — A contiguous area where
§ 30-100 ENVIRONMENT § 30-101
30:29
separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on
difference schedules.
CONTROL MEASURE — Any best management practice or stormwater facility, or
other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters.
DEPARTMENT — The department of environmental quality.
DEVELOPMENT — Land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with
the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation,
transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural
or non-silvicultural purposes.
DIRECTOR — The director of the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality.
GENERAL PERMIT — The state permit titled "General Permit for Discharges of
Stormwater from Construction Activities" (9VAC25-880-1 et seq.) of the Regulations
authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Act within a geographical
area of the commonwealth of Virginia.
LAND DISTURBANCE or LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY — A man-made change
to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including clearing,
grading, or excavation except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified
in Section 30-102(b) of this article.
LAYOUT — A conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater
management facilities required at the time of approval.
MINOR MODIFICATION — An amendment to an existing general permit before
its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited
to, changes in EPA promulgated test protocols, increasing monitoring frequency
requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within
the overall compliance schedules. A minor general permit modification or amendment
does not substantially alter general permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease
the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the
capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment.
OPERATOR — The owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation
under this article.
PERMIT or VSMP AUTHORITY PERMIT — An approval to conduct a land-disturbing
activity issued by the administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity, in
accordance with this article, and which may only be issued after evidence of general
permit coverage has been provided by the department.
PERMITTEE — The person to whom the VSMP authority permit is issued.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality,
commission, or political subdivision of a state, governmental body, including federal,
state, or local entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity.
REGULATIONS — The Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Permit
Regulations, 9VAC25-870, as amended.
SITE — The land or water area where any facility or land-disturbing activity is
physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection
with the facility or land-disturbing activity.
§ 30-101 ABINGDON CODE § 30-101
30:30
STATE — The Commonwealth of Virginia.
STATE BOARD — The State Water Control Board.
STATE PERMIT — An approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the
State Board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued
under a state general permit or an approval issued by the State Board for stormwater
discharges from an MS4. Under these state permits, the Commonwealth imposes and
enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations, the
Virginia Stormwater Management Act and the Regulations.
STATE WATER CONTROL LAW — Chapter 3.1 (§ 62.1-44.2 et seq.) of title 62.1 of
the Code of Virginia.
STATE WATERS — All water, on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially
within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands.
STORMWATER — Precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through
conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow
melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document(s) containing material
describing methods for complying with the requirements of Section 30-105 of this
article.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN or SWPPP — A document that
is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential
sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater
discharges from the construction site, and otherwise meets the requirements of this
article. In addition the document shall identify and require the implementation of control
measures, and shall include, but not be limited to the inclusion of, or the incorporation
by reference of an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater
management plan, and a pollution prevention plan.
SUBDIVISION — The same as defined in Section 2.2 of Article II of Appendix A of
the Town of Abingdon Subdivision Ordinance.
TOTAL MAXIMUM DAILY LOAD or TMDL — The sum of the individual wasteload
allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background
loading and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per
time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point
versus nonpoint source trade-offs.
VIRGINIA STORMWATER BMP CLEARINGHOUSE WEBSITE — A website that
contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may
be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater
Management Act and associated regulations.
VIRGINIA STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ACT or ACT — The Virginia
Stormwater Management Act, Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of title
62.1 of the Code of Virginia.
VIRGINIA STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AUTHORITY or VSMP
AUTHORITY — An authority approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, to
operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program.
§ 30-101 ENVIRONMENT § 30-101
30:31
VIRGINIA STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM or VSMP — A program
approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, that has been established by
a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land-disturbing
activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements,
annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and
requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this article,
and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article and associated regulations.
§ 30-102. Stormwater permit requirement; exemptions. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
(a) Except as provided herein, no person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity
until he has submitted a permit application to the Town of Abingdon that includes
a state VSMP permit registration statement, if such statement is required, and, after
July 1, 2014, a stormwater management plan or an executed agreement in lieu of a
stormwater management plan, and has obtained Town approval to begin land
disturbance. Upon the development of an online reporting system by the
department, but no later than July 1, 2014, a the Town shall be required to obtain
evidence of state VSMP permit coverage where it is required prior to providing
approval to begin land disturbance. The Town shall act on any permit application
within 60 days after it has been determined by the Town to be a complete
application. The Town may either issue project approval or denial and shall provide
written rationale for the denial. The Town shall act on any permit application that
has been previously disapproved within 45 days after the application has been
revised, resubmitted for approval, and deemed complete. Prior to issuance of any
approval, the Town may also require an applicant, excluding state and federal
entities, to submit a reasonable performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter
of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to
the Town, to ensure that measures could be taken by the Town at the applicant's
expense should he fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or
maintain appropriate actions that maybe required of him by the permit conditions
as a result of his land-disturbing activity. If the Town takes such action upon such
failure by the applicant, the Town may collect from the applicant the difference
should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the
security held. Within 60 days of the completion of the requirements of the permit
conditions, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit, or other legal arrangement, or
the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or
terminated. These requirements are in addition to all other provisions of law relating
to the issuance of permits and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements
for such permits.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the following activities are
exempt, unless otherwise required by federal law:
(1) Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas
operations and projects conducted under the provisions of title 45.1 of the
Code of Virginia;
(2) Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management,
tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops,
livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the state board in
regulations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of
§ 30-101 ABINGDON CODE § 30-102
30:32
§ 30-103. Stormwater management program established; submission and
approval of plans; prohibitions. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches,
strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land
drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to
harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is
reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) of title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia or is converted to
bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Subsection B of
§ 10.1-1163 of Chapter 11 of title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia;
(3) Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than one acre and
not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, including additions
or modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures;
(4) Land disturbing activities that disturb less than one acre of land area that are
part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one acre or greater
of disturbance;
(5) Discharges to a sanitary sewer or a combined sewer system;
(6) Activities under a state or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned
property to an agricultural or open land use;
(7) Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an
existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of
existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance
if performed in accordance with this subsection; and
(8) Conducting land-disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where
the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent
endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the
administrator shall be advised of the disturbance within seven days of
commencing the land-disturbing activity and compliance with the
administrative requirements of Subsection (a) is required within 30 days of
commencing the land-disturbing activity.
(c) Where land-disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family
residence, an agreement in lieu of a permit may be substituted for a Virginia
Stormwater Management Program permit if executed by the Town of Abingdon.
(a) Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:27 of the Code of Virginia, The Town of Abingdon hereby
establishes a Virginia Stormwater Management Program for land-disturbing
activities and adopts the applicable regulations that specify standards and
specifications for VSMPs promulgated by the state board for the purposes set out in
Section 30-100 of this article. The Town hereby designates the Director of Public
Works or his designee as the Administrator of the Virginia Stormwater
Management Program.
(b) No VSMP authority permit shall be issued by the administrator, until the following
§ 30-102 ENVIRONMENT § 30-103
30:33
§ 30-104. Stormwater pollution prevention plan; contents of plans. [Ord. of
4-7-2014]
§ 30-105. Stormwater management plan; contents of plan. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
items have been submitted to and approved by the administrator as prescribed
herein:
(1) A permit application that includes a general permit registration statement (a
registration statement is not required for construction activity involving a
single-family detached residential structure, within or outside of a common
plan of development or sale pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:28.8);
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan approved in accordance with the Town
of Abingdon Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance (Chapter 30, Article
IV) and
(3) A stormwater management plan that meets the requirements of Section 30-105
of this article.
(c) No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until evidence of general permit
coverage is obtained.
(d) No VSMP authority permit shall be issued until the fees required to be paid
pursuant to Section 30-114, are received, and a reasonable performance bond
required pursuant to Section 30-115 of this article has been submitted.
(e) No VSMP authority permit shall be issued unless and until the permit application
and attendant materials and supporting documentation demonstrate that all land
clearing, construction, disturbance, land development and drainage will be done
according to the approved permit.
(f) No grading, building or other local permit shall be issued for a property unless a
VSMP authority permit has been issued by the administrator.
(a) The Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) shall include the content
specified by Section 9VAC25-870-54 and must also comply with the requirements
and general information set forth in Section 9VAC25-880-70, Section II
[stormwater pollution prevention plan] of the general permit.
(b) The SWPPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design,
construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge
of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP.
(c) The SWPPP must be maintained by the operator at a central location on site. If an
on-site location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near
the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP
available for public review in accordance with Section II of the general permit,
either electronically or in hard copy.
(a) The stormwater management plan, required in Section 30-103 of this article, must
apply the stormwater management technical criteria set forth in Section 30-108 of
this article to the entire land-disturbing activity. Individual lots in new residential,
§ 30-103 ABINGDON CODE § 30-105
30:34
commercial, or industrial developments shall not be considered separate landdisturbing activity. The stormwater management plan shall consider all sources of
surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater flows converted to
surface runoff, and include the following information:
(1) Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges; information on
the features to which stormwater is being discharged including surface waters
or karst features, if present, and the pre-development and post-development
drainage areas;
(2) Contact information including the name, address, and telephone number of the
owner and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or
properties affected;
(3) A narrative that includes a description of current site conditions and final site
conditions;
(4) A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and
the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained
after construction is complete;
(5) Information on the proposed storm water management facilities, including:
a. The type of facilities;
b. Location, including geographic coordinates;
c. Acres treated; and
d. The surface waters or karst features, if present, into which the facility will
discharge.
(6) Hydrologic and hydraulic computations, including runoff characteristics;
(7) Documentation and calculations verifying compliance with the water quality
and quantity requirements of Section 30-108 of this article.
(8) A map or maps of the site that depicts the topography of the site and includes:
a. All contributing drainage areas;
b. Existing streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, other water bodies,
and floodplains;
c. Soil types, geologic formations if karst features are present in the area,
forest cover, and other vegetative areas;
d. Current land use including existing structures, roads, and locations of
known utilities and easements;
e. Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess the impacts of
stormwater from the site on these parcels;
f. The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns on
the site;
§ 30-105 ENVIRONMENT § 30-105
30:35
§ 30-106. Pollution prevention plan; contents of plans. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
g. Proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, and stormwater
management facilities; and
h. Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be
adapted to various uses, including but not limited to planned locations of
utilities, roads, and easements.
(b) If an operator intends to meet the water quality and/or quantity requirements set
forth in Section 30-108 of this article through the use of off-site compliance options,
where applicable, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be
included. Approved off-site options must achieve the necessary nutrient reductions
prior to the commencement of the applicant's land-disturbing activity except as
otherwise allowed by § 62.1-44.15:35 of the Code of Virginia.
(c) Elements of the stormwater management plans that include activities regulated
under Chapter 4 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be
appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth
of Virginia pursuant to Article I (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of title 54.1 of the
Code of Virginia.
(d) A construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities
shall be submitted to the administrator. The construction record drawing shall be
appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth
of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities have been
constructed in accordance with the approved plan.
(a) Pollution prevention plan, required by 9VAC25-870-56, shall be developed,
implemented, and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation,
implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to
minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be
designed, installed, implemented, and maintained to:
(1) Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing,
wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a
sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better
treatment prior to discharge;
(2) Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction
wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides,
detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site to
precipitation and to stormwater; and
(3) Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement
chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures.
(b) The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to
prohibit the following discharges:
(1) Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate
control;
§ 30-105 ABINGDON CODE § 30-106
30:36
§ 30-107. Review of stormwater management plan. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
(2) Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils,
curing compounds, and other construction materials;
(3) Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and
maintenance; and
(4) Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing.
(c) Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of
trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls.
(a) The administrator, or any duly authorized agent of the administrator, shall review
stormwater management plans and shall approve or disapprove a stormwater
management plan according to the following:
(1) The administrator shall determine the completeness of a plan in accordance
with Section 30-105 of this article, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of
such determination, within 15 calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed
to be incomplete, the above written notification shall contain the reasons the
plan is deemed incomplete.
(2) The administrator shall have an additional 60 calendar days from the date of
the communication of completeness to review the plan, except that if a
determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in
subdivision (1), then plan shall be deemed complete and the administrator
shall have 60 calendar days from the date of submission to review the plan.
(3) The administrator shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved,
within 45 calendar days of the date of resubmission.
(4) During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the
decision communicated in writing to the person responsible for the landdisturbing activity or his designated agent. If the plan is not approved, the
reasons for not approving the plan shall be provided in writing. Approval or
denial shall be based on the plan's compliance with the requirements of this
article.
(5) If a plan meeting all requirements of this article is submitted and no action is
taken within the time provided above in subdivision (2) for review, the plan
shall be deemed approved.
(b) Approved stormwater plans may be modified as follows:
(1) Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be allowed
only after review and written approval by the administrator. The administrator
shall have 60 calendar days to respond in writing either approving or
disapproving such request.
(2) The administrator may require that an approved stormwater management plan
be amended, within a time prescribed by the administrator, to address any
deficiencies noted during inspection.
§ 30-106 ENVIRONMENT § 30-107
30:37
§ 30-108. Technical criteria for regulated land disturbing activities. [Ord. of
4-7-2014]
(c) The approved stormwater management plan for a residential, commercial, or
industrial subdivision shall govern the development of the individual parcels,
including those parcels developed under subsequent owners.
(d) The administrator shall require the submission of a construction record drawing for
permanent stormwater management facilities. The administrator may elect not to
require construction record drawings for stormwater management facilities for
which recorded maintenance agreements are not required pursuant to Section
30-109(b).
(a) To protect the quality and quantity of state water from the potential harm of
unmanaged stormwater runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities, the Town
hereby adopts the technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities set forth
in part II B of the regulations, as amended, expressly to include 9VAC25-870-63
[water quality design criteria requirements]; 9VAC25-870-65 [water quality
compliance]; 9VAC25-870-66 [water quantity]; 9VAC25-870-69 [offsite
compliance options]; 9VAC25-870-72 [design storms and hydrologic methods];
9VAC25-870-74 [stormwater harvesting]; 9VAC25-870-76 [linear development
project]; and, 9VAC25-870-85 [stormwater management impoundment structures
or facilities]; 9VAC25-870-92 [Comprehensive stormwater management plans];
9VAC25-870-93 [Definitions]; 9VAC25-870-94 [Applicability]; 9VAC25-870-95
[General]; 9VAC25-870-96 [Water quality]; 9VAC25-870-97 [Stream channel
erosion]; 9VAC25-870-98 [Flooding]; 9VAC25-870-99 [Regional (watershedwide) stormwater management plans], which shall apply to all land-disturbing
activities regulated pursuant to this article, except as expressly set forth in
Subsection (b) of this section.
(b) Until June 30, 2019, any land-disturbing activity for which a currently valid
proffered or conditional zoning plan, preliminary or final subdivision plat,
preliminary or final site plan or zoning with a plan of development, or any
document determined by the Town as being equivalent thereto, was approved by
the Town prior to July 1, 2012 and for which no coverage under the general permit
has been issued prior to July 1, 2014, shall be considered grandfathered by the
administrator and shall not be subject to the technical criteria of part II B of the
regulations, but shall be subject to the technical criteria of part 11 C of the
regulations for those areas that were included in the approval, provided that the
administrator finds that such proffered or conditional zoning plan, preliminary or
final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan or zoning with a plan of
development, or any document determined by the Town as being equivalent thereto,
(i) provides for a layout as defined in 9VAC25-870-10 and (ii) the resulting landdisturbing activity will be compliant with the requirements of part II C. In the event
that the Town-approved document is subsequently modified or amended in a
manner such that there is no increase over the previously approved plat or plan in
the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge of the land-disturbing
activity through stormwater runoff, and such that there is no increase over the
previously approved plat or plan in the volume or rate of runoff, the grandfathering
shall continue as before.
§ 30-107 ABINGDON CODE § 30-108
30:38
§ 30-109. Long-term maintenance of permanent stormwater facilities. [Ord. of
4-7-2014]
(1) Until June 30, 2019, for local, state, and federal projects for which there has
been an obligation of local, state, or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior
to July 1, 2012, or for which the department has approved a stormwater
management plan prior to July 1, 2012, such projects shall be considered
grandfathered by the Town and shall not be subject to the technical
requirements of part II B of the regulations, but shall be subject to the technical
requirements of part II C of the regulations for those areas that were included
in the approval.
(2) For land-disturbing activities grandfathered under this subsection,
construction must be completed by June 30, 2019, or portions of the project
not under construction shall become subject to the technical requirements of
Subsection (a) above.
(c) In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for
a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical
requirements part II C of the regulations, as adopted by the Town in Subsection (b)
of this section.
(d) The administrator may grant exceptions to the technical requirements of part II B
or part II C of the regulations, provided that (i) the exception is the minimum
necessary to afford relief, (ii) reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so
that the intent of the act, the regulations, and this article are preserved, (iii) granting
the exception will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar
circumstances, and (iv) exception requests are not based upon conditions or
circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created. Economic hardship alone is not
sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of this article.
(1) Exceptions to the requirement that the land-disturbing activity obtain required
VSMP authority permit shall not be given by the administrator, nor shall the
administrator approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater
BMP Clearinghouse website, or any other control measure duly approved by
the director, except where allowed under part II C of 9VAC25-870-93.
(2) Exceptions to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall not be allowed
unless offsite options otherwise permitted pursuant to 9VAC25-870-69 have
been considered and found not available.
(3) A record of all exceptions granted shall be maintained by the Town in
accordance with 9VAC25-870-126.
(e) Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more
stringent standard at their discretion.
(a) The administrator shall require the provision of long-term responsibility for and
maintenance of stormwater management facilities and other techniques specified to
manage the quality and quantity of runoff. Such requirements shall be set forth in
an instrument recorded in the local land records prior to general permit termination
or earlier as required by the administrator and shall at a minimum:
§ 30-108 ENVIRONMENT § 30-109
30:39
§ 30-110. Monitoring and inspections. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
(1) Be submitted to the administrator for review and approval prior to the approval
of the stormwater management plan;
(2) Be stated to run with the land;
(3) Provide for all necessary access to the property for purposes of maintenance
and regulatory inspections;
(4) Provide for inspections and maintenance and the submission of inspection and
maintenance reports to the administrator; and
(5) Be enforceable by all appropriate governmental parties.
(b) At the discretion of the administrator, such recorded instruments need not be
required for stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff
primarily from an individual residential lot on which they are located, provided it is
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the administrator that future maintenance of such
facilities will be addressed through an enforceable mechanism at the discretion of
the administrator.
(c) If a recorded instrument is not required pursuant to Subsection 30-109(b), the
administrator shall develop a strategy for addressing maintenance of stormwater
management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an
individual residential lot on which they are located. Such a strategy may include
periodic inspections, homeowner outreach and education, or other method targeted
at promoting the long-term maintenance of such facilities. Such facilities shall not
be subject to the requirement for an inspection to be conducted by the administrator,
or any duly authorized agent of the administrator.
(a) The administrator, or any duly authorized agent of the administrator, shall inspect
the land-disturbing activity during construction for:
(1) Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan;
(2) Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan;
(3) Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan;
and
(4) Development and implementation of any additional control measures
necessary to address a TMDL.
(b) The administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator may, at
reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or
upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or
conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions
of this ordinance.
(c) In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit,
any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the
administrator may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or
§ 30-109 ABINGDON CODE § 30-110
30:40
§ 30-111. Hearings. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
§ 30-112. Appeals. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are
required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a
permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time
specified.
(d) Pursuant to § 62.1-44.15:40 of the Code of Virginia, the administrator may require
every VSMP authority permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to
VSMP authority permit requirements under this article, to furnish when requested
such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as
may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state
waters, or such other information as maybe necessary to accomplish the purposes
of this article.
(e) Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the
provisions of this article shall be conducted by the administrator, or any duly
authorized agent of the administrator, pursuant to the Town's adopted and state
board approved inspection program, and shall occur, at minimum, at least once
every five years except as may otherwise be provided for in Section 30-109.
(a) Any permit applicant or permittee, or person subject to ordinance requirements,
aggrieved by any action of the Town taken without a formal hearing, or by inaction
of the Town, may demand in writing a formal hearing by the Town Council causing
such grievance, provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the
administrator within 30 days after notice of such action is given by the
administrator.
(b) The hearings held under this section shall be conducted by the Town Council at a
regular or special meeting of the Town Council. Town Council members shall
conduct such hearings on behalf of the Town at any other time and place authorized
by the Town Council.
(c) A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearings shall be taken and filed with
the Town Council. Depositions may be taken and read as in actions at law.
(d) The Town Council shall have power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces
tecum, and at the request of any party shall issue such subpoenas. The failure of a
witness without legal excuse to appear or to testify or to produce documents shall
be acted upon by the Town Council, whose action may include the procurement of
an order of enforcement from the circuit court. Witnesses who are subpoenaed shall
receive the same fees and reimbursement for mileage as in civil actions.
(a) Any applicant under the provision of this ordinance who is aggrieved by any action
of the Town or its agent shall have the right to apply for and receive a review of
such action by the Town Council provided an appeal is filed within 30 days from
the date of the action. Any applicant who seeks an appeal hearing before the Town
Council shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled Town Council public hearing
provided that the Town Council and other involved parties have at least 30 days'
§ 30-110 ENVIRONMENT § 30-112
30:41
§ 30-113. Enforcement. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
prior notice. In reviewing the agent's actions, the Town Council shall consider
evidence and opinions presented by the aggrieved applicant and agent. After
considering the evidence and opinions, the Town Council may affirm, reverse or
modify the action. The Town Council's decision shall be final, subject only to
review by the Circuit Court of Washington County, Virginia.
(b) Final decisions of the Town Council under this ordinance shall be subject to review
by the Circuit Court of Washington County, Virginia provided an appeal is filed
within 30 days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights,
duties, or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in landdisturbing activities.
(a) Informal and formal administrative enforcement procedures may include the
following as required by 9VAC25-870-116:
(1) Verbal warnings and inspection reports;
(2) Notices of corrective action;
(3) Consent special orders and civil charges in accordance with Subdivision 6 of
§ 62.1-44.15:37 of the Code of Virginia;
(4) Notices to comply in accordance with § 62.1-44.15:25 of the Code of Virginia;
(5) Special orders in accordance with Subdivision 6 of § 62.1-44.15:25 of the
Code of Virginia; and
(6) Public notice and comment periods for proposed settlements and consent
special orders pursuant to 9VAC25-870-660.
(7) The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit
conditions and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be
completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order
may be issued in accordance with Subsection (b) or the permit may be revoked
by the administrator.
(8) If a permittee fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with this
section within the time specified, the administrator may issue an order
requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an
approved plan, or the person conducting the land-disturbing activities without
an approved plan or required permit to cease all land-disturbing activities until
the violation of the permit has ceased, or an approved plan and required
permits are obtained, and specified corrective measures have been completed.
Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by certified
mail, return receipt requested, sent to his address specified in the land records
of the Town, or by personal delivery by an agent of the administrator.
However, if the administrator finds that any such violation is grossly affecting
or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion
of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the
commonwealth or otherwise substantially impacting water quality, it may
§ 30-112 ABINGDON CODE § 30-113
30:42
issue, without advance notice or hearing, an emergency order directing such
person to cease immediately all land-disturbing activities on the site and
shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the
time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel
such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is not
complying with the terms thereof, the administrator may institute a proceeding
for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy in accordance with
subsection 30-113(c).
(b) In addition to any other remedy provided by this article, if the administrator or his
designee determines that there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this
article, they may initiate such informal and/or formal administrative enforcement
procedures in a manner that is consistent with Section 30-103 of this article.
(c) Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any rule, regulation,
ordinance, order, approved standard or specification, or any permit condition issued
by the administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the Circuit
Court of Washington County by the Town to obey same and to comply therewith
by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy.
(d) Civil and criminal judicial enforcement procedures may include the following as
required in 9VAC25-870-116:
(1) Schedule of civil penalties in accordance with § 62.1-44.15:48 of the Code of
Virginia;
(2) Criminal penalties in accordance with § 62.1-44.15:48 B and C of the Code of
Virginia; and
(3) Injunctions in accordance with §§ 62.1-44.15:25, 62.1-44.15:42, and
62.1-44.15:48 D 1 of the Code of Virginia.
(e) Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or who fails, neglects, or
refuses to comply with any order of the administrator, shall be subject to a civil
penalty not to exceed $32,500 for each violation within the discretion of the court.
Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense.
(1) Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this subsection shall
include but not be limited to the following:
a. No state permit registration;
b. No SWPPP;
c. Incomplete SWPPP;
d. SWPPP not available for review;
e. No approved erosion and sediment control plan;
f. Failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls;
g. Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed
or maintained;
§ 30-113 ENVIRONMENT § 30-113
30:43
§ 30-114. Fees. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
h. Operational deficiencies;
i. Failure to conduct required inspections;
j. Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and
k. Discharges not in compliance with the requirements of Section
9VAC25-880-70 of the general permit.
(2) The administrator may issue a summons for collection of the civil penalty and
the action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court.
(3) In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection, the court may consider
the degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to
the violator from noncompliance.
(4) Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by the
Town shall be paid into the treasury of the Town to be used for the purpose of
minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters of the
Town and abating environmental pollution therein in such manner as the court
may, by order, direct.
(f) Notwithstanding any other civil or equitable remedy provided by this section or by
law, any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
ordinance, any order of the administrator, any condition of a permit, or any order of
a court shall, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not
more than 12 months or a fine of not less than $2,500 nor more than $32,500, or
both.
(a) Fees to cover costs associated with implementation of a VSMP related to land
disturbing activities and issuance of general permit coverage and VSMP authority
permits shall be as approved by the Town Council from time to time. When a site
or sites have been purchased for development within a previously permitted
common plan of development or sale, the applicant shall be subject to fees in
accordance with the disturbed acreage of their site. The permit fee schedule is on
file in the office of the director of public works.
(b) Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements from the general
permit issued by the state board shall be imposed in accordance with table 2 of the
fee schedule. If the general permit modifications result in changes to stormwater
management plans that require additional review by the Town, such reviews shall
be subject to the fees set out in table 2. The fee assessed shall be based on the total
disturbed acreage of the site. In addition to the general permit modification fee,
modifications resulting in an increase in total disturbed acreage shall pay the
difference in the initial permit fee paid and the permit fee that would have applied
for the total disturbed acreage in table 1 of the fee schedule.
(c) The annual permit maintenance fee shall be imposed in accordance with table 3 of
the fee schedule, including fees imposed on expired permits that have been
administratively continued. With respect to the general permit, these fees shall
§ 30-113 ABINGDON CODE § 30-114
30:44
§ 30-115. Performance bond. [Ord. of 4-7-2014]
Prior to issuance of any permit, the applicant shall be required to submit a reasonable
performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or
such other legal arrangement acceptable to the Town Attorney, to ensure that measures
could be taken by the Town at the applicant's expense should he fail, after proper
notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate actions which may be
required of him by the permit conditions as a result of his land disturbing activity. If the
Town takes such action upon such failure by the applicant, the Town may collect from
the applicant for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action
exceed the amount of the security held, if any. Within 60 days of the completion of the
requirements of the permit conditions, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other
legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded
to the applicant or terminated.
§ 30-116. through § 30-125. (Reserved)
apply until the permit coverage is terminated.
(d) All incomplete payments will be deemed as nonpayments, and the applicant shall
be notified of any incomplete payments. Interest may be charged for late payments
at the underpayment rate set forth in § 58.1-15 of the Code of Virginia and is
calculated on a monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A 10% late payment
fee shall be charged to any delinquent (over 90 days past due) account. The Town
shall be entitled to all remedies available under the Code of Virginia in collecting
any past due amount.
§ 30-114 ENVIRONMENT § 30-116
30:45

ARTICLE VI
Stormwater System To Address Illicit Discharge And Illegal Connection
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 30-126. Purpose(s). [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
The purposes of this article are to provide to the maximum extent practical for the health,
safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Abingdon:
§ 30-127. Definitions. [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
As used in this article:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the discharge of pollutants to the municipal storm sewer system. This term
also includes treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage, or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material
storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.),
and any subsequent amendments.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The agency designated to administer and
enforce this article.
DIRECTOR — The director of the department of public works of the Town.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical,
or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when
improperly treated, stored transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any unauthorized or illegal connection to the Town's storm
sewer system whether or not such connection results in a discharge to the system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
Town's storm sewer system, except as exempted in sections 30-141 through 30-143.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342, as amended from time to
time.
NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain system that
(a) By reducing pollutants in storm water discharges;
(b) Through the regulation of non-storm water discharges to the Town's storm sewer
system; and
(c) Complying with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251
et seq.).
§ 30-126 ENVIRONMENT § 30-127
30:47
is not composed entirely of storm water.
POLLUTANT — Sewage, industrial waste, or other waste or materials, whether liquid
or solid, which cause or contributes to pollution.
STORM SEWER SYSTEM — Any publicly owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems,
gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention
basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other
drainage structures.
STORM WATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water
from rainstorm events.
TOWN — Town of Abingdon, Virginia.
TOWN MANAGER — The Town Manager of the Town or his designee, who is
responsible for the implementation of this article.
§ 30-128. Applicability. [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
This article, including any amendments or revisions thereto, shall apply to all water
entering the storm sewer system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands
lying within the Town.
§ 30-129. Administration. [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
The public work department of the Town shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this article.
§ 30-130. Watercourse protection. [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's
lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of
trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate,
or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner
or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, sot that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 30-131. Notification of spills. [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
(a) Notwithstanding other requirement of law, as soon as any person responsible for a
facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or
operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which
are resulting in, or may result in, illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into
storm water or the municipal storm water system, the person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release.
(b) In the event of a release of hazardous materials, the person shall immediately notify
the Virginia Department of Emergency Management, the Virginia Department of
Environmental Quality, and the Abingdon Fire Department of the occurrence. In
addition, the son shall notify the Town Manager in person or by telephone or
§ 30-127 ABINGDON CODE § 30-131
30:48
§ 30-132. through § 30-140. (Reserved)
facsimile no later than the next business day.
(c) In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, the person shall notify the
Virginia Department of Environmental Quality and the Abingdon Fire Department.
In addition, the person shall notify the Town Manager in person or by telephone or
facsimile no later than the next business day.
(d) Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Town Manager within three business days of the
telephone notice.
(e) If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an onsite written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence.
Such records shall be retained for at least five years.
§ 30-131 ENVIRONMENT § 30-132
30:49

DIVISION 2
Illicit Discharges and Connections
§ 30-141. Prohibition of illicit discharges. [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
§ 30-142. Prohibition or abatement of illicit connections. [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
§ 30-143. Elimination of illicit discharges and connections. [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
§ 30-144. through § 30-150. (Reserved)
(a) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the Town storm sewer
system any discharge that is not composed entirely of storm water. The
commencement, conduct, or continuance of any non-storm water discharge to the
Town storm sewer system is prohibited.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, uncontaminated discharges from the following
sources are permitted: water line flushing; landscape irrigation; diverted stream
flows; rising ground waters; uncontaminated ground water infiltration;
uncontaminated pumped ground water; discharges from potable water sources;
foundation drains; lawn watering; individual residential car washing; flows from
riparian habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; street
wash water; and discharges or flows from fire fighting activities.
(c) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under
an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the
permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided
that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm sewer system.
(a) The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to
the Town's storm sewer system is prohibited.
(b) Illicit connections to the Town's storm sewer system made in the past, regardless of
whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection, shall be abated.
(a) Any owner or person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be,
the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the person's
expense, the best management practices necessary to prevent the further discharge
of pollutants to the storm sewer system.
(b) Any person responsible for a property or premises where an illicit connection is
located may be required, at the person's expense, to eliminate or secure approval for
the connection to the storm sewer system.
§ 30-141 ENVIRONMENT § 30-144
30:51

DIVISION 3
Enforcement
§ 30-151. Notice of violation. [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
Whenever the department of public works finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of the ordinance, the director may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without
limitation:
§ 30-152. Abatement of violation. [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
§ 30-153. Inspections by Town. [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(b) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(c) The violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
(d) The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards
and the restoration of any affected property;
(e) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs; and
(f) A deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed.
(a) If such violation presents an immediate and imminent threat to life or property, the
Town may abate or remove such violation and bring an action to recover the
necessary costs for provision of public emergency services required to abate the
violation against the responsible party.
(b) The Town may, after reasonable notice to the responsible party to abate or remove
the violation, and after no action by that responsible part, remove or abate such
violation acting through its own agents or by contract with independent contractors
and may collect the cost thereof from the owner or occupants of the premises upon
which the violation is maintained in any manner provided for the collection of state
or local taxes, or by action against the responsible party if the responsible party is
other than the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the violation is
maintained.
(a) The department shall have the right at reasonable times to enter onto private
properties for the purposes of investigating a suspected violation of this article. In
the event the owner or person in control of any premises refuses entry after a request
to enter and inspect has been made by the department, the Town is hereby
empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining
such entry.
(b) The owner or person in control of any premises, facility, operation or residence
where an illicit discharge or illicit connection is known or suspected shall allow the
department to have access to and copy at reasonable times, any applicable state or
federal permits related to the suspected or known discharge or connection, and any
reports or records maintained in accordance with this article.
§ 30-151 ENVIRONMENT § 30-153
30:53
§ 30-154. Penalties and liability. [Ord. of 5-7-2018]
(c) The failure of an owner or person in control of any premises to allow such
inspection by the department shall be cause for the issuance of a cease and desist
order, the issuance of a stop work order, withholding of a certificate of occupancy,
and civil penalties.
(a) Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of
a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that such violation is committed, and each day
that such violation is permitted to remain uncorrected shall constitute a separate
offense.
(b) Any person who otherwise violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
a civil penalty between $250 and $1,000 for each day that the violation continues.
The court assessing such civil penalty may order the penalty to be paid into the
treasury of the Town and designated for the purpose of minimizing, preventing,
managing or mitigating pollution of the waters of the Town.
(c) Pursuant to sections 30-143 and 30-152, any person who violates any provision of
this article shall be responsible for the necessary costs to eliminate and abate the
violation.
(d) Upon the request of the Town Manager, the Town Attorney shall initiate
appropriate legal action to enforce the provisions of this article.
(e) The remedies provided for in this article are cumulative and not exclusive, and shall
be in addition to any other remedies provided by law.
(f) Neither the approval of a discharge under this article, nor compliance with the
conditions of such approval, shall relieve any person of responsibility for damage
to other persons or property or impose any liability upon the Town for damage to
other persons or property.
§ 30-153 ABINGDON CODE § 30-154
30:54
Chapter 34
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
§ 30-154 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION § 30-154
34:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 34-1. Duties of police at fires generally. [Code 1985, § 7-1]
The police shall attend all fires in the Town and shall so direct traffic and enforce traffic
regulations in the vicinity of the fire as to expedite the approach and work of the fire
department. Police shall also safeguard property during the progress of the fire.
§ 34-2. through § 34-25. (Reserved)
§ 34-1 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION § 34-2
34:3

ARTICLE II
Fire Department
§ 34-26. Assistance from other fire departments. [Code 1985, § 7-2]
The Fire Chief may call for help from other fire departments when, in his opinion, it is
necessary.
§ 34-27. Fire lines. [Code 1985, § 7-3]
§ 34-28. Participants in Line of Duty Act — volunteer firefighters included. [Code
1985, § 7-4]
For the purposes of participating in the benefits provided in Code of Virginia,
§§ 15.1-136.1 through 15.1-136.7, it is hereby recognized that the volunteer firefighters
of the Town are an integral part of the official safety program of the Town.
§ 34-29. Same — Physical examinations. [Code 1985, § 7-5]
Pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 27-40.1 and 27-40.1:1, provision for physical
examinations for the volunteer firefighters of the Town shall be authorized as follows:
§ 34-30. Junior fire program. [Ord. of 12-6-2004]
Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 40.1-79.1, as amended, and subject to any restrictions
that may be adopted by the Abingdon Fire Department, any person who is 16 years of
age or older, with parental or legal guardian approval, in writing, is authorized to work
with and/or participate fully in all activities of the Abingdon Fire Department, including
but not limited to the taking of training classes provided by the Virginia Department
(a) The Fire Chief shall establish fire lines where needed during any fire.
(b) The police officer on duty at the scene of the fire shall be responsible for
maintaining the fire lines established as provided in this section until the emergency
has passed.
(a) A physical examination shall be provided for all volunteer firefighters of the Town
to include:
(1) Urinalysis.
(2) Tuberculosis skin test.
(3) X-ray.
(4) E.K.G.
(5) V.D.R.L.
(b) Such physical examinations shall be conducted by any licensed physician as
designated by the Town Manager.
(c) Such examinations shall be at the expense of the Town.
§ 34-26 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION § 34-30
34:5
of Fire Programs, provided such person has or is participating in a training program
to attain certification under National Fire Protection Association 1001, Level One, Fire
Fighter Standards, as administered by the Virginia Department of Fire Programs. The
certification record and parental or legal guardian consent shall be kept on file in the
office of the Abingdon Fire Department for each participant who is enrolled pursuant to
this section.
§ 34-31. through § 34-50. (Reserved)
§ 34-30 ABINGDON CODE § 34-31
34:6
ARTICLE III
Fire Prevention Code
§ 34-51. Adoption. [Ord. of 1-4-20169
]
There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of governing conditions to safeguard life and
property from the hazards of fire or explosion arising from the improper maintenance of
life safety and fire prevention and protection materials, devices, systems and structures
and the unsafe storage, handling, and use of substances, materials and devices, including
fireworks, explosives and blasting agents, wherever located, that certain code known as
"The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code" thereof and the whole thereof.
§ 34-52. Availability of copies. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
Editions of "The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code" adopted by this article
may be purchased from the Virginia Department of Fire Programs Bookstore at 1005
Technology Park Drive, Glen Allen, Virginia 23059-4500 or viewed online at:
http://codes.iccsafe.org/app/book/toc/2015_IFC_HTML/index.html.
§ 34-53. Term of permits. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
Any permit issued pursuant to the fire prevention code shall be valid until expired,
revoked or suspended.
§ 34-54. Establishment and duties of the fire official. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
The enforcement procedures of "The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code" shall be
instituted by the fire official and administered in accordance with the provisions set forth
in the "Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code."
§ 34-55. Modifications. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
The fire official may grant modifications to any provision of the Virginia Statewide
Fire Prevention Code upon application by the owner or the owner's agent provided the
spirit and intent of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code are observed and public
health, welfare, and safety are assured. The fire official shall require that sufficient
technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any alternative. If
it is determined that the evidence presented is satisfactory proof of performance for
the use intended, the fire official shall approve the use of such alternative subject
to the requirements of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code. The fire official
may require and consider a statement from a professional engineer, architect or other
competent person as to the equivalency of the proposed modification. The application
for modification and the final decision of the fire official shall be in writing and shall be
recorded in the permanent records of the Town.
§ 34-56. Appeals. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
The Local Board of Fire Prevention Code Appeals is hereby designated as the appeals
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, which pertained to the fire prevention code and derived from
Code 1985, §§ 7-6 — 7-13.
§ 34-51 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION § 34-56
34:7
board to hear appeals arising from the application of the provisions of "The Virginia
Statewide Fire Prevention Code."
§ 34-57. (Reserved)10
§ 34-58. Violations. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
§ 34-59. Administrative practices. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
(a) When the fire official discovers an alleged violation of the provisions of the
Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code or other codes or ordinances under the fire
official's jurisdiction, the fire official shall prepare a written notice citing the section
allegedly violated, describing the condition deemed unsafe and specifying time
limitations for the required abatements to be made to render the structure or
premises safe and secure.
(b) Notices of violation issued shall indicate the right to appeal by referencing the
appeals section of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code.
(c) The written notice of violation shall be served upon the owner, a duly authorized
agent or upon the occupant or other person responsible for the conditions under
violation. Such notice shall be served either by delivering a copy of same to such
persons by mail to the last known post office address, by delivering in person or by
delivering it to and leaving it in the possession of any person in charge of the
premises, or, in the case such person is not found upon the premises, by affixing a
copy thereof in a conspicuous place at the entrance door or avenue of access. Such
procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice.
(d) If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time specified, the fire
official shall request the legal counsel of the Town to institute the appropriate legal
proceedings to restrain, correct, or abate such alleged violation.
(e) Penalties upon conviction of violating the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code
shall be as set out in § 27-100 of the Code of Virginia.
(f) When authorized and certified in accordance with § 27-34.2 of the Code of
Virginia, the fire official may, subject to any limitations imposed by the Town,
issue a summons in lieu of a notice of violation. If the fire official is not certified in
accordance with § 27-34.2 of the Code of Virginia the law-enforcement agency of
the Town may make arrests for any alleged violations of the Virginia Statewide Fire
Prevention Code or orders affecting the immediate public safety.
(a) The fire official shall establish such procedures or requirements as may be
necessary for administration and enforcement of this ordinance. The procedures are
to be approved by the Town of Abingdon Council.
(b) In accordance with § 27-97 of the Code of Virginia, fees may be levied by the Town
of Abingdon Council in order to defray the cost of enforcement and appeals under
the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code.
10. Editor's Note: Former § 34-57, which pertained to new materials, and processesor occupancies which may require
permits and derived from Code 1985, § 7-12, was repealed 1-4-2016.
§ 34-56 ABINGDON CODE § 34-59
34:8
§ 34-60. through § 34-80. (Reserved)
(c) Fees may be set from time to time by the Town of Abingdon Council and a current
copy of which may be obtained at the fire official's office.
§ 34-59 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION § 34-60
34:9

ARTICLE IV
Fireworks
§ 34-81. When manufacture, transportation, sale, storage, use of fireworks
unlawful. [Code 1985, § 7-14]
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to
transport, manufacture, store, sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, or to buy, use, ignite
or explode any firecracker, torpedo, skyrocket, or other substance or thing, of whatever
form or construction, that contains any explosive or inflammable compound or
substance, and is intended, or commonly known, as fireworks and which explodes, rises
into the air or travels laterally, or fires projectiles into the air, other than sparks or those
fireworks excepted under the provisions of Subsection (a) of Section 34-83.
§ 34-82. Permit for exhibition or display. [Code 1985, § 7-15]
Any person desiring to conduct or present a display of fireworks may do so if he has
obtained a permit for such display from the Town Manager. It shall be unlawful for the
holder of such a permit to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the terms of such permit
in conducting or presenting an exhibition or display of fireworks pursuant thereto.
§ 34-83. Article inapplicable to certain fireworks; use of such fireworks. [Code
1985, § 7-16]
§ 34-84. Penalty. [Code 1985, § 7-17]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, be punished by confinement in jail not to exceed 12
months, or by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or both such fine and imprisonment.
(a) This article shall not apply to the use or the sale of sparklers, fountains, Pharaoh's
serpents, caps for pistols, or to pinwheels commonly known as whirligigs or
spinning jennies.
(b) The fireworks listed in Subsection (a) of this section may only be used, ignited or
exploded on private property with the consent of the owner of such property.
§ 34-81 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION § 34-84
34:11

Chapter 38
HEALTH AND SANITATION
§ 34-84 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 34-84
38:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 38-1. through § 38-25. (Reserved)
§ 38-1 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 38-1
38:3

ARTICLE II
Condition of Premises
§ 38-26. Definitions. [Ord. of 7-7-2005; Ord. of 9-3-201311]
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall be defined as
follows:
ABATEMENT COST — The Town's cost of labor, equipment and supplies for, or the
contract price of and any charges to the Town with respect to, its removal and disposal
of weeds or trash from a parcel.
HARDSHIP — Conditions created by the strict imposition of an ordinance onto a
specific property with exceptional or extraordinary characteristics or limitations, thereby
rendering undue oppression or near impossibility to the property owner or occupant with
regard to compliance.
OWNER — Any person shown by any public record maintained by any circuit court,
treasurer, commissioner of revenue, or Town Clerk to have an interest in a parcel lying
in the Town of Abingdon, Virginia as of the date of the abatement of public nuisance
under this article or any successor in title taking with actual or constructive notice of the
existence of a public nuisance.
PARCEL — Any real estate (and any interest therein) lying in the Town of Abingdon,
Virginia, identified by a Town of Abingdon or Washington County Official Tax Map
Number herein including, but not limited to, yards, grounds, driveways, entrance or
passageways, parking areas, storage areas, vacant land, body of water and including
sidewalks, grass strips, one-half of alleys, curbs or rights-of-way up the edge of
pavement of any public street.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — The state of facts requiring governmental action for the
establishment and maintenance of public health, safety, order and convenience.
TOWN MANAGER — The Town Manager of the Town of Abingdon or his designee.
TRASH — Abandoned personal property, garbage, refuse, or debris openly lying on any
parcel, which might endanger the health of other residents in the Town.
WEED or WEEDS — Any plant grass, or other vegetation over 10 inches in height
growing upon a parcel in the Town of Abingdon, including but not limited to, any
sage brush, poison oak, poison ivy, Ailanthus Altissima (commonly called Tree of
Heaven or Paradise Tree), ragweed, dandelions, milkweed, Canada thistle, and any
other undesirable growth, excluding trees, ornamental shrubbery, vegetable and flower
gardens purposefully planted and maintained by the property owner or occupant free of
weeds, cultivated crops, or undisturbed woodland not otherwise in violation.
§ 38-27. Weeds and trash declared public nuisance; abatement required. [Ord. of
7-7-2005; Ord. of 9-3-2013]
Weeds growing or trash lying on any parcel shall constitute a public nuisance, except
that in the case of a parcel greater than one acre in area natural vegetation growing more
than 50 feet from every property line shall not constitute a public nuisance. It shall be
11. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. II, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from
Ord. of 7-7-2005.
§ 38-26 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 38-27
38:5
unlawful to cause or allow a public nuisance with any respect to a parcel. The owner of
any parcel shall abate any public nuisance with respect to his parcel.
§ 38-28. Weeds and trash prohibited; duty of owner to remove weeds and trash.
[Ord. of 7-7-2005; Ord. of 9-3-2013]
It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for the owner of any parcel to allow weeds,
as defined herein, to grow or trash to stand upon such parcel. It shall be the duty of the
owner of any parcel to immediately cut, remove or destroy any and all weeds and to
remove trash on his parcel. Any owner who shall violate any provision of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor and each day that such weeds shall
remain uncut or such trash is allowed to stand after the period within which they are
required hereunder to be cut or removed shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense
under this section.
§ 38-29. Notice of removal of weeds; preabatement hearing. [Ord. of 7-7-2005;
Ord. of 9-3-2013]
(a) Notwithstanding the criminal sanctions provided for elsewhere in this Code, and in
addition to them, whenever the Town Manager determines that a public nuisance
exists with respect to any parcel, the Town Manager shall mail by United States
postal service certified mail to the owner of the parcel at the owner's address, as
determined by public records, written notice that there exists a public nuisance with
respect to the parcel and demand the abatement of the nuisance within 14 days
following the mailing of the notice. Such notice, when so addressed and deposited
with the postal service with proper postage prepaid, shall be deemed complete and
sufficient. In the event that such notice is returned by the postal authorities or if the
owner's address is unknown, the Town Manager shall cause a copy of the notice to
be posted in a conspicuous place on the parcel. The posting shall be accomplished
at least seven days prior to abatement of the public nuisance with respect to that
parcel.
(b) The notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Set forth the alleged violation of this article;
(3) Describe the parcel of real property where the violations are alleged to exist or
to have been committed;
(4) Advise that if the weeds or trash are not removed within prescribed time, and
that if the weeds and trash do not remain abated or removed, the Town will
proceed to abate the nuisance with the costs thereof together with an
administrative fee and interest authorized by this article being specially
assessed against the owner and the parcel;
(5) Advise that the cost of abatement together with the administrative fee and
interest constitutes a lien against the property in favor of the Town; and
(6) Advise that within 14 days of the certified mailing of the notice or posting,
whichever is applicable, the owner may appeal to the Town Manager stating
§ 38-27 ABINGDON CODE § 38-29
38:6
§ 38-30. Abatement of public nuisance. [Ord. of 7-7-2005; Ord. of 9-3-2013]
§ 38-31. Accounting for abatement costs. [Ord. of 7-7-2005; Ord. of 9-3-2013]
The Town Manager shall keep an account of the cost of abating public nuisances and
embody such account in periodic reports with assessment lists which shall be transmitted
to the Town Manager and the manager of billings and collections at convenient intervals.
The copy retained by the Town Clerk shall be available for public inspection. The reports
shall refer to each parcel as to which public nuisance was abated by description sufficient
to identify the parcel, and specify the cost of abatement including but not limited to a
minimum of two hours labor as well as other reasonable charges for equipment; and
interest at the legal rate established at that time by the Code of Virginia, 1950, as
amended, should the said abatement costs not be paid within 30 days of the date they are
billed by the Town's billing clerk to the owner.
§ 38-32. Notice to owner of hearing on abatement costs; post-abatement hearing.
[Ord. of 7-7-2005; Ord. of 9-3-2013]
in detail the reasons why the proposed action should not be taken.
(c) In the event the owner appeals the proposed abatement as provided for above, the
Town Manager shall set a hearing and notify the owner of time and location of a
hearing to be held within five says from the date of the Town Manager's receipt of
the appeal. At any hearing, the Town Manager shall hear and investigate any
objection that may be raised and take action in response as he may deem reasonable.
(d) Any notice sent by the Town Manager to any owner of a parcel which, because of
weeds or trash, has been declared a public nuisance under this article and which
notice otherwise complies with the requirements of this section, shall constitute
complete and sufficient notice for any similar condition during the same period of
April 1 until November 1 in the year which the notice was sent.
(a) If the owner shall fail or neglect to complete abatement of the public nuisance as
required within 14 days of mailing of notice or of posting, whichever is applicable,
or if the owner fails to continue to comply with the requirements of this section, the
Town Manager may direct in writing that Town forces abate or complete the
abatement of such a public nuisance, or the Town Manager may contract for his
abatement on behalf of the Town with a private contractor.
(b) Any owner may abate the public nuisance himself without liability to the Town
provided he completes the abatement prior to commencement of the abatement by
Town personnel or any private contractor on behalf of the Town.
(a) Upon completion of the reports and assessment lists, the Town Manager shall send
by certified mail to each owner at his address as determined from public records a
notice including a statement to the owner of the abatement cost and administrative
fees. The notice shall also advise the owner of his right to object to, be heard upon,
and contest the amount of the abatement costs. The notice shall further provide that
upon confirmation by the Town Manager of the abatement cost and administrative
fee, they shall constitute special assessments against the owner and the parcel, a
personal obligation of the owner, and a lien upon the owner's parcel from the date
§ 38-29 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 38-32
38:7
and time of the recordation of the notice of the lien, and from the date of such
confirmation, until paid, bear interest at the legal rate, and that any fees, charges or
costs for the collection for abatement of a nuisance thereof shall be collected in any
manner provided by the Code of Virginia for the collection of state and local taxes.
(b) The owner shall have 14 days from the date of receipt of the notice of assessment
to appeal the amount of the assessment to the Town Manager. The Town Manager
shall set a hearing and notify the owner of the time and location of the hearing for
the purpose of hearing the owner's objections to and comments upon the report and
proposed assessment, of correcting any mistakes or inaccuracies in these documents
and of confirming the same. If the owner does not appeal the assessment as stated
in the notice, the assessment shall be deemed confirmed.
(c) With respect to all assessments remaining unpaid 14 days after the confirmation,
the Town Manager shall cause a notice of the lien of the special assessment
prepared by the Town Attorney to be recorded in the clerk's office of the Circuit
Court of Washington County, Virginia. The Town Attorney may take appropriate
steps in the appropriate court to enforce the lien to satisfy the special assessment.
(d) The Town Manager, when in his/her sole discretion it is just and proper to do so,
may waive liens or adjust compliance provisions imposed pursuant to this section
whenever doing so will:
(1) Facilitate the sale of the property and encourage its productive refuse. Such
liens may be waived only as to a purchaser who is unrelated by blood or
marriage to the owner and who has no business association with the owner.
All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner of the property
at the time the liens were imposed.
(2) Alleviate hardship. (See definition, hardship, Section 38-26) Hardship shall be
determined at the sole discretion of the Town Manager when he can find that:
a. The strict application of the ordinance would produce results amounting
to undue hardship; and
b. Said hardship is not generally shared by other properties in the same
vicinity; and
c. Said authorization to alleviate hardship will not amount to substantial
detriment to adjacent property.
§ 38-32 ABINGDON CODE § 38-32
38:8
Chapter 42
HUMAN RELATIONS
§ 38-32 HUMAN RELATIONS § 38-32
42:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 42-1. through § 42-25. (Reserved)
§ 42-1 HUMAN RELATIONS § 42-1
42:3

ARTICLE II
Fair Housing
§ 42-26. Adoption of state law. [Code 1985, § 6.1-1]
Code of Virginia, §§ 36-96.1 — 36-96.23, are hereby incorporated by reference into this
Code.
§ 42-27. Designated Town representative — generally. [Code 1985, § 6.1-2]
The Town Manager, or such person as he may appoint, is hereby designated as the
representative of the Town to receive, review, investigate and resolve, wherever
possible, complaints related to fair housing opportunities within the Town.
§ 42-28. Same — powers; Town to bear costs. [Code 1985, § 6.1-3]
§ 42-29. Procedure upon failure of Attorney General to prosecute violations.
[Code 1985, § 6.1-4]
Should the state real estate board find reasonable cause to believe there has been a
violation of this article and advise the attorney general in accordance with Code of
Virginia, § 36-96.8, and should the attorney general take no action, the designated
representative is hereby authorized to have the Town Attorney file suit in the name of
the Town to enjoin such violation in the circuit court of the county and to prosecute the
same to its ultimate conclusion.
(a) The designated representative is empowered to use all Town equipment, the
investigative facilities of the Town police department, the legal advice of the Town
Attorney and the duplicating facilities of the Town, and to have the use of any
stenographical facilities of the Town, its agents or employees, for the purpose of
making up or providing a record of such complaints, and to forward the same to the
state real estate board, outlining any action taken by him and an explanation for the
same.
(b) The costs of preparing such a record or conducting such an initial investigation shall
be borne by the Town, with no costs to the initial complainant.
§ 42-26 HUMAN RELATIONS § 42-29
42:5

Chapter 46
MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS
§ 46-1. Definitions. [Code 1985, § 19-1]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure subject to federal regulation, which is
transportable in one or more sections; is eight body feet or more in width and 40
body feet or more in length in the traveling mode, or is 320 or more square feet
when erected on site; is built on a permanent chassis; is designed to be used as a
single-family dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the
required utilities; and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical
systems contained in the structure. This definition includes manufactured homes that are
permanently affixed to the land and those that are not so fixed.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which
are located four or more manufactured homes, or which is held out for the location of
four or more manufactured homes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle
or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment for such park.
§ 46-2. Parking manufactured home outside of manufactured home park; permit
for temporary use of manufactured home. [Code 1985, § 19-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any manufactured home on any street, alley, or
other public place or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied,
within the Town, except within a manufactured home park located in a limited industrial
district or general industrial district, as established by or under the zoning regulations,
approved by the health department; provided, that the temporary stopping or parking
of a manufactured home for no more than two hours or in an emergency is permitted;
provided further, a permit for the temporary use of a manufactured home may be
issued by the building official upon approval by the Town Manager for advertising,
educational, health, office or storage purposes.
§ 46-3. Parking or occupying manufactured home on premises of occupied
dwelling. [Code 1985, § 19-3]
No person shall park or occupy any manufactured home on the premises of an occupied
dwelling or on any lot which is not part of the premises of any occupied dwelling,
either of which is situated outside of a manufactured home park approved by the health
department; provided, however, that parking of only one unoccupied manufactured
home in an accessory private garage building or in a rear yard in any district, as
established by or under the zoning regulations, is permitted if no living quarters are
maintained or business conducted in such manufactured home while such manufactured
home is so parked.
§ 42-29 MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS § 46-3
46:1

Chapter 50
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 50-1. Advertising matter; attaching to poles, trees, public property. [Code 1985,
§ 13-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to tack or otherwise attach any advertising matter or
other substance to any telephone, telegraph or electric transmission pole or tree on public
property or any public property within the Town.
§ 50-2. Begging. [Code 1985, § 13-3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to beg on the streets of the Town.
§ 50-3. Halloween; trick or treat visitations and special curfew. [Code 1985,
§ 13-4]
§ 50-4. Profane swearing and intoxication in public; penalty; transportation of
public inebriates to detoxification center. [Code 1985, § 13-4.1]
If any person profanely curses or swears or is intoxicated in public, whether such
intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other intoxicant or drug of whatever
nature, he shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. In any area in which there is
located a court-approved detoxification center a law-enforcement officer may authorize
the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification
center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center.
§ 50-5. Property destruction or damage. [Code 1985, § 13-5]
The unauthorized, intentional destruction or damaging of any property, real or personal,
of another, whether the property of the Town or of any other person, and including
streets, shall be unlawful.
§ 50-6. Discharge of firearms. [Code 1985, § 13-9; Ord. of 2-6-2012]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on the streets, highways, public homes,
private homes or public places in the Town to make trick or treat visitations; except,
that this section shall not apply to children 12 years of age and under on Halloween
night.
(b) A special curfew hour of 10:00 p.m. on Halloween evening is hereby established
for the trick or treat visitations permitted by Subsection (a) of this section.
(c) Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor.
(a) Definitions.
PNEUMATIC GUN(S) — As used in this Code of Ordinances, means any
implement, designed as a gun, that will expel a BB or pellet by action of pneumatic
pressure. The term pneumatic gun includes a paintball gun that expels by action
of pneumatic pressure plastic balls filled with paint for the purpose of marking the
§ 46-3 OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS § 50-6
50:1
§ 50-7. Use of pneumatic guns, slingshots, grit shooters; throwing missiles. [Code
1985, § 13-10; Ord. of 2-6-2012]
§ 50-8. Disposal of unclaimed property in possession of Police Department. [Ord.
No. 2-2002, 5-6-2002]
point of impact.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person in the Town to fire or discharge any gun, pistol
or other firearms of any kind. This subsection shall not apply to any lawenforcement officer in the performance of his official duties nor to any other person
whose such willful act is otherwise justifiable or excusable at law in the protection
of his life or property, or is otherwise specifically authorized by law. Neither shall
this section be construed to prohibit the use of any pneumatic guns on or within
private property by minors above the age of 16 with written permission of the owner
or legal possessor of the property when conducted with reasonable care to prevent
a projectile from crossing the boundaries of the property. Use of pneumatic guns by
minors below the age of 16 requires the supervision by a parent, guardian, or other
adult supervisor approved by a parent or guardian as well as written permission of
the owner or possessor of the property. Further, any minor using a pneumatic gun,
whether permitted by a parent or guardian or not, shall be responsible for obeying
all laws, regulations and restrictions governing such use, pursuant to the Code of
Virginia 1950, as amended, § 15.2-915.4.
(c) Upon extreme circumstances and only after all alternative methods of protection
have been exhausted, the Town Council may grant permits for the use of firearms.
Any such permit shall contain conditions as determined by the Town Council to be
strictly necessary for the safety of said permittee as well as the maintenance of
public safety. The use of any such firearms pursuant to such a permit shall be in
strict compliance with the conditions imposed by the issuance of said permit and
pursuant to the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, § 15.2-915.4. Exceptions to the
permitting requirement shall be extended to Town-owned properties for and during
the observation of educational historic reenactments, ceremonial or patriotic
activities and similar designated events.
(d) The penalty for violation of a pneumatic gun offense shall not exceed that of a Class
3 misdemeanor.
(a) No person shall use any instrument for projecting missiles liable to do any injury to
persons or property, such as a slingshot, grit shooter, or any other type of instrument
for projecting missiles, in the Town. This section shall not, however, be construed
to prohibit the use of any pneumatic guns on or within private property with
permission of the owner or legal possessor of the property when conducted with
reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the boundaries of the property,
pursuant to the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, § 15.2-915.4 and consistent
with Section 50-6(a) and (d), above.
(b) It shall also be unlawful for any person to throw any rock, stone or similar
dangerous missile in the Town.
(a) Any unclaimed personal property which has been in the possession of the Town's
§ 50-6 ABINGDON CODE § 50-8
50:2
§ 50-9. Disposal of unclaimed firearms or other weapons in possession of Police
Department. [Ord. No. 4-2002, 5-6-2002]
police department and unclaimed for a period of more than 60 days may be (i) sold
at a public sale in accordance with the provisions of this section or (ii) retained
for use by the police department. As used herein, "unclaimed personal property"
shall be any personal property belonging to another which has been acquired by
a law enforcement officer pursuant to his duties, which is not needed in any
law-enforcement prosecution, which has not been claimed by its rightful owner
and which the state treasurer has indicated will be declined if remitted under the
Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act (Code of Virginia, § 55-210.1 et
seq.). Unclaimed bicycles and mopeds may also be disposed of in accordance with
Section 70-222. Unclaimed firearms may also be disposed of in accordance with
Section 50-9.
(b) Prior to the sale or retention for use by the police department of any unclaimed item,
the Chief of Police or his or her duly authorized agents shall make reasonable
attempts to notify the rightful owner of the property, obtain from the attorney for
the commonwealth in writing a statement advising that the item is not needed in
any criminal prosecution, and cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the locality once a week for two successive weeks, notice that there
will be a public display and sale of unclaimed personal property. Such property,
including property selected for retention by the police department, shall be
described generally in the notice, together with the date, time and place of the sale
and shall be made available for public viewing at the sale. The Chief of Police or
his or her duly authorized agents shall pay from the proceeds of the sale the costs
of advertisement, removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens, and
notice of sale. The balance of the funds shall be held by such officer for the owner
and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. Any unclaimed item
retained for use by the police department shall become the property of the Town
and shall be retained only if, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, there is a
legitimate use for the property by the agency and that retention of the item is a more
economical alternative than purchase of a similar or equivalent item.
(c) If no claim has been made by the owner for the property or proceeds of such sale
within 60 days of the sale, the remaining funds shall be deposited in the general
fund of the Town and the retained property may be placed into use by the police
department. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the Town within three
years from the date of such sale and, if timely application is made therefor and
satisfactory proof of ownership of the funds or property is made, the Town shall
pay the remaining proceeds of the sale or return the property to the owner without
interest or other charges or compensation.
(a) The Town may destroy unclaimed firearms and other weapons which have been in
the possession of the police department for a period of more than 60 days. For the
purposes of this section, "unclaimed firearms and other weapons" means any
firearm or other weapon belonging to another which has been acquired by a lawenforcement officer pursuant to his duties, which is not needed in any criminal
prosecution, which has not been claimed by its rightful owner and which the state
treasurer has indicated will be declined if remitted under the Uniform Disposition
§ 50-8 OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS § 50-9
50:3
of Unclaimed Property Act (Code of Virginia, § 55-210.1 et seq.).
(b) At the discretion of the Chief of Police or his or her duly authorized agents,
unclaimed firearms and other weapons may be destroyed by any means which
renders the firearms and other weapons permanently inoperable. Prior to the
destruction of such firearms and other weapons, the Chief of Police or his or her
duly authorized agents shall comply with the notice provision contained in Section
50-8.
§ 50-9 ABINGDON CODE § 50-9
50:4
Chapter 54
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 50-9 PARKS AND RECREATION § 50-9
54:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 54-1. through § 54-25. (Reserved)
§ 54-1 PARKS AND RECREATION § 54-1
54:3

ARTICLE II
Advisory Commission
§ 54-26. Creation; composition. [Ord. No. 90-4-3, 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 2003-59,
8-4-2003; Ord. of 3-7-2011; Ord. No. 2020.01.06.B, 1-6-2020]
There shall be a parks and recreation advisory commission in the Town, which shall
be composed of up to nine members appointed by the Council who shall serve without
compensation.
§ 54-27. Terms of office of members; filling vacancies. [Ord. No. 90-4-3, 4-2-1990;
Ord. No. 2020.01.06.B, 1-6-2020]
The terms of office of the members of the parks and recreation advisory commission
shall be for four-years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies
in such commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of the term shall be filled by
the Council for the unexpired term.
§ 54-28. Organization. [Ord. No. 90-4-3, 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 2020.01.06.B,
1-6-2020]
Immediately after their appointment, the members of the parks and recreation advisory
commission shall meet and organize by electing one of their members chairman and such
other officers as may be necessary.
§ 54-29. Duties and responsibilities generally. [Ord. No. 90-4-3, 4-2-1990; Ord. No.
2020.01.06.B, 1-6-2020]
§ 54-30. Financial duties and responsibilities. [Ord. No. 90-4-3, 4-2-1990; Ord. No.
2020.01.06.B, 1-6-2020]
(a) The parks and recreation advisory commission shall make recommendations for
approval by the Town Council involving the establishment of a system of
supervised recreation for the Town; to set apart for use as parks, playgrounds,
recreation areas and structures, any lands, water areas or buildings owned by or
leased to or controlled by the Town and may suggest improvements of such lands
or buildings, and structures as may be necessary to the recreation program within
those funds allocated to the division of parks and recreation.
(b) The commission shall advise in the acceptance by the Town of any grant, gift,
bequest or donation, any personal or real property offered or made available for
recreation purposes and which is judged to be of present or possible future use for
recreation or parks.
(c) The commission shall interpret the recreation and park services of the division of
parks and recreation to the community and interpret the needs and desires of the
community to the Town Council.
(d) The commission shall determine and establish the general policies to be followed
in carrying out the purpose for which the commission was established.
(a) The parks and recreation advisory commission shall have no authority to enter into
§ 54-26 PARKS AND RECREATION § 54-30
54:5
§ 54-31. Planning duties and responsibilities. [Ord. No. 90-4-3, 4-2-1990; Ord. No.
2020.01.06.B, 1-6-2020]
§ 54-32. through § 54-50. (Reserved)
any contract or incur any obligation binding the Town.
(b) The commission shall assist the director(s) of the indoor parks and recreation and
Director(s) of Abingdon Parks and Outdoor Recreation in development and
preparation of an annual budget for the division to be submitted to the Town
Manager and subsequently to the Town Council, at the time designated by the Town
Manager.
(c) The commission shall assist the director of parks and recreation in the development
and preparation of an annual budget for capital improvements (acquisition and
development) in accordance with the master plan for parks and recreation for the
Town.
(a) The parks and recreation advisory commission, with the assistance of appropriate
Town agencies, shall prepare a master plan for the acquisition and development of
an adequate system of parks, facilities, and recreation programs for the residents of
the Town and update same yearly, consistent with the Town's master plan. The
parks and recreation master plan shall be submitted to the Town Council for its
review and approval.
(b) The commission shall investigate and determine the needs and interests of the
community for recreation facilities and programs and recommend a recreation
program to meet those needs.
§ 54-30 ABINGDON CODE § 54-32
54:6
ARTICLE III
Virginia Creeper Trail
§ 54-51. Purpose; joint ownership of trail; enforcement. [Code 1985, § 21-1(b) —
(d)]
§ 54-52. Compliance. [Code 1985, § 21-2]
The Virginia Creeper Trail is hereby established for the use of the general public;
provided, that the limitations and regulations established in this chapter are observed by
all users.
§ 54-53. Use regulations. [Code 1985, § 21-3; Ord. of 3-6-2000; Ord. of 1-4-2010,
eff. 2-4-2010]
§ 54-54. Violations. [Code 1985, § 21-4]
(a) The purpose of this article is to jointly enunciate the public policies of the governing
bodies of the Towns of Abingdon and Damascus as to the operation of the Virginia
Creeper Trail and the manner of use of such trail by the public.
(b) It is hereby agreed that ownership of such trail is held jointly by the Towns of
Abingdon and Damascus and that such trail will be developed largely under the
supervision of the Town of Abingdon and maintained by the Town of Abingdon, or
by such other entity as may be jointly agreed upon by both parties.
(c) Enforcement of this article will be carried out by the police departments of the
Town of Abingdon and the Town of Damascus, as well as by the county sheriff's
department.
(a) There shall be no motorized vehicles allowed upon the Virginia Creeper Trail, with
the following exceptions:
(1) Vehicles belonging to the Town of Abingdon and the Town of Damascus and
the county, their successors and assigns, as may be necessary for law
enforcement, maintenance or other official and authorized use.
(2) Vehicles of persons owning lands adjacent to such trail who may have need to
cross such trail from time to time. Such exemption shall be limited to periodic
crossing and use of the trail only by such persons and not for travel upon such
trail.
(3) Electrically powered wheelchairs operated by handicapped persons at their
own risk.
(b) No firearms shall be discharged upon such trail.
(c) No alcoholic beverages shall be carried in an open container or consumed upon
such trail.
(d) Camping on the trail shall be allowed only in areas of such trail as shall be
designated by an appropriate sign or marker.
§ 54-51 PARKS AND RECREATION § 54-54
54:7
§ 54-55. through § 54-75. (Reserved)
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
(b) Each day of violation or each failure to comply with a lawful order by any officer
authorized under Section 54-51 shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
§ 54-54 ABINGDON CODE § 54-55
54:8
ARTICLE IV
Town Parks
§ 54-76. Rules and regulations. [Ord. of 2-5-2007; Ord. of 3-7-2007]
(a) The use and/or possession of alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs are strictly
prohibited within any Town park.
(b) There shall be no motorized vehicles allowed in any park with the exception of law
enforcement, emergency response, electrically powered wheelchairs, and/or
maintenance vehicles belonging to the Town of Abingdon.
(c) Littering in Town parks is strictly prohibited and all persons using a Town park
should place all waste or trash in the receptacles provided.
(d) All pets must be kept on a leash while in a Town park.
(e) Pet owners are required to dispose of any waste deposited by a pet in a Town park.
(f) The playing of loud music not in conjunction with a Town-sponsored event is
strictly prohibited within a Town park.
(g) Visitors are encouraged to be considerate of others while using a Town park.
(h) Any organized events within a Town park must be approved by an authorized
representative of the Town of Abingdon Parks and Recreation Department.
(i) Loitering and solicitation are strictly prohibited within a Town park.
(j) Except for law enforcement officers acting with their official scope of employment,
the brandishing or unauthorized use of firearms within a Town park is strictly
prohibited.
(k) All Town parks will be closed from dusk to dawn except for events sponsored by
the Town of Abingdon.
(l) All rules and regulations heretofore mentioned shall apply to all Town parks with
the exception of the Virginia Creeper Trail and the Harry L. Coomes Recreation
Center.
§ 54-76 PARKS AND RECREATION § 54-76
54:9

Chapter 58
SOLID WASTE
§ 54-76 SOLID WASTE § 54-76
58:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 58-1. Dumping trash, unsightly matter on highway, right-of-way or private
property. [Code 1985, § 14-1]
§ 58-2. through § 58-25. (Reserved)
(a) Any person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor who dumps or otherwise
disposes of trash, garbage, refuse, litter, or other unsightly matter, on public
property, including a public highway, right- of-way, property adjacent to such
highway or right-of-way, or on private property without the written consent of the
owner thereof or his agent.
(b) When any person is arrested for a violation of this section, and the matter alleged to
have been illegally dumped or disposed of has been ejected from a motor vehicle,
the arresting officer may comply with the provisions of Code of Virginia,
§ 46.2-936 in making such arrest.
(c) When a violation of the provisions of this section has been observed by any person,
and the matter illegally dumped or disposed of has been ejected from a motor
vehicle, the owner or operator of such motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the
person ejecting such matter. However, such presumption shall be rebuttable by
competent evidence.
(d) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the lawful disposal of such matter
in landfills.
(e) Upon conviction of any person for a violation of this section, the court may suspend
the imposition of any sentence on condition that the defendant volunteer his
services for such period of time as the court may designate to remove litter from the
street. Any such sums collected shall be paid into the court and forwarded to the
state treasurer for the construction and maintenance of state highways.
§ 58-1 SOLID WASTE § 58-2
58:3

ARTICLE II
Storage And Collection
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 58-26. Definitions. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
APARTMENT COMPLEX — Any multifamily building with more than two dwelling
units.
BASIC SOLID WASTE — Residential solid waste, and light commercial solid waste.
BRUSH — Trimmings from shrubbery and trees. Brush collected by the Town is limited
to items less than 10 feet in length and six inches in diameter.
BULKY RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of combustible or
noncombustible waste materials from dwelling units or commercial, industrial,
institutional or agricultural establishments which are either too large or too heavy to
be safely and conveniently loaded in solid waste transportation vehicles by solid waste
collectors, with the equipment available.
COLLECTION — Removal of solid waste from its container to the transportation
vehicle.
COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE — Solid waste resulting from the operation of any
commercial, industrial, institutional, or agricultural establishment. This term includes
solid wastes resulting from multifamily dwellings containing more than six dwelling
units. Light commercial solid waste means waste that is of the similar nature, content,
and quantity as residential solid waste that may be conveniently and naturally placed
for disposal in a Town-issued solid waste container. Locations where light commercial
solid waste regularly exceeds the nominal capacity of three Town-issued solid waste
containers per unit or entity, or a maximum of nine containers within a parcel, property
or development will be required to contract with a private solid waste collection
provider.
DEMOLITION AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Any waste material, such as
lumber, brick, plaster, gutters, roofing material or other substances, from the
construction, repair, addition to or destruction of residential, industrial, institutional or
commercial structures.
DIRECTOR — The director of the Town public works department or his authorized
representative.
DISPOSABLE SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — Disposable plastic bags with a
minimum 1.5 mil thickness and a capacity of 20 to 35 gallons specifically designed for
storage of yard wastes.
DUMPSTER — A metal container, provided by a private source or contractor, used for
the storage of commercial solid waste, with varying capacities, the body of which shall
be watertight and vector proof, equipped with hinged plastic or metal lids dumpster lids
§ 58-26 SOLID WASTE § 58-26
58:5
shall be kept closed at all times. Dumpsters, or other privately provided and contracted
solid waste collection, shall be used for all solid waste that does not fit, or exceeds, the
definitions for residential or light commercial solid waste.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a structure and
forming a single habitable unit, with facilities which are used, or are intended to be used,
for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS WASTES — Includes, but are not limited to, acids, caustics, chemicals,
medical wastes generated by health care professionals, pathological wastes, petroleum
wastes, explosive wastes, pesticides, pesticide containers and toxic or radioactive
materials.
HOUSEHOLD TRASH — Waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles,
ashes, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to
housekeeping.
MANAGER — The Town Manager of the Town.
OCCUPANT — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, is in actual
possession of any dwelling unit or of any other improved real property, either as owner
or as a tenant.
OTHER COLLECTION SERVICES — Collection services provided, or offered for a
fee, by the Town beyond the collection of residential and light commercial waste from
Town-issued solid waste containers. These services primarily include collection of bulk
rubbish, white goods, and brush. There may be other collection services as authorized by
the Town Council or Town Manager as needed.
PROCESSING — Incinerating, composting, baling, shredding, salvaging, compacting
and other processes whereby solid waste characteristics are modified or solid waste
quantity is reduced.
RECYCLING — The process of separating a given solid waste material from the solid
waste stream and processing it so that it may be used again as a raw material for a
product which may or may not be similar to the original product.
REFUSE — Solid waste.
RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE — Waste consisting of garbage and household trash,
resulting from the maintenance and operation of a single dwelling unit, or up to six
residential units on a parcel or within a common plan development, not exceeding a total
of nine Town-issued solid waste containers within a parcel, property or development.
SOLID WASTE — Unwanted or discarded waste materials in a solid or semisolid
state, including but not limited to garbage, cooled ashes, street refuse, rubbish, dead
animals, animal and agricultural wastes, yard wastes, discarded appliances, special
wastes, industrial wastes and demolition and construction wastes.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — A receptacle used to store solid waste during the
interval between solid waste collections. A Town-issued solid waste container is a 96
gallon or 64 gallon mobile trash cart that is issued by the Town to those residential or
light commercial units or entities that qualify for solid waste collection by the Town.
§ 58-26 ABINGDON CODE § 58-26
58:6
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL — The process of discarding or getting rid of unwanted
material; in particular, the final disposition of solid waste.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT — The complete solid waste system of storage,
collection, transportation, processing and disposal.
STORAGE — Keeping, maintaining or storing solid waste from the time of its
production until the time of its collection.
TRANSPORTATION — The transporting of solid waste from the place of collection or
processing to a solid waste processing facility or solid waste disposal area.
WHITE GOODS — A specific type of bulky rubbish consisting of large metal objects
such as stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, etc.
YARD WASTES — Grass clippings, leaves and trimmings from shrubbery, brush and
trees.
§ 58-27. Violations of article generally. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
§ 58-28. through § 58-40. (Reserved)
(a) Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any of the provisions
of this article or any lawful rules or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall
be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.
(b) If any person fails to comply with the provisions of this article relating to removal
of solid waste by the Town, the employees of the Town engaged in solid waste
collection and transportation shall refuse to collect or remove any solid waste from
the premises occupied by such person.
§ 58-26 SOLID WASTE § 58-28
58:7

DIVISION 2
Town Collection
§ 58-41. Collection generally. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
§ 58-42. Rules and regulations governing storage, collection, processing, and
disposal of basic solid waste by the Town. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
(a) The Town shall provide for the collection of all basic solid waste within the Town,
provided that the Town employees and vehicles necessary for solid waste collection
can access the Town-issued solid waste container(s) while remaining on public
rights-of-way. The Town may provide the collection service by contracting with an
individual, corporation, county or other Town or a combination thereof, for the
entire Town or portions thereof, as deemed to be in best interest of the Town. All
other generators of other types of solid waste shall through arrangement under
private contract, provide for the safe, legal, and timely disposal of solid waste.
(b) As part of the collection of solid waste, and in order to meet state mandated
recycling goals, the Town may provide for a recycling program for the basic solid
waste, single-family, residential refuse customers of the Town. Under the program,
the Town may provide to such customers once a week curbside pickup from special
containers furnished by the Town or the Town's contractor for recyclable materials,
which may include paper, aluminum, plastics, metal and bimetal cans and other
materials determined by the Town Manager or the Town's contractor. The Town or
its contractor may transport, market, and dispose of the recycled material which,
upon collection, shall become the property of the Town. As part of the recycling
program, the Town may also assist private and public recycling efforts that take
place within the Town and benefit Town citizens, especially those not currently
served by the Town's recycling program.
(c) The service of collecting solid waste is designed as an integral part of the Town's
program of health and sanitation, to be operated as an adjunct to the Town's system
for providing sanitary sewage disposal. All liquid waste shall be drained from
garbage before the garbage is placed in a Town-issued solid waste container, and
the liquid shall then be disposed of in the sanitary sewer system.
(d) Solid waste collectors employed by the Town, or a solid waste collection agency
operating under contract with the Town, shall be responsible for the collection of
solid waste from the point of collection. Any spillage or blowing of waste as a result
of the duties of the solid waste collector shall be collected and placed in the
transportation vehicle by the solid waste collector.
(a) The Town Manager, subject to the review of the Town Council, shall make, amend,
revoke and enforce reasonable and necessary rules and regulations governing, but
not limited to the following:
(1) Preparation, drainage and wrapping of garbage deposited in Town-issued solid
waste containers.
(2) Specifications for Town-issued solid waste containers, including the type,
composition, equipment, size and shape thereof.
§ 58-41 SOLID WASTE § 58-42
58:9
§ 58-43. Frequency of collection. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
Residential and light commercial basic solid waste shall be collected once a week.
Recyclable materials shall be collected once a week, and the collection routes and
schedule shall be the same as the basic solid waste collection. The Town Manager
may vary the frequency of collection prescribed by this section to accommodate Town
observed holidays.
§ 58-44. Placement for collection; permitted and excluded contents. [Ord. of
8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
(3) Maximum number of units or entities within a parcel, property or development
eligible for Town solid waste collection service, and the maximum number of
Town-issued solid waste containers per same units, entities, properties or
developments.
(4) Identification of Town-issued solid waste containers and of the cover thereof,
and of equipment thereto appertaining, if any.
(5) Weight limitations on the combined weight of Town-issued solid waste
containers and the contents thereof, and weight and size limitations on solid
waste too large for Town-issued solid waste containers.
(6) Storage of solid waste in Town-issued solid waste containers.
(7) Sanitation, maintenance and replacement of Town-issued solid waste
containers.
(8) Schedules of and routes for collection and transportation of solid waste.
(9) Collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste.
(10) Processing facilities and fees for the use thereof.
(11) Disposal facilities and fees for the use thereof.
(12) Records of quality and type of wastes received at processing and disposal
facilities.
(13) Handling of special wastes such as toxic wastes, sludges, ashes, agriculture
and construction wastes, bulk items, tires, automobiles, oils, grease, etc.
(14) Recycling.
The Town Manager may allow an exception to the above rules and regulations if
deemed a benefit to public health and safety, and if it does not interfere with the
safe and efficient operation of the Town solid waste collection service.
(b) A copy of all rules and regulations made and promulgated under the provisions of
this section shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall have the same
force and effect as if set forth fully in this article.
(a) All Town-issued solid waste containers containing basic solid waste for collection
by the Town shall be set out not later than 7:00 a.m. on collection days, and not
§ 58-42 ABINGDON CODE § 58-44
58:10
§ 58-45. Collection charges. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
later than 6:30 a.m. on collection days for those that place their Town-issued solid
waste containers along Main Street for collection, and shall be placed in such
location as may be specified by the Town Manager or his designee so that they
can be reached easily and conveniently by the Town's employees and solid waste
collection vehicles and equipment. No Town employee shall enter any building for
the removal of solid waste.
(b) All basic solid waste from premises to which collection services are provided by
the Town, as well as bulky rubbish, brush, and white goods, as described in sections
58-46 and 58-69 respectively, shall be placed at the curb or edge of the street or
alley for collection. Recycled materials must be placed in the container provided by
the Town or its agent and placed at the curb or edge of the street or alley for
collection. Any Town-issued solid waste containers, recycling containers, or other
solid wastes either required or permitted to be placed at the curb or edge of the street
or alley for collection shall be placed so as not to create a nuisance, obstruct the
flow of stormwater, or block sidewalks or other traveled ways. Empty containers
shall be removed from the right-of-way and returned to their place of storage,
behind the building setback line, within 24 hours of the time of collection. If
containers are continuously or habitually left at the collection location longer than
24 hours after the time of collection, that shall constitute a violation of this
ordinance that may result in termination of service.
(c) All garbage containing liquid or animal or vegetable matter subject to decay or
fermentation shall be drained of moisture before being placed in the receptacles
provided therefore. Liquid wastes may not be disposed of in Town-issued solid
waste containers.
(d) Demolition and construction waste, factory cuttings, trade wastes or similar
materials shall not be set out for removal by the Town or its agent. Such materials
shall be disposed of by the occupants of the premises on which they are collected.
(a) There is hereby imposed, for the collection and disposal of solid waste, for the
payment of the county tipping fee, and for the improvement of the general public
health and environment, a solid waste collection service charge for each dwelling
unit and commercial or residential establishment generating basic solid waste
within the Town. The service charge for collection of residential solid waste shall
be as established by the Town Council from time to time. The residential fee per
dwelling unit per calendar month is for up to three residential solid waste containers
per week. Residences which have requirements in excess of this amount will be
required to provide for their own legal disposal. Commercial establishments which
have a requirement in excess of this amount will be required to provide for their
own legal disposal.
(b) The director of finance, or such other Town official who is responsible for
preparing utility and other service charge billings for the Town, is hereby
authorized to make and promulgate reasonable and necessary rules and regulations
for the billing and collection of the disposal service charges provided for in this
section. A copy of all such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the
Town Clerk.
§ 58-44 SOLID WASTE § 58-45
58:11
§ 58-46. Brush collection. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
§ 58-47. Collection of bulky rubbish. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
(c) The Town may enforce collection of the charges provided for in this section by
bringing proper legal action against the occupant of any dwelling unit or owner of
any commercial establishment to recover any sums due, plus a reasonable attorney's
fee to be fixed by the court, plus the cost of such action as well as any applicable
fees and interest.
(d) The charges provided for in this section and the bills therefore shall be governed by
the applicable provisions of this Code or applicable Town rules and regulations
relating to charges for sanitary sewer service and interest and penalties on late
payments among other provisions. However, if solid waste collection charges are
not paid, collection will be refused when the charges become two months past due.
If solid waste collection service is discontinued due to non-payment of collection
charges, a fee of $20 will be charged to resume collection service.
(e) The Town Manager is authorized and directed, on application, to exempt from the
payment of charges imposed by this section those elderly or disabled citizens who
qualify for (but do not necessarily participate in) the real estate tax exemption or
deferral program. These latter exemptions shall apply to the exemption herein
created, with necessary changes, except no requirement of real estate ownership
shall exist, the scheduling of application for exemptions and notification to
participants may be flexible, and there shall be no proration of the exemption.
(a) Brush, consisting of trimmings from trees and shrubbery, less than 10 feet in length
and six inches in diameter to be collected by the Town or its agents, shall be placed
in stacks parallel to the street in a manner which will not block vehicular travel,
vehicular sight distance, storm drainage, sidewalks, entrances, or fire hydrants.
Brush stacks shall be placed along the road frontage of the property that generates
the brush, unless doing so creates one of the previous blockages.
(b) If the brush stack for one property is greater than one truckload, the remainder of
the brush stack will be hauled at such time as a vehicle is available in order not to
interrupt the regular collection schedule.
(c) Shrubbery trimmings and leaves shall be placed in stacks parallel to the street in the
same manner as brush which will not block vehicle travel, vehicle sight distance,
storm drainage, sidewalks, entrances, or fire hydrants. Materials shall not be of a
hazardous nature nor shall any individual item weigh more than 50 pounds.
(a) Bulky rubbish will be collected if separated from other waste and set out as
prescribed by regulations to be made and promulgated by the Town Manager
pursuant to Section 58-42.
(b) White goods shall be collected only during those days designated by the Town
Manager. This service is available only to locations receiving residential collection
services.
(c) For all white goods which contain refrigeration units, the owner must remove the
refrigeration unit and dispose of it according to federal and state regulations prior
§ 58-45 ABINGDON CODE § 58-47
58:12
§ 58-48. Ownership after collection. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
All solid waste, but not hazardous waste, collected for disposal or recycling shall become
the property of the Town.
§ 58-49. Interference with collection equipment or collectors. [Ord. of 8-6-1993;
Ord. of 3-4-2013]
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with solid waste collection
and transportation equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of
their duties as such, whether such equipment or collector shall be those of the Town or
those of a solid waste collection agency operating under contract with the Town.
§ 58-50. Termination of collection service to vacant premises. [Ord. of 8-6-1993;
Ord. of 3-4-2013]
The collection of solid waste and the service charge therefore shall be terminated
upon presentation of satisfactory proof to the director of finance that any dwelling unit
or other establishment is unoccupied; however, service to any such dwelling unit or
establishment shall be recommenced upon renewed occupancy thereof.
§ 58-51. Disposal generally. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
to setting the item out for collection by the Town or its agent. Any white goods that
still have refrigeration units shall not be collected by the Town.
(d) Bulky rubbish shall only be collected during days designated by the Town Manager.
This service is only available to locations receiving residential collection service.
(e) Bulky rubbish shall not be placed for collection in such a manner that it blocks
vehicular travel, vehicular sight distance, storm drainage, sidewalks, entrances, or
fire hydrants. Bulky rubbish shall be placed along the road frontage of the property
that generates the bulky rubbish, unless doing so creates one of the previous
blockages. Bulky rubbish shall be placed roadside no more than 24 hours before
scheduled collection.
(f) Any residential property owner is eligible to receive, for the cost of the tipping fee
and a service charge to be established by the Town Manager, and as equipment and
staff availability allows, a service whereby the Town will deliver a trailer to a
property within the Town corporate limits, allow up to a week for the user to load
the trailer with bulky rubbish, then transport the trailer to the appropriate waste
facility. The user will then be billed for the tipping fee and service charge. This
service is restricted to one time per month per property.
(a) Solid wastes shall be deposited at a processing facility or disposal area, or recycled.
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of solid waste at any facility or
location that is not approved by the Town and the state department of health.
(b) The director may classify certain wastes as hazardous wastes. Hazardous wastes
shall not be accepted for collection by the Town but shall be disposed of in a
manner that meets all local, state and federal regulations by the generators of such
waste.
§ 58-47 SOLID WASTE § 58-52
58:13
§ 58-52. General requirements for vehicles transporting solid waste. [Ord. of
8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
All vehicles used for the transportation of solid waste shall be maintained in a safe,
clean and sanitary condition and shall be so constructed, maintained and operated as to
prevent spillage of solid waste there from. Every such vehicle shall be constructed with
a watertight body and with a cover which may be an integral part of the vehicle or may
be a separate cover of suitable material with fasteners designed to secure the vehicle in
transporting solid waste, or, as an alternate, the entire body thereof shall be enclosed,
with only the loading hopper exposed. No solid waste shall be transported in the loading
hopper.
§ 58-53. Transportation of earth, rock and other loose material. [Ord. of 8-6-1993;
Ord. of 3-4-2013]
Earth, rock, and other loose material shall be conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or
receptacles, so constructed and maintained that none of the material being transported
shall spill upon the public rights-of-way. Vehicles shall be equipped with approved
functioning covers, which shall be utilized to prevent the contents from blowing from
the vehicle whenever it is in operation upon the public rights-of-way.
§ 58-54. through § 58-65. (Reserved)
§ 58-52 ABINGDON CODE § 58-54
58:14
DIVISION 3
Containers
§ 58-66. Required. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
§ 58-67. (Reserved)12
§ 58-68. Commercial containers. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
§ 58-69. No containers for brush and yard wastes. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of
3-4-2013]
Small yard wastes, such as grass clippings, shall be placed fully within the Town-issued
solid waste containers. Bulky yard waste shall be disposed of as provided in Section
58-46.
(a) The occupant of any dwelling unit generating residential solid waste, and of every
institutional, commercial, business, and/or agricultural establishment producing
light commercial solid waste within the corporate limits of the Town, that wishes to
receive for a fee the Town's solid waste collection service, will be provided with up
to three Town-issued solid waste containers. The fee for the Town-issued solid
waste containers shall be set by the Town Manager. Such occupant shall place all
solid waste generated on the premises in the Town-issued solid waste containers,
with the exception of bulky rubbish, large brush, white goods, and hazardous waste.
The solid waste shall be placed in the Town-issued solid waste container so that the
lid closes completely.
(b) The requirements of Subsection (a) of this section, and the other rules in this article
dealing with specifications for solid waste containers shall not apply to solid wastes
to be recycled. Where recycling service is available, the Town or the Town's agent
shall provide a suitable container or containers prescribed by the Town Manager,
for recycling. The Town Manager and/or the Town's agent shall take appropriate
steps to replace the recycling containers as necessary.
(a) Any commercial, industrial, institutional, or agricultural establishment that
generates more solid waste than specified in the definition of light commercial solid
waste, and any multi-family dwellings consisting of more than six units, shall be
required to contract with a private solid waste collection provider for containers to
be used for placing solid waste between collections, and for the collection of solid
waste. The containers shall be waterproof and leak proof and shall meet all
requirements of the state department of health.
(b) Any one unit or entity receiving Town solid waste collection service that regularly
exceeds the capacity of three Town-issued solid waste containers may be required
to contract with a private solid waste collection provider for solid waste containers
and collection. At that time, the Town-issued solid waste container will be
recovered by the Town.
12. Editor's Note: Former § 58-67, which pertained to specifications — residential containers and derived from Ord. of
8-6-1993, was repealed by Ord. of 3-4-2013.
§ 58-66 SOLID WASTE § 58-70
58:15
§ 58-70. Solid waste to be kept covered. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
§ 58-71. Maintenance. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of every dwelling unit or establishment
for which Town-issued solid waste containers are provided by this division to maintain
such containers in good repair at all times and to maintain such containers and the area
surrounding them in a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. A $25 fee will be
imposed on the user to replace a Town-issued solid waste container if it the container is
damaged by misuse on the part of the user, or lost.
§ 58-72. Storage. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon the residential premises.
Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon private property.
§ 58-73. Unlawful use. [Ord. of 8-6-1993; Ord. of 3-4-2013]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit solid waste in any solid waste container
other than his own, without the written consent of the owner of such container, or with
the intent of avoiding payment of the service charge provided in this article for solid
waste collection and disposal. It shall be unlawful for any person living outside the
corporate limits of the Town or any business not located in the Town to make use of
Town solid waste collection services by bringing any solid waste into the Town limits
and placing the same in or near any receptacles set out for Town collection.
(a) Solid waste containers shall not be filled more than level full and shall be kept
covered at all times except when depositing waste therein or removing the contents
thereof. Basic solid waste set out for collection shall be enclosed within the required
container with the lid completely closed.
(b) Commercial dumpsters which habitually violate the closed lid requirement, or
habitually have solid waste deposited outside of the container, will be deemed a
public nuisance and health hazard, and will be subject to compliance with the Town
of Abingdon, Virginia Code of Ordinances Chapter 30, § 30-51.
§ 58-70 ABINGDON CODE § 58-73
58:16
Chapter 62
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
§ 58-73 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES § 58-73
62:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 62-1. Obstructions generally. [Code 1985, § 16-1; Ord. of 5-3-1999; Ord. of
7-5-2011]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encroach upon any street, highway,
roadway, median, or other public right-of-way or place of the Town in any manner
which prevents the free-flow of either pedestrian or motor traffic, constitutes
inconvenience to pedestrians and motor vehicle drivers, creates a public traffic
hazard, safety threat of any type, or a public nuisance.
(b) It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to engage in the solicitation of
contributions, distribution and/or sale of handbills, leaflets, bulletins, literature,
advertisements, services or similar material to/from occupants of a motor vehicle
when the motor vehicle and the person soliciting are located on a street, road,
median, shoulder or other public right-of-way or place within the Town, thereby
creating a public traffic hazard, safety threat of any type, or a public nuisance.
(c) Pursuant to § 15.2-2009 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended, displays of
wares of merchandise and sidewalk signs may be permitted upon application to the
Town Manager, and the Town may prescribe such terms and conditions for use of
such public place or places.
(d) Nothing in this article shall apply to any authorized meeting, parade, festival, or
other gathering or use on a public roadway, utility strip or median within the Town,
or otherwise permitted or authorized by the Town.
(e) Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 4
misdemeanor, punishable by imposing a fine not to exceed $250. Any such person
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each separate act which is a
violation of this article.
(f) The Town Manager and Town Attorney shall be authorized to file and resolve
(including by settlement) civil actions for injunction to prohibit future persistent
and significant violations of this chapter.
(g) Definitions. The terms used in this section and not further defined herein shall carry
their ordinary meanings. For purposes of this section, the terms set out below shall
carry the following meanings, accordingly:
CONTRIBUTIONS — A donation of money or goods in return for no value or
nominal value.
DISTRIBUTION — To give out or to deliver; or any acts seeking to give out or
deliver.
ENCROACHMENT — An interference with or intrusion onto the property of
another; the infringement of another's rights.
HIGHWAY — Carries the same definition as used in the Code of Virginia, 1950,
as amended, § 46.2-100.
MEDIAN — A paved or planted strip constituting a part of, and dividing, a
§ 62-1 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES § 62-1
62:3
§ 62-2. Improvements encroaching on sidewalk, curb and gutter, street or rightof-way. [Code 1985, § 16-3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any improvement encroaching on any
sidewalk, curb and gutter, street or right-of-way in the Town.
§ 62-3. Barbed wire fences. [Code 1985, § 16-7]
No person shall construct or maintain a barbed wire fence on any public right-of-way or
sidewalk of the Town.
§ 62-4. Barriers and lights on excavations or obstructions. [Code 1985, § 16-8]
Whenever any excavation has been made in any of the streets or sidewalks of the Town,
or any obstruction placed thereon, the person causing such excavation or obstruction
shall, to prevent accident to persons or property while work is progressing, have such
highway or roadway into lanes according to the direction of travel.
MERCHANDISE — Tangible personal property that has economic value or
satisfies an economic want.
NUISANCE — Interference in a place in which it does not reasonably belong;
A condition, activity or situation that interferes with the use and/or enjoyment of
property.
OBSTRUCT — To impede, block or hinder; to interfere with or hold back.
PEDESTRIAN — A human standing or going about on foot.
PERSON — Includes a human being as well as a firm, partnership, association of
persons, corporation, limited liability company, limited partnership, unincorporated
association, or other artificial person.
PUBLIC ROADWAY — The part of a highway that is the roadway in a case where
the highway has been dedicated and accepted for public ownership, public use, and
public maintenance.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel and for curb and gutter, exclusive of the shoulder and exclusive
of the sidewalks and the utility strip.
SALE — Rendering available for purchase for money or other thing of value of
merchandise or services.
SERVICES — Useful labor that does not produce a tangible commodity.
SHOULDER — That part of the highway between the portion regularly traveled by
vehicular traffic and the lateral curb and gutter or ditch.
SOLICITATION — To make, to offer, or to announce a request or plea for a sale
of goods for the provision of services.
UTILITY STRIP — A vegetated strip of ground typically located between the
sidewalk and the back of the curb or edge of the pavement of a public or private
street. The utility strip is usually intended for the placement of street trees and
underground or above ground utilities.
§ 62-1 ABINGDON CODE § 62-4
62:4
excavation or obstruction guarded by proper barriers and, during hours of darkness, shall
provide light by operating flashing warning lights or other sufficient means over such
excavation or obstruction. Where such excavation is in the nature of a trench or ditch,
such lights shall be placed continuously along the line of such excavation at no greater
distance apart than 100 feet.
§ 62-5. Removal. [Code 1985, § 16-9]
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person in any way to interfere with or remove
or tear down any barriers or lights erected in accordance with the provisions of Section
62-4.
§ 62-6. through § 62-25. (Reserved)
§ 62-4 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES § 62-6
62:5

ARTICLE II
Streets And Alleys
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 62-26. Gasoline and kerosene pumps and equipment. [Code 1985, § 16-5]
No gasoline, diesel, kerosene or other such pumps or tanks installed, placed, replaced or
maintained in the Town shall be located closer than 12 feet to the line of the street rightof-way.
§ 62-27. through § 62-35. (Reserved)
§ 62-26 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES § 62-27
62:7

DIVISION 2
Acceptance of Rights-of-Way
§ 62-36. Generally. [Code 1985, § 16-10]
The Town shall accept on petition of the owners of any footage abutting any previously
unopened or unaccepted right-of-way 30 feet in width or wider, platted or dedicated for
public use before July 1, 1950, on the following terms and conditions:
(a) The petitioners shall furnish an unrestricted right-of-way of at least 40 feet in width.
However, whenever it is feasible and in the Town's opinion necessary, an
unrestricted right-of-way of 50 feet shall be provided. The petitioners shall also
provide any slope or temporary easements necessary for construction purposes. If
an additional right-of-way is required or if the previous right-of-way has not been
accepted, then the petitioners shall delineate the dedication of such right-of-way
which shall be prepared and recorded in accordance with the platting requirements
of the Town subdivision ordinance. However, at the discretion of the Town
Manager or his designated agent, approval of the plat may be abbreviated to only
the necessary administrative procedures.
(b) Design standards and improvements shall be in accordance with the requirements
of the Town subdivision ordinance.
(c) The Town may be responsible for the preparation of the improvement plans at the
discretion of the director of public works.
(d) Cost of the improvements shall be distributed in the following manner:
(1) The Town shall pay all of the cost of any drainage facilities within the public
rights-of-way required in connection with the street improvements.
(2) The petitioners shall pay all of the cost of the structural pavement section
which includes, but is not limited to, the base and surface materials.
(3) The cost of clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, erosion control,
sanitary sewer, curb and gutter, driveway, sidewalks and all other incidental
construction activities shall be borne on a 50-50 basis between the petitioners
and the Town.
(e) All work shall be subject to progress inspections by and must meet the approval of
the Town.
(f) Drainage and/or utility easements shall be furnished by the petitioners from the
affected property owners whenever the Town determines they are necessary and
shall be included on the plat as required in Subsection (a) of this section.
(g) The petitioners shall enter into a construction agreement with the Town. The Town
will be responsible for the preparation of the agreement and the estimated
construction costs of the improvements.
(h) The petitioners shall deposit with the Town prior to construction their portion, as
required in Subsection (d) of this section, of the estimated construction costs. Upon
completion of the work and acceptance by the Town, the advance deposit will be
§ 62-36 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES § 62-36
62:9
§ 62-37. Less than 30 feet in width. [Code 1985, § 16-11]
No right-of-way less than 30 feet in width shall be accepted by the Town except in
the case of an alley. If the alley is permitted by the Town, then it shall conform to
the requirements of the Town subdivision ordinance for alleys and shall be constructed
in accordance with those standards. The cost of all activities necessary to effect the
improvement of such alley shall be borne by the petitioners. The right-of-way shall be
accepted by the Town when all required improvements have been completed by the
petitioners and so reported to the Town Council by the Town Manager, and his report
recorded in the minutes of the Council.
§ 62-38. through § 62-60. (Reserved)
adjusted upward or downward according to the actual cost of the work.
(i) No right-of-way shall be accepted by the Town as part of the street system until the
Town Manager shall report the completion of the requirements set forth in this
section and his report recorded in the minutes of the Council.
(j) When the Town accepts a right-of-way the abutting property owners shall release
the Town from responsibility for the cost of or damage to any abutting property by
reason of any change in grade; lowering or raising of driveway entrances;
walkways; lowering, raising, replacing, or repairing any utility connections;
transplanting or replacing trees, flowers, shrubs or grass; or any other work
incidental to the improvements.
§ 62-36 ABINGDON CODE § 62-38
62:10
ARTICLE III
Sidewalks; Curbs; Gutters; Driveways
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 62-61. Paved sidewalks to be kept clean and unobstructed. [Code 1985, § 16-2]
§ 62-62. Sidewalks to be kept clear of weeds. [Code 1985, § 16-4]
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of premises in the Town to allow weeds
to accumulate on the sidewalks or borderway of sidewalks or alleys adjacent to such
premises.
§ 62-63. Projecting eaves and gutters. [Code 1985, § 16-6]
All buildings which are built on the line of a street in the Town or so that their eaves
project over a sidewalk shall be so provided with gutters that there shall be no drip from
the eaves upon the sidewalks. All gutters, the water from which may be emptied upon
the streets, shall be so constructed as to discharge such water at the flowline of the curb
and gutter or paved or unpaved roadside drainage ditch or swale. Flow from gutters or
downspouts shall not be discharged across the surface of any sidewalks.
§ 62-64. through § 62-75. (Reserved)
(a) The owners and occupants of lots abutting on the streets of the Town shall keep the
paved sidewalks in front of their premises free from dirt, filth, trash, snow, ice,
wood, coal, barrels, boxes or any other obstruction likely to interfere with the
convenience of the public.
(b) The Town may enforce this section and Section 62-62 as provided in Code of
Virginia, § 15.1-867.
§ 62-61 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES § 62-64
62:11

DIVISION 2
Construction
§ 62-76. New residential construction, Town contracted. [Ord. of 7-1-1988; Ord.
No. 2005-90, 12-5-2005]
The Town Manager or his designated agent may initiate the construction of sidewalks,
curbs, curbs and gutters and appurtenant facilities at his discretion or upon application of
a property owner or a group of property owners on the following terms and conditions:
§ 62-77. New residential construction, applicant contracted. [Ord. of 7-1-1988]
If the applicant desires to have construction or reconstruction of sidewalks, curbs,
curbs and gutters and appurtenant facilities performed by a licensed contractor of their
choosing and at a schedule which will serve to meet their needs the following terms and
conditions shall apply:
(a) The Town shall deem the requested improvements appropriate and in the best
interest of the Town. In this connection, work shall be undertaken on a block by
block basis or within natural topographic or other reasonable limits.
(b) The Town shall be responsible for doing the work or retaining a contractor to do the
work.
(c) The work shall be scheduled in relation to its priority and need when compared with
other Town improvement projects and the availability of funds for the Town's share
of the costs.
(d) The Town shall be responsible for preparation of the improvement plan, the
estimated construction cost and a construction agreement.
(e) The owner shall, prior to construction, execute the construction agreement and
deposit 50% of the estimated cost of such construction with the Town.
(f) Upon completion of construction, the advance deposit will be adjusted according to
the actual cost of the work such that the cost will be borne 50% by the Town and
50% by the applicant.
(g) The Town, may, in accordance with its administrative guidelines for Town
contracted sidewalk construction, waive any portion or all of the payment of the
50% deposit and/or cost to be made by the owner for such construction.
(a) The Town shall deem the requested improvements appropriate and in the best
interest of the Town. In this connection the improvements shall be undertaken on a
case by case basis.
(b) The applicant shall be responsible for preparation of the improvement plan. The
plan and proposed improvements shall meet the standards as required by the Town
department of public works.
(c) All such work and the contractor selected shall be approved by the director of public
works prior to commencement of construction.
§ 62-76 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES § 62-77
62:13
§ 62-78. Nonresidential construction. [Ord. of 7-1-1988]
In the case of a request for the construction or reconstruction of sidewalks, curbs and
gutters, and appurtenant facilities at a nonresidential (commercial, business or industrial)
location, all of the provisions of Section 62-77 shall apply; except, that the applicant
shall be responsible for the full cost of the improvements and shall not be reimbursed by
the Town for any of the cost incurred in connection with the construction.
§ 62-79. Reconstruction, maintenance or maintenance replacement. [Ord. of
7-1-1988]
§ 62-80. Construction of driveways. [Code 1985, § 16-13]
(d) All construction shall be subject to progress inspections by and must meet the
approval of the director of public works.
(e) The applicant shall be responsible for preparation of an estimated cost of
construction which must be approved by the director of public works prior to
construction.
(f) The Town shall prepare a construction agreement which shall be executed prior to
construction.
(g) Upon approval by the Town of the finished work and the submission of verified
bills to the Town, the Town shall reimburse the applicant for 40% of the cost of
construction.
(a) The Town Manager or his designated agent may initiate the reconstruction,
maintenance or maintenance replacement of sidewalks, curbs, curbs and gutters and
appurtenant facilities. Such activities may be undertaken in conjunction with other
street improvement activities to eliminate a hazard or unsafe condition when
warranted by a generally deteriorated condition of the facility, when warranted as
routine maintenance or when deemed necessary and in the best interest of the
public. The cost for all such work so initiated shall be borne by the Town.
(b) Such work may also be initiated upon application of a property owner or group of
property owners. If the reason for the application is for maintenance purposes as
listed above the cost shall be borne by the Town. However, if the purpose of the
application is for aesthetic reasons or to change the type of construction, for
example, from a concrete sidewalk to a brick sidewalk, then the procedure for new
construction shall be followed and the cost shall be distributed as provided for
therein.
(c) The work shall be scheduled in relation to its priority and need when compared with
other work in this category, in relation to new construction activities and in relation
to the availability of funds for the work.
(d) Nothing in this section shall be construed to obligate the Town to incur a financial
obligation for these types of activities greater than its budgeted amounts within any
given fiscal year.
(a) The state department of transportation minimum standards of entrances to state
§ 62-77 ABINGDON CODE § 62-80
62:14
§ 62-81. Entrances. [Code 1985, § 16-14]
§ 62-82. through § 62-100. (Reserved)
highways, on file in the office of the Town Clerk, shall be the standard to be
observed in the construction of entrances on streets in the Town.
(b) The following requirements for private and commercial entrances to such streets
shall be observed:
(1) No driveway shall be constructed pursuant to this section unless there shall
first have been obtained a permit from the director of public works allowing
such construction.
(2) Construction of the entrance shall meet the requirements for improvements as
set forth in this division.
(a) The Town shall not be responsible for keeping in repair that portion of a sidewalk
or roadway shoulder where a driveway entrance has been constructed.
(b) The property owner shall, in all cases, maintain the entrance leading into his
property from such street.
(c) Where a new commercial or private entrance is to be built into a street, the Town
public works department shall, after the property owner or his agent has secured the
proper permit from the director of public works and made any deposit as set forth
in this division, provided the required storm drain pipe and graded the roadway,
install such drain pipe and keep it clear of debris.
(d) All entrances shall be so constructed by the property owner that water will drain
from the surface of the roadway, and shall be surfaced with a stable material to
prevent mud from washing or tracking into the roadway.
(e) Entrances with an open drainage ditch shall be permitted when it is possible to
provide adequate drainage. The normal drainage flow in all cases shall not be
obstructed or diverted into the street.
§ 62-80 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES § 62-82
62:15

ARTICLE IV
Excavations
§ 62-101. Permit required. [Code 1985, § 16-14]
No person, unless specially authorized by the Council, shall take up or remove any
portion of the surface of the sidewalk or street or excavate in any public street of
the Town without written permission of the Town Manager or his designated agent;
provided, that the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the Town Council a decision
of the Town Manager refusing to grant the same.
§ 62-102. Deposits; acquiescence in provisions of article. [Code 1985, § 16-16]
§ 62-103. Duty to prosecute work without delay. [Code 1985, § 16-17]
It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit to remove a sidewalk, pavement
or street surface or excavate in any street or alley shall have been granted to institute
at once and prosecute without delay the work for which such permit was obtained, and
promptly, on its completion, give written notice thereof to the director of public works.
§ 62-104. Replacing surface. [Code 1985, § 16-18]
No pavement, sidewalk or street surface shall be replaced, after being taken up, by any
person except under the direction of the director of public works. If the applicant fails
to resurface the disturbed street promptly and in a manner approved by the director of
public works, the director of public works is authorized to cause such work to be done at
the expense of the applicant.
§ 62-105. Guarding by lights and barriers; responsibility for damages caused by
excavation. [Code 1985, § 16-19]
Any person to whom a permit is granted to do such work as provided in this article shall
place guards or barriers around such excavation and shall protect it by flashing warning
lights at night, and shall be responsible for damages to persons or property caused by
such excavations until taken in charge by the Town.
(a) Before a permit to remove a sidewalk, pavement or street surface or excavate in any
street or alley is granted, the director of public works may require a deposit
sufficient to pay for resurfacing the street to be disturbed, the amount of such
deposit to be determined by the director of public works.
(b) Every person who shall make application as above specified shall be deemed to
have assented to all the provisions and terms of this article, including the right of
the Town to collect the actual cost of replacing the pavement, sidewalk or street
surface in the manner above directed.
§ 62-101 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES § 62-105
62:17

ARTICLE V
Sinking Spring Cemetery
§ 62-106. Creation and composition. [Ord. of 5-7-2007]
There is hereby created a committee to be named the "Sinking Spring Cemetery
Committee." The committee shall be composed of not less than seven voting members
appointed by the Town Council. In addition, an employee designated by the Town
Manager shall be a non-voting member.
§ 62-107. Duties and responsibilities of the committee. [Ord. of 5-7-2007]
(a) Qualification and compensation.
(1) The seven voting members shall consist of the following:
a. Town of Abingdon: one member.
b. Historical Society of Washington County, Virginia: one member.
c. Sinking Spring Presbyterian Church: one member.
d. Funeral home located in the Town of Abingdon: one member.
e. Community at large: three members, one of whom is related to or
descended from family relatives or ancestors buried in the cemetery.
(2) The members shall serve without compensation but all necessary expenses of
the committee shall be paid by the Town pursuant to appropriate action by the
Town Council.
(b) Terms of office. The seven voting members shall be appointed by the Town Council
for three year staggered terms and serve until their respective successors are
appointed. Of the members initially appointed, one shall serve for one year, three
shall serve for two years, and three shall serve for three years. Thereafter, all
members shall serve three year terms. Vacancies resulting from death, resignation
or other causes shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner original
appointments are made. Members may serve any number of terms but not more than
two terms consecutively.
(a) The committee shall within a reasonable time after appointment, conduct an
organizational meeting to elect a chairman, vice-chairman and standing subcommittee chairs as needed, and provide for the adoption of rules and procedures
for holding public meetings. The Town employee designated by the Town Manager
shall act as secretary and conduct the daily affairs of the committee. The secretary
shall cause a record to be kept of all proceedings, resolutions, findings and actions
taken by the committee. The committee's records shall be filed with the Town
Clerk;
(b) The committee shall meet not less than twice each year, or more frequently if
deemed necessary by the committee;
(c) The committee shall visit and inspect the cemetery/cemeteries not less than
§ 62-106 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES § 62-107
62:19
annually or more frequently if deemed necessary by the committee;
(d) The committee shall within three months after the end of each calendar year report
in writing to the Town Council about the condition of the cemetery/cemeteries and
submit such recommendations about the operation and maintenance of the
cemetery/cemeteries as the committee deems appropriate. In addition the report
shall include information about all burials, if any, in the cemetery/cemeteries during
the previous year including the names and dates and other personal information
available and other activities such as the installation of monuments and such
information that is available about the number and frequency of visitors to the
cemetery/cemeteries.
(e) The committee may make recommendations to the Town Council which the
members of the committee deem appropriate to maintain, protect and preserve the
historical nature of the cemetery/cemeteries.
§ 62-107 ABINGDON CODE § 62-107
62:20
Chapter 66
TAXATION
§ 62-107 TAXATION § 62-107
66:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 66-1. Tax year. [Code 1985; Ord. of 6-1-2009, eff. 1-1-2010]
The Town tax year shall begin on January 1 of each year and end on December 31 of
each year. The tax collection dates established by the Town and applicable as designated
are set forth as follows:
§ 66-2. Delinquent taxes; penalty and interest. [Code 1985; Ord. of 6-1-2009, eff.
1-1-2010]
§ 66-3. Collection of delinquent taxes. [Code 1985, § 17-2; amended 11-1-2021 by
Ord. No. 2021.11.01.B]
§ 66-3.1. Payment of administrative fees, attorney's fees, and collection agency's
fees to cover costs associated with collection of delinquent taxes. [Added 11-1-2021
by Ord. No. 2021.11.01B]
Any person liable for local taxes or other local accounts who fails to pay the amount
due within 30 days after notice of the delinquency has been sent may, in addition to
all penalties and interest, pay a fee to cover the administrative costs associated with the
collection in such amount as allowed by § 58.1-3958 of the Virginia Code, as amended,
or such other Virginia statute regulating the amount of such fees or covering the subject
of fees in such cases. In addition to the administrative fee, any collection agency's fees
or attorney's fees actually contracted for, not to exceed 20% of the delinquent bill, may
also be added to the delinquent bill.
(a) All taxes or levies on tangible personal property in the Town shall be due and
payable during the year for which the same are assessed and shall be paid to the
treasurer of the Town on or before November 20 of such year.
(b) All taxes or levies on real property in the Town shall be due and payable during the
year for which the same are assessed and shall be paid to the treasurer of the Town
in two approximately equal installments, as follows: one-half on or before May 20
and one-half on or before November 20 of such year.
(a) Pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3915 and 58.1-3916, any person failing to
pay any tax levy on or before the tax collection date(s), as set forth in Section
66-1(a) and/or (b), shall incur a penalty thereon of 10%, which shall be added to the
amount of taxes or levies due from such taxpayer.
(b) Pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3916 and 58.1-3918, interest at a rate of 10%
per annum shall be imposed and collected. For the second and subsequent years of
delinquency, interest shall be calculated at a rate established pursuant to Section
6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. Interest shall commence
from the first day following the day such taxes are due.
(a) Pursuant to the authority of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3940 et seq., Town Council
may employ or retain an attorney to collect past due taxes by distress, suit, lien, sale
or any other available legal means on behalf of the Town.
§ 66-1 TAXATION § 66-3.2
66:3
§ 66-3.2. Publication of delinquent taxes and taxpayers. [Added 11-1-2021 by Ord.
No. 2021.11.01B]
§ 66-4. through § 66-25. (Reserved)
(a) Pursuant to the authority of the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3924, the Treasurer, upon
the request of the Council, shall furnish a copy of any of the six lists mentioned in
the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3921. Pursuant to the authority of the Code of Virginia
§ 58.1-3922, the lists shall conform to the facts as they existed on June 30 of the
year they are submitted to the governing body. Delinquent real estate taxes shall be
listed in the name of the owner on the date of assessment.
(b) Pursuant to the authority of the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3924, the governing body,
or the Treasurer, may publish:
(1) A list of real estate which is delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes; and
(2) A list of taxes assessed on tangible personal property, machinery and tools and
merchants' capital and such other subjects of local taxation which are
delinquent, or such part of said lists as are deemed advisable by the Treasurer
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town and/or on the Town's
website.
§ 66-3.2 ABINGDON CODE § 66-4
66:4
ARTICLE II
Real Property Tax
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 66-26. Service charge upon exempt property. [Ord. No. 89-9-2001, 9-11-1989]
(a) There is hereby imposed a service charge upon the owners of all real estate situate
within the Town which is exempt from property taxation under Code of Virginia,
§ 58.1-3400, excepting, however, property owned by the commonwealth; provided,
however, that the following properties and the respective owners thereof are exempt
from such service charge:
(1) Nonprofit private or public burying grounds or cemeteries.
(2) Property owned by public libraries, law libraries of local bar associations when
the same are used or available for use by a state court or courts or the judge or
judges thereof, medical libraries of local medical associations when the same
are used or available for use by state health officials, incorporated colleges or
other institutions of learning not conducted for profit. Provided, however, that
this subsection shall apply only to property primarily used for literary,
scientific or educational purposes or purposes incidental thereto and shall not
apply to industrial schools which sell their products to other than their own
employees or students.
(3) Buildings with the land they actually occupy and the furniture and furnishings
therein belonging to any benevolent or charitable organization and used by it
exclusively for lodge purposes or meeting rooms together with such additional
or adjacent land as may be necessary for the convenient use of the buildings
for such purposes.
(4) Buildings which are lawfully owned and held by churches or religious bodies
and wholly and exclusively used for religious worship or for the residence of
the minister of any church or religious body or for use as a religious convent,
nunnery, monastery, cloister or abbey.
(5) Any buildings which are used or operated exclusively for nonprofit, private,
educational or charitable purposes other than faculty or staff housing of any
such education institution.
(6) Public roadways or property held for future construction of such roadways.
(b) The service charge shall be based on the assessed value of the tax exempt real estate
and the amount which the Town expended in the year preceding the year in which
such charge is assessed for the purpose of furnishing police and fire protection and
for collection and disposal of refuse, less any amount received from federal or state
grants specifically designated for the above-mentioned purposes and assistance
provided to the Town pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 14.1-84.1 et seq. The
expenditures for services not provided for certain real estate shall not be considered
in the calculation of the service charge for such real estate, nor shall such
§ 66-26 TAXATION § 66-26
66:5
§ 66-27. through § 66-35. (Reserved)
expenditures be considered when a service is currently funded by another service
charge.
(c) The service charge rate shall be determined by dividing the expenditures
determined pursuant to Subsection (b) of this section by the assessed fair market
value expressed in hundreds of dollars of all real estate located within the Town
including nontaxable property. The resulting rate shall then be applied to the
assessed value of the tax exempt property.
(d) Real estate owned by the United States government or any of its instrumentalities
shall not be included in the assessed value of all property within the Town. For
purposes of this section, artistic significance shall not be taken into account in the
valuation of exempt real estate.
(e) In no event shall the service charge exceed 20% of the real estate tax rate of the
Town.
(f) The Town Manager, prior to imposing any service charge authorized by this section
shall publish and list all exempt real estate in the land books of the Town in the
same manner as is taxable real estate.
(g) Any person aggrieved by the assessment or the valuation of real estate for purposes
of this section may apply to the Town Manager for correction thereof pursuant to
Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3981, as amended. Any person aggrieved by the decision
of the Town Manager upon such application may appeal to the county circuit court
as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984, as amended.
§ 66-26 ABINGDON CODE § 66-27
66:6
DIVISION 2
Relief for Elderly and Handicapped
§ 66-36. Manufactured homes included. [Ord. of 6-2-2014]
For purposes of this division, any reference to real estate shall include manufactured
homes.
§ 66-37. Applicability to handicapped. [Code 1985, § 17-5; Ord. of 6-2-2014]
All of the provisions of this division relative to real estate tax relief for elderly property
owners shall also apply to qualified totally and permanently handicapped property
owners, on the same basis as to income and net worth.
§ 66-38. Authorized; legislative finding. [Code 1985, § 17-6; Ord. of 6-2-2014]
§ 66-39. Administration. [Code 1985, § 17-7; Ord. of 6-2-2014]
The exemption authorized by Section 66-38 shall be administered by the Town Treasurer
according to the general provisions contained in this article. The Town Treasurer is
hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules
and regulations in conformity with the general provisions of this article, including
the requirements of answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine
qualifications for exemption as specified by this section. The Town Treasurer may
require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income
or financial worth.
§ 66-40. Requirements for exemption. [Code 1985, § 17-8; Ord. of 6-7-1993; Ord.
of 6-2-2014]
Exemption shall be granted under this article for real estate taxes on the qualifying
dwelling and land, not exceeding one acre, subject to the following provisions:
(a) Real estate tax exemption is hereby provided for qualified property owners, who
are not less than 65 years of age and who are eligible according to the terms of this
division.
(b) Persons qualifying for exemption are deemed to be bearing an extraordinary real
estate tax burden in relation to their income and financial worth.
(a) The title of the property for which exemption is claimed is held, or partially held,
on January 1 of the taxable year by the person claiming exemption.
(b) The head of the household occupying the dwelling and owning title, or partial title,
thereto is 65 years of age or older on December 31 of the year immediately
preceding the taxable year. Such dwelling must be occupied as the sole dwelling of
the person or persons not less than 65 years of age.
(c) The total combined income during the immediately preceding calendar year from
all sources of the owner of the dwelling living therein and of the owner's relatives
living in the dwelling shall not exceed $12,000; provided, that the first $2,500 of
income other than spouse of the owner shall not be included in such total.
§ 66-36 TAXATION § 66-40
66:7
§ 66-41. Affidavit; certificate; changes in status. [Code 1985, § 17-9; Ord. of
6-2-2014]
§ 66-42. Amount of exemption. [Code 1985, § 17-10; Ord. of 6-7-1993; Ord. of
6-2-2014]
The person qualifying for and claiming exemption shall be relieved of that portion of the
real estate tax levied on the qualifying dwelling and land, not exceeding one acre, in the
amount calculated in accordance with the following schedule:
If Income Is: And Net Worth Is: Percentage
$0 to $10,263 $0 to $33,000 80
$33,001 to $66,000 64
$66,001 to $100,000 56
$10,264 to $15,227 $0 to $33,000 60
$33,001 to $66,000 48
$66,001 to $100,000 42
$15,228 to $20,356 $0 to $33,000 40
$33,001 to $66,000 32
$66,001 to $100,000 28
$20,357 to $25,487 $0 to $33,000 20
(d) The net combined financial worth, including equitable interests, as of December 31
of the immediately preceding calendar year, of the owner and the spouse of any
owner, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land, not exceeding one acre,
upon which it is situated shall not exceed $30,000.
(a) Annually, and not later than May 1, of the taxable year, the person claiming an
exemption must file a real estate tax exemption affidavit with the Town Treasurer.
(b) The affidavit shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the Town Treasurer, the
location, assessed value and tax on the property and the names of the related
persons occupying the dwelling for which exemption is claimed, their gross
combined income and the combined net worth of the owners and the spouse of any
owner.
(c) If, after audit and investigation, the Town Treasurer determines that the person is
qualified for exemption, he shall issue to the person a certificate which shall show
the amount of the exemption from the claimant's real estate tax liability upon the
qualifying dwelling and land, not exceeding one acre.
(d) Changes in respect to income, financial worth, ownership of property or other
factors occurring during the taxable year for which the affidavit is filed and having
the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided herein,
or by any ordinance adopted hereafter, shall nullify any exemption for the then
current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following.
§ 66-40 ABINGDON CODE § 66-42
66:8
If Income Is: And Net Worth Is: Percentage
$33,001 to $66,000 16
$66,001 to $100,000 14
§ 66-43. Forfeiture. [Code 1985, § 17-11; Ord. of 6-1-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; Ord. of
6-2-2014]
Failure to pay the difference between the exemption and the full amount of taxes levied
on the property for which the exemption is issued by the tax collection date, as defined in
Section 66-1, of the year for which such exemption is issued shall constitute a forfeiture
of the exemption.
§ 66-44. False claims. [Code 1985, § 17-12; Ord. of 6-2-2014]
The false claiming of the exemption authorized in this section shall constitute a Class 1
misdemeanor.
§ 66-45. Minimum amount for certain veterans. [Ord. of 6-6-1988; Ord. No.
88-6-2002, 6-7-1988; Ord. of 6-6-2011; Ord. of 6-2-2014]
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this division:
(1) Real estate exempts from taxation of the real property, including the joint real
property of husband and wife, of any veteran who has been rated by the U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs or its successor agency pursuant to federal law
to have a 100% service-connected, permanent, and total disability, and who
occupies the real property as his principal place of residence.
(2) The surviving spouse of a veteran eligible for the exemption set forth in this
article shall also qualify for the exemption, so long as the death of the veteran
occurs on or after January 1, 2011, the surviving spouse does not remarry, and
the surviving spouse continues to occupy the real property as his principal
place of residence.
(b) The veteran or surviving spouse claiming the exemption under this article shall file
with the commissioner of the revenue of the county, city, or Town or such other
officer as may be designated by the governing body in which the real property is
located, on forms to be supplied by the county, city, or Town, an affidavit or written
statement (i) setting forth the name of the disabled veteran and the name of the
spouse, if any, also occupying the real property, (ii) indicating whether the real
property is jointly owned by a husband and wife, and (iii) certifying that the real
property is occupied as the veteran's principal place of residence. The veteran shall
also provide documentation from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs or its
successor agency indicating that the veteran has a 100% service-connected,
permanent, and total disability. The veteran shall be required to re-file the
information required by this section only if the veteran's principal place of residence
changes. In the event of a surviving spouse of a veteran claiming the exemption, the
surviving spouse shall also provide documentation that the veteran's death occurred
on or after January 1, 2011.
§ 66-42 TAXATION § 66-46
66:9
§ 66-46. through § 66-55. (Reserved)
§ 66-46 ABINGDON CODE § 66-46
66:10
DIVISION 3
Special Assessment for Land Preservation
§ 66-56. Legislative findings; purpose. [Code 1985, § 17-23]
The Town Council finds that the preservation of real estate devoted to agricultural,
horticultural, forest and open space users within its boundaries is in the public interest
and, having heretofore adopted a land use plan, hereby declares that such real estate shall
be taxed in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3230 et seq., and
this article.
§ 66-57. Application for assessment. [Code 1985, § 17-24]
§ 66-58. Determination by Town Manager; appeals; taxes for qualifying property
to be extended from use value; tax bills to show use and fair market values. [Code
1985, § 17-25]
(a) The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in Code of Virginia,
§§ 58.1-3230 and 58.1-3233, may, at least 60 days preceding the tax year for which
such taxation is sought, apply to the Town Manager for the classification,
assessment and taxation of such property for the next succeeding tax year on the
basis of its use, under the procedures set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3234;
provided, that in any year in which a general reassessment is being made, the
property owner may submit such application until 30 days have elapsed after his
notice of increase in assessment is mailed in accordance with Code of Virginia,
§ 58.1-3330, or 60 days preceding the tax year, whichever is later. Such application
shall be on forms provided by the state department of taxation and supplied by the
Town Manager and shall include such additional schedules, photographs and
drawings as may be required by the Town Manager. An individual who is the owner
of an undivided interest in a parcel may apply on behalf of himself and the other
owners of such parcel, upon submitting an affidavit that such other owners are
minors or cannot be located. An application shall be submitted whenever the use or
acreage of such land previously approved changes; provided, that such property
owner must revalidate annually with the Town Manager any applications
previously approved. An application fee of $20 plus $0.10 per acre shall accompany
each application but does not apply to revalidations. There shall be a revalidation
fee every sixth year.
(b) No application fee may be required when a change in acreage occurs solely as a
result of a conveyance necessitated by governmental action or condemnation of a
portion of any land previously approved for taxation on the basis of use assessment.
(c) In any case wherein a landowner has previously submitted such an application, he
shall be sent by the Town Manager a form for reapplication 30 days prior to the
annual deadline for refiling such application, with a letter explaining the
aforementioned refiling requirements.
(d) A separate application shall be filed for each noncontiguous tract or boundary
owned by the same owner, or may be filed on each parcel on the land book.
(a) Promptly upon receipt of any initial application, the Town Manager shall determine
§ 66-56 TAXATION § 66-58
66:11
§ 66-59. Roll-back tax and interest when use changes to nonqualifying use;
violations, penalty and interest. [Code 1985, § 17-26]
§ 66-60. Material misstatements of facts in application; penalty. [Code 1985,
§ 17-27]
Any person making a material misstatement of fact in any application filed pursuant to
this article shall be liable for all taxes, in such amounts and at such times as if such
property had been assessed on the basis of fair market value as applied to other real estate
whether the subject property meets the criteria for taxation under this article. If the
Town Manager determines that the subject property does meet such criteria, he shall
determine the value of such property for its qualifying use, as well as its fair market
value.
(b) In determining whether the subject property meets the criteria set forth in this
division, the Town Manager may request an opinion from the director of the state
department of conservation and recreation, the state forester or the state
commissioner of agriculture and consumer services. Upon the refusal of the
commissioner of agriculture and consumer services, the state forester or the director
of the department of conservation and recreation to issue an opinion or upon an
unfavorable opinion which does not comport with standards set forth in the
statements filed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3240, the party aggrieved may
seek relief in the circuit court of the county, and if the court finds in his favor, it
may issue an order which shall serve in lieu of an opinion for the purposes of this
division.
(c) The use value and fair market value of any qualifying property shall be placed on
the land book before delivery to the Town Manager, and the tax for the next
succeeding tax year shall be extended from the use value.
(d) The tax bills on land taxed under this article shall show both the use value and the
fair market value on the face of such bills, so that the landowner will be apprised of
such "fair market value" at all times.
(a) There is hereby imposed a roll-back tax, and interest thereon, in such amounts as
may be determined under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3237, upon any property as to
which the use changes to a nonqualifying use or upon any property whose zoning
is changed to a more intensive use at the request of the owner or his agent.
(b) The owner of any real estate liable for roll-back taxes shall, within 60 days
following a change in use or zoning, report such change to the Town Manager or
other assessing officer on such forms as may be prescribed. The Town Manager
shall forthwith determine and assess the roll-back tax, which shall be paid to the
Town within 30 days of assessment. Upon failure of any owner to report a change
in use within 60 days following such change in use and/or failure to pay such rollback tax within 30 days of assessment, such owner shall be liable for an additional
penalty equal to 10% of the amount of the roll-back tax and interest, which penalty
shall be collected as a part of the tax. In addition to such penalty, there is hereby
imposed interest of 0.833% of the amount of the roll-back tax, interest and penalty,
for each month or fraction thereof during which the failure continues.
§ 66-58 ABINGDON CODE § 66-60
66:12
in the taxing jurisdiction, together with interest and penalties thereon, and he shall be
further assessed with an additional penalty of 100% of such unpaid taxes.
§ 66-61. Applicability of state law. [Code 1985, § 17-28]
The provisions of Code of Virginia, tit. 58.1, applicable to local levies and real estate
assessment and taxation shall be applicable to assessments and taxation hereunder
mutatis mutandis including, without limitation, provisions relating to tax liens, boards
of equalization and the correction of erroneous assessments, and for such purposes the
roll-back taxes shall be considered to be deferred real estate taxes.
§ 66-62. through § 66-65. (Reserved)
§ 66-60 TAXATION § 66-62
66:13

DIVISION 4
Personal Property Tax Relief Act of 1998
§ 66-66. Purpose; definitions; relation to other ordinances. [Ord. No. 2-2005,
12-5-05; Ord. of 6-1-2009, eff. 1-1-2010]
§ 66-67. Method of computing and reflecting tax relief. [Ord. No. 2-2005,
12-5-2005]
§ 66-68. Allocation of relief among taxpayers. [Ord. No. 2-2005, 12-5-2005]
§ 66-69. Transitional provisions. [Ord. No. 2-2005, 12-5-2005]
(a) The purpose of this division is to provide for the implementation of the changes to
PPTRA affected by legislation adopted during the 2004 Special Session I and the
2005 Regular Session of the General Assembly of Virginia.
(b) Terms used in this division that have defined meanings set forth in PPTRA shall
have the same meanings as set forth in Va. Code § 58.1-3523, as amended.
(c) To the extent that the provisions of this division conflict with any prior ordinance
or provision of the Town Code, this division shall control.
(d) All taxes or levies on tangible personal property in the Town shall be due and
payable during the year for which the same are assessed and shall be paid to the
treasurer of the Town on or before November 20 of such year.
(a) For tax years commencing in 2006, the Town adopts the provisions of Item 503.E
of the 2005 Appropriations Act, providing for the computation of tax relief as a
specific dollar amount to be offset against the total taxes that would otherwise be
due but for PPTRA and the reporting of such specific dollar relief on the tax bill.
(b) The Council shall, by resolution, set the percentage of tax relief at such a level that
it is anticipated fully to exhaust PPTRA relief funds provided to the Town by the
commonwealth.
(c) Personal property tax bills shall set forth on their face the specific dollar amount of
relief credited with respect to each qualifying vehicle, together with an explanation
of the general manner in which relief is allocated.
(a) Allocation of PPTRA relief shall be provided in accordance with the general
provisions of this section, as implemented by the specific provisions of the Town's
annual budget relating to PPTRA relief.
(b) Relief shall be allocated in such a manner as to eliminate personal property taxation
of each qualifying vehicle with an assessed value of $1,000 or less.
(c) Relief with respect to qualifying vehicles with assessed values of more than $1,000
shall be provided at a percentage, annually fixed and applied to the first $20,000 in
value of each such qualifying vehicle, that is estimated fully to use all available
state PPTRA relief. The percentage shall be established annually as a part of the
adopted budget for the Town.
§ 66-66 TAXATION § 66-69
66:15
§ 66-70. (Reserved)
(a) Pursuant to authority conferred in Item 503.D of the 2005 Appropriations Act, the
Town Treasurer is authorized to issue a supplemental personal property tax bill, in
the amount of 100% of tax due without regard to any former entitlement to state
PPTRA relief, plus applicable penalties and interest, to any taxpayer whose taxes
with respect to a qualifying vehicle for tax year 2005 or any prior tax year remain
unpaid on September 1, 2006, or such date as state funds for reimbursement of the
state share of such bill have become unavailable, whichever earlier occurs.
(b) Penalty and interest with respect to bills issued pursuant to Subsection (a) of this
section shall be computed on the entire amount of tax owed. Interest shall be
computed at the rate provided in Section 66-2 of the Code of the Town of Abingdon
from the original due date of the tax.
§ 66-69 ABINGDON CODE § 66-70
66:16
DIVISION 5
Historic District Tax Abatement
§ 66-71. Purpose. [Ord. of 10-5-2009; Ord. of 11-5-2012]
The Town of Abingdon finds that the continued development and success of its Old and
Historic District requires incentives, and determines that the most appropriate method
of offering incentives for the area described below is to create a tax credit/abatement
program in that area, as authorized by the Code of Virginia 1950, § 58.1-3220, as
amended. The intent of Council is to provide property tax credit and/or abatements
to encourage maintenance, restoration and preservation and rehabilitation by providing
for such a tax credit of $2,500 as to Town property taxes for every $2,500 of work
performed and documented on the structures located within the Old and Historic District
of the Town. The Council of the Town believes that the establishment of such tax credits
and/or abatement incentives will improve the economic and visual conditions of the
geographic area of the Town which could, in turn, benefit the welfare of the citizens of
Abingdon.
§ 66-72. Administration. [Ord. of 10-5-2009; Ord. of 11-5-2012]
The administrator of the Old and Historic District Tax Abatement Incentive shall be the
Town Manager or his designee. The administrator shall determine the procedures for
obtaining the benefits created by this chapter and for the administration of this chapter.
§ 66-73. Definitions. [Ord. of 10-5-2009; Ord. of 11-5-2012]
For the purposes of this division, the phrase below shall have the following meaning,
unless clearly indicated to the contrary:
QUALIFYING PROJECT — One that meets the requirements of the Town Council's
adopted abatement categories, per Section 66-75 below.
QUALIFYING PROPERTY — A structure which is physically located within the
boundaries of the Old and Historic District, which, by the determination of the
administrator, positively contributes to the character of said district as a contributing
structure or as listed as a state and/or National Registered property.
§ 66-74. Boundaries. [Ord. of 10-5-2009; Ord. of 11-5-2012]
Boundaries are those which are shown as being in the Old and Historic District per the
Town of Abingdon Official Zoning Map.
§ 66-75. Taxes eligible for exemption/abatement. [Ord. of 10-5-2009; Ord. of
11-5-2012]
To encourage maintenance, restoration, preservation and rehabilitation projects, a tenyear comprehensive property tax credit for work meeting eligibility criteria would be
offered.
The program keeps the assessed tax of the renovated structure at the same level as it
was before the start of renovation for 10 years. The ordinance allows a six-month tax
abatement, since taxes are paid twice per year, for every qualifying $2,500 spent and
§ 66-71 TAXATION § 66-75
66:17
documented on the structure only, not land. The credit provided would "roll" and be
applied into future tax years, not to exceed 10 years, thereby making the maximum the
property owner could claim $25,000 within a ten-year period.
§ 66-76. Non-retroactive. [Ord. of 11-5-2012]
Such credit shall be non-retroactive within a ten-year period for a maximum tax credit
of $25,000. The tax credit shall be allowed immediately following the tax year in which
the work is completed.
§ 66-77. Tax credit pre-applicant approval required. [Ord. of 11-5-2012]
The property owner is required to receive a tax credit pre-applicant approval from the
board, or waiver per Town Code, before work begins. To insure compliance, the board
shall review all work proposed as well as final review/approval upon completion.
§ 66-78. Issuance of certificate of appropriateness. [Ord. of 11-5-2012]
Upon completion and final approval, the board shall issue a final certificate of
appropriateness to be reviewed and executed by the Town Manager or his/her designee
and subsequently forwarded to the Town Treasurer for processing.
§ 66-79. through § 66-80. (Reserved)
§ 66-75 ABINGDON CODE § 66-79
66:18
DIVISION 6
Partial Exemption for Certain Rehabilitated, Renovated, or Replacement
Commercial or Industrial Structures
§ 66-80.1. Exemption authorized. [Ord. of 4-2-2012]
§ 66-80.2. Amount and term of exemption. [Ord. of 4-2-2012]
(a) Partial tax exemption. A partial tax exemption from real property taxes is hereby
provided in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision for qualifying real
property which is devoted to commercial and industrial uses and that is rehabilitated
in accordance with the criteria set out in the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended,
§ 58.1-3221 and this section.
(b) Qualification. Real property shall qualify for the partial tax exemption provided for
within this subdivision when it is located within the geographic boundaries as set
forth in this section, it has on it a structure that meets the age of structure
requirements set forth in this section, and when the property has been substantially
rehabilitated as set forth in this section.
(c) Geographic boundaries. The geographic boundaries for the partial tax exemption
program described in Division 6 are the former Johnston Memorial Hospital
properties within the Town of Abingdon, more specifically described as those
properties identified as of September 13, 2011, with tax parcel identification
numbers as more specifically described in Appendix A, attached hereto.13
(d) Age of structure. The age of structure requirement for the partial tax exemption
program described in this subdivision shall be met if a structure on the commercial
or industrial real property shall be no less than 20 years old.
(e) Substantial rehabilitation. The substantial rehabilitation criteria shall be satisfied if
a structure formerly used for a commercial or industrial purpose but which had
fallen into disuse or disrepair has been restored, renovated, or rehabilitated in a
manner that allows continued commercial or industrial use. (The use does not have
to be the same type of use as that which occurred in the structure prior to the period
of disuse or disrepair, but it must be for commercial or industrial use.) As used in
this section, the term "substantial rehabilitation" shall include demolition and
replacement with new structure(s) for commercial and industrial use even if such
replacement structure is not on the same parcel on which the original structure is
located, but is, instead, on an adjoining parcel within the geographic boundaries
defined by this section. In the event that a replacement structure is built on an
adjoining parcel, then the partial tax exemption credit, if any, shall attach to the
parcel on which the replacement structure is built and there shall be no eligibility
for additional credit for the parcel on which the original structure was located.
(a) Amount of exemption. The amount of exemption authorized pursuant to this section
shall be the real property tax, as of the effective date of the exemption, on 50% of
the qualifying costs. Qualifying costs shall include the cost of substantial
rehabilitation, renovation, or replacement of the qualifying commercial or industrial
13. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 66-80.1 TAXATION § 66-80.2
66:19
§ 66-80.3. Application; determination of eligibility; application fee. [Ord. of
4-2-2012]
structure, but such partial tax credit shall be limited to the extent that it shall
not cause reduction of the real property tax below $0. Qualifying costs shall not
include expenses on the following non-exclusive list of non-qualifying costs: costs
for items such as office furniture and equipment, desktop office computer systems,
manufacturing equipment, rolling stock, legal fees, taxes, recording fees, interest,
or other expenses unrelated to the construction costs necessary for substantial
rehabilitation, renovation or replacement of the qualifying structure.
(b) Term of exemption. The partial tax exemption shall be applied for each year of a
fifteen-year period following the effective date of exemption, as defined in this
division, or such shorter time limitation on the length of exemption, as follows.
(c) Shortened term of exemption. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the partial tax
exemption shall be discontinued when either of the following events occur.
(1) The accumulated sum of annually applied credits is $650,000; or
(2) The property is conveyed from the owner who was originally approved for
receipt of the partial tax credit, unless such conveyance is to a business entity
related to the original applicant as (1) partial or whole owner of such applicant
or (2) partially or wholly owned by such applicant.
(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the partial property tax
exemption credit provided in this subdivision shall be limited to a total maximum
collective tax exemption credit of $650,000 for all real property located within the
geographic boundaries set forth in this subdivision. In other words, no additional
partial tax exemption credits shall be awarded after the total of partial tax
exemptions to be accumulated over the full fifteen-year period defined in this
section will sum $650,000 for the total land mass included within the geographic
boundaries defined in this subdivision.
(a) Application to determine eligibility. As a prerequisite to qualify for partial tax
exemption, the owner of the structure and of the real property on which the structure
is located shall file with the county's commissioner of revenue, upon forms
furnished by the commissioner, an application to qualify such structure for partial
tax exemption pursuant to this subdivision.
(b) Non-qualifying. A structure shall be deemed non-qualifying if demolition or
rehabilitation has commenced prior to the commissioner's determination of
qualification for the partial tax exemption, subject to the following exceptions:
(1) If any property, for which an application for the partial tax exemption credit
provided by this article is made, has been damaged or destroyed as a result of
a sudden natural or man-made disaster prior to the application, then that
property shall remain eligible for consideration for qualification. For purposes
of this article, a sudden natural or man-made disaster shall include, without
limitation, damage or destruction caused by fire, flood, windstorm, and
explosion.
§ 66-80.2 ABINGDON CODE § 66-80.3
66:20
(2) If demolition or rehabilitation has commenced no more than six months prior
to filing an application and the owner provides to the commissioner
documentary evidence to prove eligibility as set forth in this subdivision, then
that property shall remain eligible for consideration for qualification.
Documentary evidence may include, without limitation, photographs,
historical records, or other documentary proof of location, age, and prior use
of structure.
(c) Determination of percentage eligibility. If a structure qualifies for partial tax
exemption pursuant to this subdivision in accordance with the geographic
boundaries and substantial rehabilitation criteria, but in terms of age qualification
has some portion that qualifies and some portion that does not qualify, then the age
of the structure and the amount of partial property tax exemption credit shall be
determined by the respective square footage of those portions of the substructure of
the structure being improved that age-qualify in proportion to that the portion that
does not age- qualify. In such cases, the commissioner shall determine the
percentage of such structure, based on square footage, that meets the age
qualification and include a statement of such percentage determination on the
commissioner's determination of eligibility, and the commissioner shall apply such
percentage calculation to the partial exemption credit to determine the proportionate
amount of credit that will be allowed based on the percentage of age-qualifying
portion of the structure. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the commissioner may
make a deminimus determination that the percentage of structure that does not
qualify under the age requirement is such that the deduction from the partial
exemption credit as a result of such non-qualification shall be waived. This
deminimus determination may be made if the percentage of non-qualification is
equal or less than 10% of the total square footage of such structure.
(d) Expiration of eligibility determination. The commissioner's determination of
eligibility shall be effective for three years from the date on which it is issued. In
other words, once the commissioner has determined that an application describes
an eligible project, the applicant has three years from the date of the commissioner's
determination of eligibility to complete the substantial rehabilitation project and to
submit to the commissioner a copy of a certificate of occupancy for the
substantially rehabilitated structure and an application to determine the amount of
the exemption, as described in this subdivision. If, within this three-year period,
substantial rehabilitation has not been completed and the aforementioned
documentation submitted to the commissioner, then to retain such eligibility an
application to renew the determination must be filed with the commissioner prior to
the three year eligibility period expiration date. In no event, however, shall there be
more than two renewals of eligibility following the initial application on any
structure.
(e) Initial application. The initial application to qualify for the rehabilitated structure
tax exemption and any subsequent renewal application must be accompanied by
payment of a fee of $50 to be paid into the general fund of the county, which fee
shall be applied to offset the cost of processing such application, making the
required assessments, and making an annual inspection to determine the progress
of the work.
§ 66-80.3 TAXATION § 66-80.4
66:21
§ 66-80.4. Effective date of exemption. [Ord. of 4-2-2012]
§ 66-80.5. Commissioner determination of amount of exemption after completion
of substantial rehabilitation. [Ord. of 4-2-2012]
§ 66-80.6. Fluctuations in market value. [Ord. of 4-2-2012]
(a) Prior to the effective date defined in this section, the owner of the property shall be
subject to taxation upon the fair market value of the property as determined by the
general reassessment prior to commencement of rehabilitation.
(b) Upon the commissioner's determination of amount of exemption no later than
December 31st of any calendar year, the partial tax exemption shall become
effective beginning on January 1st of the next calendar year, which date shall be the
effective date of exemption.
(a) The owner of real property qualifying for partial exemption of real property taxes
because of substantial rehabilitation of a structure shall submit to the commissioner
upon completion of the substantial rehabilitation an application to determine
amount of exemption credit, and such application shall include the following:
(1) Copy of the certificate of occupancy issued by the county;
(2) Owner affidavit of qualifying costs on a form to be provided by the
commissioner; and
(3) Affidavit of general contractor or project architect of qualifying costs on a
form to be provided by the commissioner.
(b) Receipt of application. After receipt of the application to determine the amount of
exemption credit, the commissioner shall issue to the owner a credit memorandum
that states the qualifying costs, as certified by the owner, and the amount of partial
tax exemption credit pursuant to this subdivision.
(c) Real property tax fluctuations. The partial tax exemption credit to be applied
annually for the term of the exemption shall be determined based on the real
property tax rate on the effective date of the exemption, and this credit shall not be
amended when the real property tax rate is adjusted from time to time.
(a) Subsequent fair market value increase. In the event that the fair market value of a
qualifying property increases after the first year of such substantial rehabilitation,
renovation or replacement, the credit specified by this subdivision shall not be
increased.
(b) Subsequent fair market value decrease. In the event that the assessed value of a
qualifying property decreases after the first year of substantial rehabilitation,
renovation or replacement, the credit specified in this subdivision shall not be
adjusted, with the following exception. It shall be capped, for each year of such
reduced assessed value, such that the credit shall not reduce the real property tax
levy on a qualifying structure below $0. If no tax credit or only a reduced tax credit
can be applied to the qualifying property due to such market value decrease, the
unused credit shall not be applied to any other property or to real property taxes
§ 66-80.4 ABINGDON CODE § 66-80.6
66:22
§ 66-80.7. Miscellaneous. [Ord. of 4-2-2012]
§ 66-80.8. Limitations on amount and eligibility for partial tax exemption and tax
credit. [Ord. of 4-2-2012]
§ 66-80.9. Failure to pay real property taxes in a timely manner; forfeiture of
assessed in any other calendar year, and the property's eligibility for the tax
exemption shall expire at the end of the fifteen-year term or such shorter term as
provided in this subdivision.
(a) The credits against the real property tax enabled by this subdivision shall not affect
any special district taxes or levies within the county. All ad valorem special district
taxes or levies shall be computed on the full fair market value of all qualifying
property.
(b) Methods of evaluation. In determining the fair market value of a structure for
purposes of assessment of taxes, the commissioner shall employ usual and
customary methods of assessing real property.
(c) Exemption not applicable to demolition of historic structures. Where substantial
rehabilitation is achieved through demolition and replacement of an existing
structure, the exemption provided in this subdivision shall not apply when any
structure demolished is a registered state landmark or is determined by the state's
department of historic resources to contribute to the significance of a registered
historic landmark.
(d) Condition of the property. Upon application to qualify for partial tax exemption
pursuant to this subdivision, an applicant shall certify that the property that is the
subject of the application, including the real property upon which the structure is
located, shall be maintained in compliance with all Code requirements. Failure to
properly maintain the property in compliance with all Code provisions shall be
grounds for denial of the requested partial tax exemption.
(e) This subdivision shall be applicable to assessments of qualifying commercial or
industrial structures made on and after January 1, 2012.
(a) Tax delinquency at time of application for qualification. No property owner shall
be eligible to apply for qualification for the partial tax exemption credit provided
by this subdivision if the property owner or any of its related corporate entities has
delinquent taxes, penalties, or interest due the county on any of its tax accounts;
however, the commissioner of revenue may restore eligibility upon payment in full
of all such delinquent accounts.
(b) Tax delinquency at time of application for determination of partial tax exemption
credit. No property owner shall be eligible for the commissioner to make a
determination of partial tax exemption credit upon completion of substantial
rehabilitation of a qualifying real property if such property owner or any of its
related corporate entities has delinquent taxes, penalties, or interest due the county
on any of its tax accounts; however, the commissioner of revenue may restore
eligibility upon payment in full of all such delinquent accounts.
§ 66-80.6 TAXATION § 66-80.9
66:23
partial exemptions and tax credits, and further qualification limitations. [Ord. of
4-2-2012]
(a) No tax credit described in this subdivision shall be issued to the owner of any
substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced structure if the real property tax
on that property has not been timely paid on or before the tax due date of any year
as required by county ordinance. Failure to pay the real property tax on improved
real property in any year on, or before, the date on which the real property tax is
due shall result in the forfeiture of any partial tax exemption credit that otherwise
would have been applied to the real property tax due in that year and in any future
year. In such cases, the property shall be removed from the partial tax exemption
program and the annual real property tax shall be assessed on the full fair market
value of the improved real property. Late payment of the real property tax on real
property and any substantially rehabilitated, renovated or replaced structure thereon
shall be subject to late payment penalties and interest in accordance with county
ordinance. However, the treasurer has statutory discretion to waive penalty and
interest and is enabled by this ordinance to reinstate the tax exemption credit if the
failure to pay the real property tax was not in any way the fault of the taxpayer.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no improved property that has
qualified for a tax credit in accordance with this article by means of substantial
rehabilitation shall be eligible to submit any application for further tax credits based
on subsequent improvements during the pendency of the initial tax credit period.
§ 66-80.9 ABINGDON CODE § 66-80.9
66:24
ARTICLE III
Consumer Utility Taxes
DIVISION 1
Electric and Natural Gas Consumers Tax
§ 66-81. Definitions. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
CCF — The volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of 100 cubic
feet.
COMMERCIAL CONSUMER — The owner or tenant of property used primarily for
commercial purposes.
CONSUMER — Every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers,
representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity or natural gas
services in this jurisdiction.
GAS UTILITY — A public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in Virginia.
INDUSTRIAL CONSUMER — The owner or tenant of property used primarily for
industrial purposes.
KILOWATT HOURS (KWh) DELIVERED — 1,000 watts of electricity delivered in
a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the
case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Code
of Virginia § 56-594, it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customergenerators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customergenerators.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company or other entity.
PIPELINE DISTRIBUTION COMPANY — A person, other than a pipeline
transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas,
manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or by-products thereof to a
purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light.
RESIDENTIAL CONSUMER — The owner or tenant of property used primarily for
residential purposes, including but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiplefamily dwellings.
SERVICE PROVIDER — A person who delivers electricity to a consumer or a gas
utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas to a consumer.
USED PRIMARILY — Relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or
natural gas utility service is furnished.
§ 66-82. Electric utility consumer tax. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
(a) In accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814, effective January 1, 2001, there
is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity
§ 66-81 TAXATION § 66-82
66:25
delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such
provider, as follows:
(1) Residential consumers. Such tax shall be the greater of (a) the rate of $0.00750
on each kWh or fraction thereof delivered monthly to such consumer by a
service provider, or (b) 10% times the minimum monthly charge imposed by
the service provider, but in either case not to exceed $1 monthly.
(2) Non-residential consumers: such tax on non-residential consumers shall be at
the rates per month for the classes of non-residential consumers as set forth
below:
a. Commercial consumers such tax shall be the greater of (i) the rate of
$0.00750 on each kWh or fraction thereof delivered monthly to such
consumer by a service provider or (ii) 10% times the minimum monthly
charge imposed by the service provider, but in either case not to exceed
$2.50 monthly.
b. Industrial consumers such tax shall be the greater of (i) the rate of
$0.00550 on each kWh or fraction thereof delivered monthly to such
consumer by a service provider or (ii) 10% times the minimum monthly
charge imposed by the service provider, but in either case not to exceed
$10.
(3) Where one single commercial or industrial user is serviced at more than one
location, the maximum amount of charge subject to such tax shall be computed
as to each location, and each such location shall be classified as an industrial
or commercial user for the purpose of determining the maximum amount of
charge subject to tax as to each location.
(4) The conversion of tax pursuant to this ordinance to monthly kWh delivered
shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000,
prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in
effect.
(b) Exemptions. The United States of America, the Commonwealth and the political
subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof, including this
jurisdiction, are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by
this section.
(c) Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the
electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it
delivers electricity and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis.
Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance
with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814, Paragraphs F, G, and Code of Virginia
§ 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the
tax imposed by this Section the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the
name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a
service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider
must follow its normal collection procedure and upon collection of the bill or any
part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric
service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction.
§ 66-82 ABINGDON CODE § 66-82
66:26
§ 66-83. Local natural gas utility consumer tax. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in
trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction.
The taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each service
provider to the Town Treasurer. Each service provider shall remit the amount of
tax shown by the report to have been collected to the Town Treasurer on or before
the last day of the second calendar month thereafter, together with the name and
address of any purchaser who has refused to pay his tax. The required reports shall
be in the form prescribed by the Town Treasurer.
(d) Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly
bills for the purposes of this ordinance if submitted 12 times per year of
approximately one month each. In the case of bills not on a monthly basis, the tax
should be calculated based upon the aggregate. For example, the tax for a bimonthly
bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the kWh will be
divided by 2; (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above;
(iii) the tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by 2; (iv) the tax in (iii) may not
exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax."
(a) In accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and
levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by
pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities classified by "class of consumers"
as such term is defined in Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814 J., as follows:
(1) Residential consumers. Such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall
be the greater of (a) the rate of $0.0212 on CCF delivered monthly to
residential consumers, or (b) 10% times the minimum monthly charge
imposed by the service provider, but in either case not to exceed $0.70
monthly.
(2) Non-residential consumers. Such tax on non-residential consumers shall be at
the rates per moth shown for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution
company or a gas utility for the classes as set forth below:
a. Commercial consumers such tax shall be the greater of (i) the rate of
$0.0104 on each CCF delivered monthly to commercial consumers or (ii)
10% times the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service
provider, but in either case not to exceed $2.50 monthly.
b. Industrial consumers such tax shall be the greater of (i) the rate of
$0.0104 on each CCF delivered monthly to industrial consumers or (ii)
10 times the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider,
but in either case not to exceed $10 monthly.
(3) Where one single commercial or industrial user is serviced at more than one
location, the maximum amount of charge subject to such tax shall be computed
as to each location, and each such location shall be classified as an industrial
or commercial user for the purpose of determining the maximum amount of
charge subject to tax as to each location.
§ 66-82 TAXATION § 66-83
66:27
§ 66-84. Treasurer to collect and pay into general treasury. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
The Town Treasurer shall be charged with the power and duty of collecting the taxes
levied and imposed under this article and shall cause the same to be paid into the general
treasury of the Town.
§ 66-85. Disposition of revenue. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
All monies collected from the utility taxes imposed by this article shall be deposited in
the general fund of the Town and used for general governmental purposes.
(4) The conversion of tax pursuant to this section to monthly CCF delivered shall
not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior
to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect.
(b) Exemptions. The United States of America, the Commonwealth and the political
subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof, including this
jurisdiction, are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by
this section.
(c) Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the natural
gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers
natural gas and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such
taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with
Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814, Paragraphs H and I, and Code of Virginia
§ 58.1-3901. If any consumer receives and pays for natural gas billed but refuses to
pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction
of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued
by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider
must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any
part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric
service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction.
Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in
trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction.
The taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each service
provider to the Town Treasurer. Each service provider shall remit the amount of
tax shown by the report to have been collected to the Town Treasurer on or before
the last day of the second calendar month thereafter, together with the name and
address of any purchaser who has refused to pay his tax. The required reports shall
be in the form prescribed by the Town Treasurer.
(d) Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly
bills for the purposes of this section if submitted 12 times per year of approximately
one month each. In the case of bills not on a monthly basis, the tax should be
calculated based upon the aggregate. For example, the tax for a bimonthly bill
(approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the CCF will be divided
by 2; (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; (iii) the
tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by 2; (iv) the tax in (iii) may not exceed
twice the monthly "maximum tax."
§ 66-83 ABINGDON CODE § 66-86
66:28
§ 66-86. Records of purchases and consumption. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
Each seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases and consumption in the
Town. Such records shall show the price charged against each purchase, the date thereof,
the date of payment thereof, the amount of consumption in kWh or CCF, and the amount
of tax imposed hereunder. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly
authorized agents of the Town at reasonable times. The duly authorized agents of the
Town shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during
regular business hours as they may desire.
§ 66-87. Failure to pay tax; violations of chapter. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
Any consumer failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax hereby imposed or levied,
any service provider violating the provisions hereof and any officer, agent or employee
of any service provider violating the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided in Section 1-6. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each
day's continuance thereof, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 66-86 TAXATION § 66-87
66:29

DIVISION 2
Telephone Consumer Utility Taxes
§ 66-88. Definitions. [Ord. of 10-2-2000; Ord. of 10-12-2004]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
COMMERCIAL USER — The owner or tenant of property who uses the utility service
for commercial purposes. As to local exchange telephone service, the term shall mean
any subscriber to business service as defined by the general exchange tariff of the
telephone franchisee, except users identified as industrial users by this article.
CONSUMER, GROSS CHARGE, MOBILE SERVICE CONSUMER, MOBILES
SERVICE PROVIDER, SERVICE ADDRESS, AND TAXABLE PURCHASE — Shall
have the meanings as provided in Code of Virginia § 58.1-3821, as amended, and such
definitions are incorporated herein by reference.
INDUSTRIAL USER — The owner or tenant of property who uses the utility service
for industrial purposes. As to local telephone service, the term shall mean any subscriber
to business service, as defined by the general exchange tariff of the telephone franchisee,
whose bill exceeds $450 per month.
MOBILE LOCAL TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE — Any two-way mobile or
portable local telecommunications service, cellular mobile radio telecommunication
service and specialized mobile radio.
PURCHASER — Every person who purchases a utility service.
RESIDENTIAL USER; RESIDENTIAL SERVICE — The owner or tenant of private
residential property or tenant of private residential property or tenant of an apartment
who pays for utility service in or for such property; "residential service" shall mean
utility service to purchaser. As to local exchange telephone services, the terms shall
mean any subscriber to residence service as defined by the general exchange tariff of the
telephone franchisee.
SELLER — Every person, whether a public service corporation of the Town or not, who
sells or furnishes a utility service.
UTILITY SERVICE — Local telephone exchange service furnished within the
corporate limits of the Town.
§ 66-89. Amount; maximum limits. [Ord. of 10-2-2000; Ord. of 10-12-2004]
(a) There is hereby imposed and levied by the Town upon each and every purchaser of
a utility service a tax in the amount of 10% of the charge, exclusive of any federal
tax thereon, made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to each utility
service. Such tax shall, in every case, be collected by the seller from the purchaser
and shall be paid by the purchaser unto the seller for the use of the Town at the time
the purchase price or such charge shall become due and payable under the
agreement between the purchaser and the seller: provided, that in case any monthly
bill submitted by any seller for residential telephone service shall exceed $10, there
shall be no tax computed on so much of the bill as shall exceed $10. In case any
§ 66-88 TAXATION § 66-89
66:31
§ 66-90. Collection and remittance; required reports. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
It shall be the duty of every seller, in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency
for the Town, to collect from the purchaser for the user of the Town the tax hereby
imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price charged therefore; and the
taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported by each seller to the Town
Treasurer. Each seller shall remit the amount of tax shown by the report to have been
collected to the Town Treasurer on or before the last day of the second calendar month
thereafter, together with the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay
his tax. The required reports shall be in the form prescribed by the Town Treasurer.
§ 66-91. Records of purchases. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
Each seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the Town. Such records
shall show the price charged against each purchase, the date thereof, the date of payment
thereof and the amount of tax imposed hereunder. Such records shall be kept open for
inspection by the duly authorized agents of the Town at reasonable times. The duly
authorized agents of the Town shall have the right, power and authority to make such
transcripts thereof during regular business hours as they may desire.
monthly bill submitted by any seller for commercial service shall exceed $25, there
shall be no tax computed on so much of the bill as shall exceed $25. In case
any monthly bill submitted by any seller for industrial service shall exceed $100,
there shall be no tax computed on so much of the bill as shall exceed $100. Bills
shall be considered monthly bills if submitted 12 times annually for a period of
approximately one month.
(b) Where on single commercial or industrial user is serviced at more than one location,
the maximum amount of charge subject to such tax shall be computed as to each
location and each such location shall be classified as an industrial or commercial
user for the purpose of determining the maximum amount of charge subject to tax
as to each location.
(c) This section shall further apply to mobile local telecommunication service. In
particular, there shall be imposed and levied by the Town upon every consumer of
mobile local telecommunications service provided by a mobile service provider or
by retailers of cellular telephone service a tax in the amount of 10% of the monthly
gross charge made by the seller against the consumer with respect to each mobile
local telecommunication service, which said tax, in every case, shall be collected
by the seller from the consumer and shall be paid by the consumer to the seller for
the use of the Town at the time that the purchase price or such charges shall become
due and payable under the agreement between the consumer and the seller;
provided, however, that the tax herein imposed shall not be deemed to apply to that
part of the charge in excess of $30 per month made by any seller of said mobile
local telecommunication service to any mobile service consumer thereon. This tax
is imposed or levied on a taxable purchase by a consumer of such service, if the
consumer's service is located in the Town. The tax on such mobile local
telecommunication service shall be administered pursuant to this article, including
definitions, duties, procedures and penalties to the extent not inconsistent with this
section.
§ 66-89 ABINGDON CODE § 66-92
66:32
§ 66-92. Exemptions. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
The United States of America, the state and the political subdivisions, boards,
commissions and authorities thereof are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax
imposed and levied by this article with respect to the purchase of utility services used by
such governmental agencies.
§ 66-93. Applicability of tax on local exchange telephone service. [Ord. of
10-2-2000]
The tax imposed and levied by this article on purchasers with respect to local exchange
telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local exchange telephone service
only, except local messages which are paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated
telephones.
§ 66-94. Tax on service for periods other than one month. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
In all case where the seller collects the price of submits bills or utility services of periods
of time other than monthly, the tax hereby imposed and levied may be computed on the
aggregate amount of purchases during such period; provided, that the amount of tax to
be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed, and such tax shall
not exceed the sum of $1 for each user of telephone service to residential users, $2.50 for
each of such utility service to commercial users or $10 for each of such utility service to
industrial users, multiplied by the number of months or portions thereof covered by the
bill.
§ 66-95. Treasurer to collect and pay into general treasury. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
The Town Treasurer shall be charged with the power and duty of collecting the taxes
levied and imposed under this article and shall cause the same to be paid into the general
treasury of the Town.
§ 66-96. Disposition of revenue. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
All monies collected from the utility taxes imposed by this article shall be deposited in
the general fund of the Town and used for general governmental purposes.
§ 66-97. Failure to pay taxes; violations of chapter. [Ord. of 10-2-2000]
Any purchaser failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax hereby imposed or levied,
any seller violating the provisions hereof and any officer, agent or employee of any
seller violating the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided
in Section 1-6. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance
thereof, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 66-98. through § 66-110. (Reserved)
§ 66-92 TAXATION § 66-98
66:33

ARTICLE IV
Meals Tax
§ 66-111. Definitions. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have, for the purposes
of this article, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
CATER — The furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for
compensation.
COLLECTOR — The treasurer or designee; the treasurer and any duly designated
deputies, assistants, inspector or other employees.
FOOD — All food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or
from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and
whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or
place of service.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any place in or from which food or food products are
prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the Town, including but not limited to, any
restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter,
convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house,
eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other
mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or
other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside
of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which
food or food products are sold for immediate consumption.
MEAL — Any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food
establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite
and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise
specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be
consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch,
snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or
place of service.
§ 66-112. Levy. [Ord. of 7-3-2000; Ord. of 7-1-2008]
There is hereby imposed and levied by the Town on each person a tax at the rate of 7%
on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared
in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not.
§ 66-113. Collection of tax by seller. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied
hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this ordinance from
the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the
time payment for such food is made, provided, however, no blind person operating a
vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the department for
the visually handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States
§ 66-111 TAXATION § 66-113
66:35
for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes.
All tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust for the Town.
§ 66-114. Exemptions; limits on application. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
(a) The tax imposed under this ordinance shall not be levied on factory-prepackaged
candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature served for on or
off-premises consumption.
(b) The tax imposed under this ordinance shall not be levied on the following items
when served exclusively for off-premises consumption:
(1) Donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and factory-prepackaged
items of essentially the same nature;
(2) Food sold in bulk. Four the purposes of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean
the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion
sold for on premises consumption (e.g. a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream); a
bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by
a food establishment for off-premises consumption.
(3) Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers.
(4) Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United
States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts
issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women,
Infants, and Children.
(5) Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the
Federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. § 2012, as amended except hot food
or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of
administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not
purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of
food in the federal Food Stamp Act; sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a
salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an
assortment of vegetables, and nonfactory sealed beverages. This subsection
shall not affect provisions set forth in subparagraphs (d)(3), (4) and (5)
hereinbelow.
(c) A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax
except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated
for the sale of prepared food and beverages.
(d) The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food
and beverages:
(1) Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of
their compensation when no charge is made to the employee.
(2) Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or
secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or
employees.
§ 66-113 ABINGDON CODE § 66-114
66:36
§ 66-115. Gratuities and service charges. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
When a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the
gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax
imposed by this ordinance, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill
and charged to the purchaser's account, provided in the latter case, the full amount of the
gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller.
An amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, that is
added to the price of the food and beverage by the seller, and required to be paid by the
purchaser, as a part of the selling price of the food and beverages and is not subject to
the tax imposed by this ordinance.
§ 66-116. Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. [Ord. of
7-3-2000]
It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the Town the taxes
imposed by this article to make a report thereof setting forth such information as the
treasurer may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this ordinance,
the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes
collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this ordinance. Such
records shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years. The treasurer or his duly
authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and
without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of
administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all
or any parts thereof.
§ 66-117. Penalty for violation of ordinance. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
(3) Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by
the Commonwealth, any political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the
United States.
(4) Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent
home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women,
narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or
residents thereof and the spouses and children of such persons.
(5) Food and beverages furnished by a public or private non-profit charitable
organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the
appropriate agency of the Commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices
to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at
central locations.
(6) Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis, not exceeding two times per
calendar year, by a non-profit educational, charitable or benevolent
organization, church, or religious body as a fund-raising activity, the gross
proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for nonprofit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes.
(7) Food and beverages sold through vending machines.
§ 66-114 TAXATION § 66-117
66:37
§ 66-118. Reports and remittance. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
The treasurer may require all prospective sellers of meals licensed to do business in the
Town to register for collection of the tax imposed by this article. Every seller shall make
a report to the Town for each calendar month, showing the amount of charges collected
for meals and the amount of tax required to be collected. The monthly reports shall be
made on forms prescribed by the treasurer and shall be signed by the seller. They shall be
delivered to the treasurer on or before the 20th day of the calendar month following the
month being reported. Each report shall be accompanied by a remittance of the amount
of tax due, made payable to the Town.
§ 66-119. Discount. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
For the purpose of compensating sellers for the collection of the tax imposed by this
article, every seller shall be allowed 5% of the amount of the tax due and accounted for
in the form of a deduction on his or her monthly return; provided, the amount due is not
delinquent at the time of payment.
§ 66-120. Penalty and interest. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to make the report or remit
the tax required by this article within the time and in the amount required, there shall be
added to the tax by the treasurer a penalty in the amount of 10% of the tax, and interest
thereon at the rate of 10% per annum, which shall be computed upon the tax and penalty
from the date such were due and payable.
§ 66-121. Procedure when tax not reported or collected. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed
under this article and make timely report and remittance thereof, the treasurer shall
proceed in such manner as is practicable to obtain facts and information on which to
base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the treasurer has procured whatever facts and
information may be obtainable, upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by
(a) Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor except that any
person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor if the
amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000 or less. Any
person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this ordinance
shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
(b) Except as provided in Subsection (a) above, any corporate or partnership officer, as
defined in Code of Virginia § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect,
account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this ordinance, who willfully
fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully
evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any
other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
(c) Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate
offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the
payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article.
§ 66-117 ABINGDON CODE § 66-121
66:38
any person who has failed to collect, report or remit such tax, the treasurer shall proceed
to determine and assess against such person the tax, penalty and interest provided in
this article, and shall notify the person by registered mail sent to his or her last known
address, of the amount of such tax, penalty and interest. The total amount thereof shall
be payable 10 days after the date such notice is sent.
§ 66-122. Duty of person going out of business. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
Whenever any person required to collect and remit to the Town any tax imposed by
this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, the tax shall
immediately become due and payable, and the person shall immediately make to the
treasurer a report and remittance thereof.
§ 66-123. Advertising payment or absorption of tax prohibited. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
No seller shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly,
that all or any part of a tax imposed under this article will be paid or absorbed by the
seller or by anyone else, or that the seller or anyone else will relieve any purchaser of the
payment of all or any part of the tax.
§ 66-124. Enforcement. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
§ 66-125. Regulations. [Ord. of 7-3-2000]
The treasurer may issue regulations for the administration and enforcement of this
article.
§ 66-126. through § 66-145. (Reserved)
(a) It shall be the duty of the treasurer to ascertain the name of every seller in the Town,
liable for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, who fails, refuses or
neglects to collect such tax or to make the reports and remittances required by this
article. The treasurer may have issued a summons for such person, and the
summons may be served upon such person by any Town police officer in the
manner provided by law and the treasurer may seek a conviction or other civil
remedy including injunction, against such person.
(b) If the purchaser of any meals refuses to pay the tax imposed by this article, the seller
may call upon the police department for assistance; and the investigation officer
may, when probable cause exists, issue the purchaser a summons returnable to the
general district court as provided by law.
§ 66-121 TAXATION § 66-126
66:39

ARTICLE V
Lodging Tax
§ 66-146. Definitions. [Ord. of 3-30-1987]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
TRANSIENT PERSON — One who for a period of not more than 90 consecutive days,
either at his own expense, or at the expense of another, lodges or obtains lodging at
any hotel, motel or tourist home or similar with exception that a person enrolled in and
attending full time a school or college within the corporate limits of the Town shall not
be classed as a transient.
§ 66-147. Amount of levy. [Ord. of 3-30-1987; Ord. of 7-1-2008]
There is hereby imposed and levied by the Town on each transient a lodging tax in the
amount of 7% of the charge made for each room rented to such transient. Such tax shall
be collected from such transient at the time provided in, and in accordance with, this
article.
§ 66-148. Collection. [Ord. of 3-30-1987]
Every person receiving any payment for lodging with respect to which a tax is levied
under this article shall collect the amount of such tax so imposed from the transient on
whom such tax is levied or from the person paying for such lodging at the time payment
for such lodging is made. The tax required to be collected under this section shall be
deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect such taxes as provided in this
article.
§ 66-149. Reports required. [Ord. of 3-30-1987]
The person collecting any tax as provided in this article shall make out a report thereof
upon such forms and setting forth such information as the Town Treasurer may prescribe
and require, showing the amount of lodging charge collected, and the tax required to
be collected, and shall sign and deliver such report to the Town Treasurer's office with
remittance of such tax. Such report and remittance as required by the Town Treasurer
shall be made at least once monthly and not later than the 20th day of the month next
following in which such tax was collected.
§ 66-150. Discount. [Ord. of 3-30-1987]
For the purpose of compensating providers for the collection of the tax imposed by this
article, every provider shall be allowed 5% of the amount of the tax due and accounted
for in the form of a deduction on his monthly return; provided, the amount due is not
delinquent at the time of payment.
§ 66-151. Penalties for late payment. [Ord. of 3-30-1987]
If a person shall fail or refuse to remit to the Town Treasurer the tax required to be
§ 66-146 TAXATION § 66-151
66:41
collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount specified there
shall be added to such tax by the Town Treasurer a penalty in the amount of 10% thereof
and interest thereon at the rate of 10% per annum which shall be computed upon the
taxes and penalty from the first day of the month next following the month in which such
taxes are due and payable.
§ 66-152. Failure to collect taxes or make reports. [Ord. of 3-30-1987]
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, or refuse, to collect the taxes imposed under
this article and to make reports and remittances as required. The Town Treasurer or
a designated representative shall have the power to examine pertinent records at all
reasonable times for the purpose of administering or enforcing the provisions of this
article.
§ 66-153. Records required. [Ord. of 3-30-1987]
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the Town
of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve for a period of four years such
suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due to have been
collected and paid to the Town. The Town Treasurer or a designated representative may
inspect such records at all reasonable times.
§ 66-154. Violations and penalties. [Ord. of 3-30-1987]
Every person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class
4 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal, neglect, or violation and each day's continuance
thereof, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 66-151 ABINGDON CODE § 66-154
66:42
ARTICLE VI
Cigarette Tax
§ 66-155. Cigarette tax imposed. [Ord. of 8-1-2007]
Pursuant to the authority set forth in the Charter for the Town of Abingdon and
§§ 58.1-3830 and 58.1-3840 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, there is hereby
imposed a tax on the sale and use of cigarettes within the corporate limits of the Town to
provide to the general fund of the Town as set hereafter in this article.
§ 66-156. Definitions. [Ord. of 8-1-2007]
The following terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
AGENT — Every local dealer and other person who shall be authorized by the Town
Treasurer to purchase and affix stamps to packages of cigarettes under the provisions of
this article.
DEALER — Every manufacturer, jobber, wholesale dealer or other person who supplies
a seller with cigarettes.
PACKAGE — Every package, box, can or other container of any cigarettes to which
the internal revenue stamp of the United States Government is required to be affixed by
and under federal statutes and regulations and in which retail sales of such cigarettes are
normally made or intended to be made.
SALE — Every act or transaction, irrespective of the method or means employed,
including the use of vending machines and other mechanical devices, whereby title to
any cigarettes shall be transferred from the seller, as herein defined, to any other person
within the Town.
SELLER — Every person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes that transfers title
or in whose place of business title to any such cigarettes is transferred within the Town
for any purpose other than resale.
STAMP — The small gummed piece of paper or decalcomania to be sold by the Town
Treasurer and to affixed by the agent to every package of cigarettes; it shall also denote
any insignia or symbol printed by a meter machine upon any such package under
authorization of the Town Treasurer.
TREASURER — The treasurer of the Town and every person duly authorized by him to
serve as his representative.
§ 66-157. Levied; amount. [Ord. of 8-1-2007]
There is hereby levied and imposed by the Town, in addition to any other taxes which
may be or have been imposed, a tax to be paid and collected as hereinafter provided on
each and every sale of cigarettes made in the Town. The tax is to be paid by the seller,
local dealer or other agent by affixing a stamp or causing a stamp to be affixed to every
package of cigarettes, in the kind and manner herein required and at the applicable rates
as follows:
§ 66-155 TAXATION § 66-157
66:43
The rate or amount of tax levied or imposed on cigarettes shall be at the rate of $0.10 on
each package containing 25 or fewer cigarettes.
§ 66-158. Preparation, sale, etc., of stamps; duties of the treasurer generally.
[Ord. of 8-1-2007]
§ 66-159. Seizure and disposition of untaxed cigarettes, etc. [Ord. of 8-1-2007]
(a) The treasurer of the Town shall acquire, keep and sell necessary stamps to local
dealers and other agents, the stamps to be such denominations and quantities as may
be necessary for the payment of the tax herein imposed.
(b) In the sale of such stamps to a local dealer or other agent, the treasurer shall allow
a discount of 3% of the denominational or face value of the stamps to cover the
costs incurred in affixing the stamps to packages of cigarettes.
(c) The Town Treasurer may, from time to time, and as often as he deems advisable,
provide for the issuance and exclusive use of stamps of a new design and forbid the
use of stamps of any other design. The treasurer is empowered to make and carry
into effect such reasonable rules and regulations relating to the preparation,
furnishing, sale and redemption of stamps as he may deem necessary. In redeeming
stamps or making refunds for destroyed stamps, he shall not in any case refund
more than 90% of the face value of such redeemed or destroyed stamps. He is
further authorized and empowered to prescribe the method to be employed, the
condition to be observed, and any other necessary requirements not contrary to this
article in the use of meter machines for printing upon packages of cigarettes an
insignia to represent the payment of the tax and in lieu of stamps.
(d) In addition to powers hereinabove granted, the Town Treasurer is further authorized
and empowered to:
(1) Prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the
method and means to be used in the cancellation of stamps;
(2) Delegate his powers to agents or others, including the police officers of the
Town;
(3) To act in any other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of the provisions of this article.
(a) If the Town Treasurer or his agent discovers any cigarettes subject to the tax
imposed under this article, but upon which such tax has not been paid and upon
which stamps have not been affixed or evidence of payment is not shown thereon
by printed markings of a meter machine in compliance with the provisions of this
article, then the treasurer or duly authorized agents or officers, any of them, may
seize and take possession forthwith of such cigarettes, which shall thereupon be
deemed to be forfeited to the Town. Such cigarettes may, within a reasonable time
thereafter, and after written notice is posted at the front door or the municipal
building at least five days before the date given therein for sale, shall sell such
cigarettes in the place designated in such notice.
(b) Any property, other than motor vehicles, used in the furtherance of any illegal
§ 66-157 ABINGDON CODE § 66-159
66:44
§ 66-160. Obligation of dealers, agents regarding stamps. [Ord. of 8-1-2007]
§ 66-161. Presumptions — quantity. [Ord. of 8-1-2007]
Cigarettes found in quantities of more than six cartons within the Town shall be
conclusively presumed for sale therein and may be seized and confiscated if:
evasion of the tax may be seized, confiscated and disposed of as provided in
Subsection (a). No credit from any sale or other disposition shall be allowed toward
any tax or penalties owed.
(c) The seizure and sale of any property shall not be deemed to relieve any of the
persons of any other penalties provided in this article.
(a) Every local dealer in cigarettes and every agent appointed under this section shall
purchase necessary stamps from the treasurer of the Town to pay the tax imposed
under this article and shall affix or cause to be affixed a stamp of the monetary value
provided by this article to each package of cigarettes prior to delivering or
furnishing such cigarettes to any seller who is not also an agent.
(b) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to preclude any dealer from
authorizing and employing any agent to purchase and affix such stamps in his
behalf or to have a stamp meter machine used in lieu of stamps to effectuate the
provisions of this article.
(c) Stamps or printed markings of a meter machine shall be placed upon each package
of cigarettes in such a manner as to be readily visible to the purchaser.
(d) It shall be the responsibility of every seller to determine that each package of
cigarettes offered for sale shall have a proper stamp affixed thereto in compliance
with the provisions of this article.
(e) If inspection by the agents of the Town discloses unstamped or improperly stamped
packages of cigarettes, the seller, when such cigarettes were obtained from a local
dealer, shall immediately notify such dealer and upon such notification such dealer
shall forthwith affix to the unstamped or improperly stamped package, container or
item with others to which stamps have been properly affixed. If a seller, who is not
also an agent, acquires or has in his possession unstamped or improperly stamped
cigarettes, the seller shall forthwith notify the treasurer of such fact. The treasurer
shall thereupon affix or cause to be affixed the proper stamps to such cigarettes.
The cost of such stamps at face value shall be advanced by such seller. The treasurer
or his agent shall thereupon affix the appropriate stamp at such agent's place of
business.
(f) The treasurer, by proper rules and regulations, may require every local dealer, agent
or seller to cancel stamps upon all packages of cigarettes in his possession.
(g) Every local dealer and seller shall maintain and keep for a period of at least two
years such records of cigarettes received and sold by him as may be required by the
treasurer; such records shall be made available for examination in the Town by the
treasurer upon demand, and the means, facilities and opportunities for making any
such examination shall be made available at all reasonable times.
§ 66-159 TAXATION § 66-161
66:45
§ 66-162. Disposition of revenue. [Ord. of 8-1-2007]
Revenue derived from the tax imposed in this article shall be deposited by the Town
Treasurer to the credit of the general fund of the Town for utilization for such legal
purposes as the Council of the Town may from time to time determine.
§ 66-163. Violations of article prohibited; acts enumerated. [Ord. of 8-1-2007]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person:
(a) They are in transit, and are not accompanied by a bill of lading or other document
indicating the true name and address of the consignor or seller and of the consignee
or purchaser, and the brands and quantity of cigarettes so transported, or they are in
transit and accompanied by a bill of lading or other document which is false or
fraudulent, in whole or in part; or
(b) They are in transit and are accompanied by a bill of lading or other document
indicating:
(1) A consignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who is
not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or possess such
cigarettes on which the taxes imposed by such other jurisdiction have not been
paid, unless the tax of the state or district of destination has been paid and the
products bear the tax stamps of that state or district; or
(2) A consignee or purchaser in the commonwealth but outside the Town who
does not possess a state sales and use tax certificate a state retail cigarette
license and, where applicable, both a business license and retail cigarette
license issued by the local jurisdiction of destination; or
(c) They are not in transit and tax has not been paid, nor have approved arrangements
for payment been made, provided that this subparagraph shall not apply to
cigarettes in the possession of distributors or public warehouses which have filed
notice and appropriate proof with the Town that those cigarettes are temporarily
within the Town and will be sent to consignees or purchasers outside the
jurisdiction in the normal course of business.
(a) To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the
payment of any tax imposed by this article or of any part thereof, or for any dealer
or seller, with intent to violate any provision of this article, to fail or refuse to
perform any of the duties imposed upon him under the provisions of this article, to
fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which the director may issue under this
article.
(b) To falsely or fraudulently make, forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp, invoice or
reports, to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such
stamp, or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish pass or tender as true any false,
altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps.
(c) To sell any cigarettes upon which the tax imposed by this article has not been paid
and upon which evidence of payment thereof is not shown on each package of
cigarettes.
§ 66-161 ABINGDON CODE § 66-163
66:46
§ 66-164. Penalties. [Ord. of 8-1-2007]
(d) To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which the cigarettes have been
removed, for which the tax has been paid.
(e) To remove from any package any stamp with intent to use or cause the same to be
used after the same have already been used, or to buy, sell or offer for sale or give
away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps, to any person, or to reuse any
stamp which has theretofore been used for evidence of the payment any tax
prescribed in this article, or except as to the director of finance, to sell or offer to
sell any stamp provided for herein.
(f) To possess, store, use, authorize or approve the possession, storage or use for sale
or resale of any cigarettes in quantities of more than 60 packages upon which the
stamp has not been affixed; or
(g) To transport, authorize or approve the transportation of any cigarettes, in quantities
of more than 60 packages into or within the city upon which the stamp has not been
affixed, if they are:
(1) Not accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating the true
name and address of the consignor or seller and the consignee or purchaser and
the brands and quantity of cigarettes transported; or
(2) Accompanied by a bill of lading or other document which is false or fraudulent
in whole or in part; or
(3) Accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating:
a. A consignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who
is not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or
possess such cigarettes on which the taxes imposed by such other
jurisdiction have not been paid, unless the tax of the state or district of
destination has been paid and the said cigarettes bear the tax stamps of
that state or district; or
b. A consignee or purchaser in the Commonwealth of Virginia but outside
the Town who does not possess a Virginia Sales and Use Tax Certificate
and a Virginia Retail Tobacco License and, where applicable, both a
business license and a retail tobacco license issued by the local
jurisdiction of destination.
(a) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class
1 misdemeanor. Conviction and punishment for such violation shall not relieve any
person from the payment of any tax, interest or penalty imposed by this article.
(b) Any person who fails to pay any cigarette tax at the time it is due shall pay a late
payment penalty in the amount of 10% of the unpaid tax per month.
(c) Any person who fails to pay any cigarette tax at the time it is due shall pay interest
on the tax found to be overdue and unpaid at the rate of three-quarters of 1% per
month.
§ 66-163 TAXATION § 66-164
66:47
(d) In addition, any person who shall perform any fraudulent act or fail to perform any
act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article shall
be required to pay a penalty in the amount of 50% of any tax found to be overdue
and unpaid.
(e) Each day's violation of, or noncompliance with, any of the provisions of this article
shall be and constitute a separate offense.
§ 66-164 ABINGDON CODE § 66-164
66:48
Chapter 70
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
§ 66-164 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 66-164
70:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 70-1. Compliance with chapter. [Code 1985, § 11-6]
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto. Unless
otherwise stated, violations of this chapter shall constitute traffic infractions punishable
by a fine of not more than $200.
§ 70-2. Adoption of state law. [Code 1985, § 11-1; Ord. No. 89-11-2001, 11-6-1989;
Ord. No. 92-6-2001, 6-1-1992; Ord. of 6-6-1994; Ord. of 5-1-1995]
Pursuant to the authority of the Code of Virginia, all of the provisions and requirements
of the laws of the state contained in Code of Virginia, tit. 46.2, and Code of Virginia, tit.
18.2, ch. 7, art. 2, with amendments and additions thereto, except those provisions and
requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and
requirements which by their very nature can have no application to or within the Town,
are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable
within the Town. References to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and
requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other
public ways within the Town. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted,
mutatis mutandis and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length
herein. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail, neglect to refuse to comply
with any provision of Code of Virginia, tit. 46.2, or of Code of Virginia, tit. 18.2, ch. 7,
art. 2, as amended and additions thereto, which is adopted by this section; provided, that
in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provisions or requirement
hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Code of Virginia,
tit. 46.2, or under Code of Virginia, tit. 18.2, ch. 7, art. 2, as amended and additions
thereto.
§ 70-3. Railroads; locomotive bell to be rung at crossings. [Code 1985, § 13-6]
Every railroad company operating through or in the Town shall cause the bells on its
locomotives or diesel engines to be rung continuously, when such locomotive engine is
approaching any grade crossing in the Town, for a distance of 200 yards before reaching
such crossing.
§ 70-4. Sounding steam whistle or horn in Town. [Code 1985, § 13-7; Ord. of
3-2-1992; Ord. of 4-6-1992]
No steam whistle or horn on any locomotive or diesel engine shall be sounded in the
Town between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except in cases of emergency to
transmit signals.
§ 70-5. through § 70-25. (Reserved)
§ 70-1 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-5
70:3

ARTICLE II
Administration And Enforcement
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 70-26. Notice of violation. [Code 1985, §§ 11-7, 11-8]
§ 70-27. Option as to parking, etc., violations. [Code 1985, § 11-9]
Any person charged with a violation of Article V of this chapter, in reference to stopping,
standing and parking, shall have the option of paying the minimum fine to the Town
Treasurer at the municipal building within the time specified in the notice of violation
upon entering a plea of guilty upon waiving appearance at court or may have the option
of depositing required lawful bond and, upon a plea of not guilty, shall be entitled to a
trial as authorized by law.
§ 70-28. Effect of payment of fine for parking violation. [Code 1985, § 11-10]
In cases under Section 70-27, the payment of a fine to the Town Treasurer shall be
deemed an acknowledgment of conviction of the alleged offense.
§ 70-29. When complaint to be entered and warrant to be issued. [Code 1985,
§ 11-11; amended 1-7-2013]
If any person fails to comply with a notice of violation given to such person or attached
to a vehicle as provided in this article, or fails or refuses to post bond, if required, the
officer issuing the notice shall forthwith have a complaint entered against such person
and secure and issue a summons for nonpayment.
§ 70-30. Records and reports of Chief of Police. [Code 1985, § 11-12]
The Chief of Police shall keep records and submit summarized monthly reports to the
Council of all notices of violation issued and arrests made for violations of traffic
regulations in the Town and of all fines collected therefor and of the final disposition or
present status of every case of violation. Such records shall be so maintained as to show
the nature of each violation and the total number of violations of each kind. Such records
(a) Forms generally. The Town Manager shall provide suitable serially numbered
forms, in triplicate, for notifying violators of the provisions of this chapter or any
other traffic ordinance to appear and answer to the charge of violating this chapter
or any other traffic ordinance.
(b) Issuance for illegally parked vehicles. Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver
is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this
chapter, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may
take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and
shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice of violation in writing, on the
form required by Subsection (a) of this section, for the driver to answer to the
charge against him within seven days at the hours and at a place specified in the
notice. The officer shall send one copy of such notice to the general district court.
§ 70-26 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-30
70:5
shall be public records.
§ 70-31. Assessment for electronic summons system. [Ord. of 11-2-2015]
§ 70-32. through § 70-40. (Reserved)
(a) Upon conviction of a defendant for the violation of any criminal or traffic ordinance
of the Town, the Town may assess against the defendant a fee of $5, in addition to
any other court costs, in order to provide for the costs associated with
implementation and maintenance of an electronic summons system.
(b) The assessment shall be collected, upon conviction, by the clerk of the general
district court and remitted to the Town Treasurer.
(c) The assessment shall be held by the Town Treasurer, subject to disbursement by the
Town Council to the Town of Abingdon Police Department solely to fund software,
hardware and associated equipment costs for the implementation and maintenance
of the electronic summons system.
§ 70-30 ABINGDON CODE § 70-32
70:6
DIVISION 2
Town Manager
§ 70-41. Traffic and parking generally. [Code 1985, § 11-2]
The Town Manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as
otherwise directed from time to time by the Council, shall have power and is hereby
authorized to:
§ 70-42. Stop and yield intersections. [Code 1985, § 11-3]
(a) Regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the Town by the erection or
placing of proper signs or markers indicating prohibited or limited parking, angle
parking, the parking of buses, trucks and other vehicles of various weights, "U"
turns, turning at intersections, hazardous intersections, school zones, hospital zones,
loading and unloading zones, quiet zones, traffic-control signals exhibiting colored
lights and other signs or markers indicating the place and manner of operating or
parking vehicles in the Town. If any such regulation regulates parking on the
interstate highway system or the arterial network of the primary system or any
extension thereof of the arterial network, it shall be subject to the approval of the
commonwealth transportation commissioner.
(b) Regulate the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and sidewalks of the Town
by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating the flow of
pedestrian traffic.
(c) Secure all such necessary signs, signals or markers to be erected or placed on any
street or part of a street. The existence of such signs, signals or markers at any place
within the corporate limits of the Town shall be prima facie evidence that such
signs, signals or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the Town
Manager in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(d) Designate bus stops and to erect signs prohibiting the parking of vehicles other than
buses at such stops.
(e) Mark off traffic lanes on streets and parts of streets indicating and directing the flow
of traffic.
(a) The Town Manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as
otherwise directed from time to time by the Council, may designate intersections at
which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way.
(b) The Town Manager shall further have power and is hereby authorized to secure all
such necessary signs, signals or markers to be erected or placed on or at any such
intersection, so that an ordinarily observant person, who may be affected by such
regulation, may be aware of such regulation.
(c) The existence of such signs, signals or markers at any place within the corporate
limits of the Town shall be prima facie evidence that such signs, signals or markers
were erected or placed by and at the direction of the Town Manager in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
§ 70-41 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-43
70:7
§ 70-43. Compliance with sign, signal or marker. [Code 1985, § 11-4]
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the directions
indicated on any sign, signal or marker erected or placed in accordance with the
provisions of this division, when such sign, signal or marker so placed or erected is
visible and legible.
§ 70-44. Permits for parades and processions. [Code 1985, § 11-5]
No parade or procession, other than a funeral procession, shall occupy or march or
proceed along any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the Town
Manager.
§ 70-45. through § 70-65. (Reserved)
§ 70-43 ABINGDON CODE § 70-45
70:8
ARTICLE III
Town License
§ 70-66. When license to be purchased. [Ord. of 4-6-201514]
The motor vehicle license tax required under this article shall be paid to the Town on or
before the due date for payment of personal property taxes each year, or before a motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer required to be licensed under this article is operated, kept
or used in the Town. Every person whose duty it is to comply with the provisions of this
article, upon payment of the required tax and upon specific request, shall be issued as
evidence a receipt showing payment of the applicable license tax.
§ 70-67. Transfer of license. [Ord. of 4-6-2015]
Any person who has paid the current license tax required by this article for any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer and who desires to apply the license tax paid to cover
another motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer owned by him shall make such request to
the director of finance and/or treasurer and the director of finance and/or treasurer shall
comply with such request if the requestor submits to the director of finance and/or
treasurer a certificate from the state motor vehicle commissioner or other proper state
officer that the state license and registration certificate of the previously licensed vehicle
have been surrendered.
§ 70-68. Refund of tax. [Ord. of 4-6-2015]
Any person who has paid the current license tax required by this article who disposes
of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer for which it was paid and who does not
purchase another motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer of the same class subject to the
license tax may request a refund for the unused portion of the license tax paid. The
director of finance and/or treasurer shall refund a prorated portion of the license tax paid
in accordance with the provisions in this section upon proof of payment of the current
license tax prior to its due date and submittal to the director of finance and/or treasurer of
a certificate from the state motor vehicle commissioner or other proper state officer that
the state license and registration certificate of the previously licensed vehicle have been
surrendered. The director of finance and/or treasurer shall refund to the applicant half the
total cost of the license if application for such refund is made on or before June 30 of the
current license year. The director of finance and/or treasurer shall refund to the applicant
a third of the total cost when the application therefore is made July 1 to September 30 of
the current license year. No refund shall be made when the application therefore is made
on or after October 1 of the current license year.
§ 70-69. Penalties and fines. [Ord. of 4-6-2015]
(a) Any person failing to obtain a license within the time required by this article shall
pay a penalty fee as authorized by the Town Council from time to time in addition
to the amount of annual license tax payable.
(b) Any person who violates the provisions of Section 70-66, shall, upon conviction,
14. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, which pertained to Town license and derived from Code
1985, §§ 11-54 — 11-66; Ord. of 1-9-1995; Ord. of 2-6-1995.
§ 70-66 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-69
70:9
§ 70-70. through § 70-100. (Reserved)
be fined $5 for each offense. Each day such violation shall continue shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 70-69 ABINGDON CODE § 70-70
70:10
ARTICLE IV
Operation Of Vehicles Generally
§ 70-101. Entering intersection or marked crosswalks when there is not sufficient
space to accommodate vehicle. [Code 1985, § 11-13]
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient
space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle
he is operating, without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
§ 70-102. Driving through parade or procession. [Code 1985, § 11-14]
§ 70-103. Backing. [Code 1985, § 11-15]
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with
reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
§ 70-104. One-way streets. [Code 1985, §§ 11-16, 11-17]
(a) No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising an authorized
procession or parade while such vehicles are in motion. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or a police
officer.
(b) No vehicle that is not properly part of a funeral procession shall join, pass through,
or interfere with the passage of any funeral procession under police or sheriff's
escort.
(a) From time to time the Council may establish and designate one-way streets and,
except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven
or moved on such streets in a direction other than as determined by the Council.
(b) This section shall become effective as to any such one-way street when signs have
been provided therefor as set out in this section.
(c) The Town Manager shall provide such signs on the one-way streets designated
under this section as will apprise an ordinarily observant person of such one-way
streets.
(d) When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Town Manager that the strict
enforcement of Subsection (a) of this section will cause an unreasonable hardship
on some particular person or persons relative to the loading or unloading of trucks
or other vehicles on such one-way streets, then in such event the Town Manager
may issue a special permit to such person or persons permitting a variance from the
provisions of Subsection (a) of this section. Any such special permit shall be in
writing and shall specify the nature of such variance and the place and period of
time when such variance shall be permitted. Such permit shall only be issued when
it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Town Manager that the granting of
such permit will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship as distinguished from a
special privilege or convenience to the person who seeks such permit.
§ 70-101 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-105
70:11
§ 70-105. Streets upon which operation of motor trucks is prohibited. [Code 1985,
§ 11-18]
Except for the purpose of receiving loads or making deliveries, it shall be unlawful for
any person to operate a motor truck upon any of the streets in the Town designated from
time to time by the Council.
§ 70-106. Streets upon which through trucks are prohibited. [Code 1985, § 11-19;
Ord. of 12-3-1990]
Except for the purpose of receiving loads or making deliveries, or closure of the adjacent
interstate highway in the event of an emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a through motor truck upon any of the streets in the Town designated from time
to time by the Council.
§ 70-107. Prevention of escape of contents of vehicles. [Code 1985, § 11-21]
No vehicle shall be operated or moved on any highway or Town street unless such
vehicle is so constructed and maintained as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting,
leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom.
§ 70-108. Maximum speed limits in certain residence districts; penalty. [Ord. No.
1-2002, 5-6-2002]
Operation of any motor vehicle in excess of a maximum speed limit established for a
highway in a residence district, when indicated by appropriately placed signs in areas
meeting the criteria for the overall applicability for the installation of such signs as
established by the commonwealth transportation board pursuant to Code of Virginia,
§ 46.2-878.2 and displaying the maximum safe speed limit and the penalty for violations,
shall be unlawful and constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than
$200, in addition to other penalties provided by law.
§ 70-109. through § 70-130. (Reserved)
§ 70-105 ABINGDON CODE § 70-109
70:12
ARTICLE V
Stopping, Standing And Parking
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 70-131. Removal and disposition of unattended, illegally parked or immobilized
vehicles. [Code 1985, § 11-24(a) — (d)]
§ 70-132. Leaving vehicles on private property prohibited; removal and
disposition; notice of disposition. [Code 1985, § 11-25]
(a) Whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is: 1) Left unattended on a public
highway or other public property and constitutes a traffic hazard; 2) Illegally
parked; 3) Left unattended for more than 10 days either on public property or on
private property without the permission of the property owner, lessee, or occupant;
or 4) Immobilized on a public roadway by weather conditions or other emergency
situation, such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may be removed for safekeeping
by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage area; provided, that no such
vehicle shall be so removed from private property without the written request of the
owner, lessee, or occupant thereof. The person at whose request such motor vehicle,
trailer or semitrailer is removed from private property shall indemnify the Town
against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage or sale thereof.
(b) It shall be presumed that such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part thereof,
is abandoned if:
(1) It lacks either:
a. A current license plate;
b. A current county, city or Town license plate or sticker; or
c. A valid state inspection certificate or sticker; and
(2) It has been in a specific location for four days without being moved.
(c) As promptly as possible, each removal shall be reported to the Chief of Police, and
notice thereof given to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. The
owner of such vehicle or trailer or semitrailer, before obtaining possession thereof,
shall pay to the persons entitled thereto all costs incidental to the removal, storage
and locating the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer.
(d) Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the cost or should the identity or
whereabouts of such owner be unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search
has been made, and after notice to him at his last known address and to the holder
of any lien of record in the office of the state department of motor vehicles against
the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part of a motor vehicle, trailer, or
semitrailer, the vehicle shall be treated as an abandoned vehicle under the
provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200 et seq.
(a) No person shall leave any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part of a motor
§ 70-131 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-132
70:13
§ 70-133. Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles. [Code 1985, § 11-26; Ord.
of 9-11-2000]
§ 70-134. Temporary removal and disposition of vehicles involved in accidents.
[Code 1985, § 11-27]
vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer on the private property of any other person without
his consent. On complaint of the owner of the property on which such motor
vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof has been left for more than 72 hours,
such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof, may be removed by or under
the direction of a law-enforcement officer to a storage area. The owners of private
property which is normally open to the public for parking shall post or cause to
be posted signs warning that vehicles left on the property for more than 72 hours
will be towed or removed at their owners' expense. The person at whose request the
vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof is so removed shall indemnify the Town
against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage, or sale thereof.
(b) In the case of the removal of a motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part of a motor
vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer from private property, when it cannot be readily sold,
the motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part may be disposed of in whatever
manner the Council may provide.
(c) In all other respects, the provisions of Section 70-131 and Code of Virginia,
§ 46.2-1217 shall apply to these removals. Disposal of a motor vehicle, trailer, or
semitrailer may at the option of the Council be carried out under either the
provisions of Section 70-131, or under the provisions of this section after a diligent
search for the owner, after notice to him at his last known address and to the holder
of any lien of record in the office of the state department of motor vehicles against
the motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer, and after the motor vehicle, trailer, or
semitrailer has been held at least 60 days.
(a) No person in charge or control of any property within the Town, whether as owner,
tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled,
nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on such property
longer than 30 days. No person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within
the Town for a longer time than 30 days. A vehicle that would otherwise be
considered "nonoperating" shall not be considered "operating" due to the
exemptions found in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-662 et seq., as amended from time to
time.
(b) This section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a
vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and
manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, provided such
vehicle is stored in such a manner that it is not visible to public view from the street
adjacent to the place of business, or to a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the Town.
(a) Whenever a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer involved in an accident is so
located as to impede the orderly flow of traffic, the police may:
(1) At no cost to the owner or operator remove the motor vehicle, trailer, or
§ 70-132 ABINGDON CODE § 70-134
70:14
§ 70-135. Notice of disposition of vehicle. [Code 1985, § 11-28]
The state department of motor vehicles shall be notified of the disposition of any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer under sections 70-131 and 70-132.
§ 70-136. Backing up to curbs. [Code 1985, § 11-29]
No vehicle shall be backed up to a curb, except during the time actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise therefrom.
§ 70-137. Stopping vehicle for advertising, sales or display purposes. [Code 1985,
§ 11-30]
No person shall stop a vehicle upon the street at any time for the purpose of advertising,
displaying, selling or offering for sale therefrom any goods, wares, merchandise, or any
other property.
§ 70-138. Parking vehicle for display for sale. [Code 1985, § 11-31]
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway in the Town for the principal purpose
of displaying such vehicle for sale.
§ 70-139. Parking vehicle for washing, greasing or repairing. [Code 1985, § 11-32]
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway in the Town for the principal purpose
of washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except when such repairs are necessitated
by an emergency.
§ 70-140. Parking in alleys. [Code 1985, § 11-33; Ord. of 6-4-2001]
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions
as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement
of vehicular traffic. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such
position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
§ 70-140.1. Using two spaces. [Ord. of 6-4-2001]
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle such that the vehicle is not entirely within a
single marked parking space.
semitrailer to some point in the vicinity where it will not impede the flow of
traffic;
(2) Have the vehicle removed to a storage area for safekeeping and shall report the
removal to the state department of motor vehicles and to the owner of the
vehicle as promptly as possible.
(b) If the vehicle is removed to a storage area under Subsection (a)(2) of this section,
the owner shall pay to the parties entitled thereto all costs incidental to its removal
and storage.
§ 70-134 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-140.2
70:15
§ 70-140.2. Parking too close to intersection. [Ord. of 6-4-2001]
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle upon the street such that the vehicle extends beyond
a marked parking space into an adjacent intersection.
§ 70-140.3. Parking with left side of vehicle to curb. [Ord. of 6-4-2001]
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle upon the street such that the left side of the vehicle
is adjacent to the curb, unless such parking is lawfully done on a one-way street and the
vehicle as parked is consistent with the flow of traffic on such one-way street.
§ 70-140.4. Unauthorized parking of vehicles. [Ord. of 6-4-2001]
The Town Manager shall have the authority to designate certain parking spaces as
authorized only for the parking of certain vehicles, including but not limited to, service
vehicles, official vehicles, emergency vehicles, vehicles parked for the purpose of
loading and unloading, or any other designation as the Town Manager may see fit.
Where such spaces have been so designated, no person shall park any vehicle in such
space unless their purpose in so parking the vehicle conforms to the designation or type
of authorized vehicle or authorized vehicle or authorized purpose for which such space
has been designated.
§ 70-140.5. Vehicle parked on sidewalk. [Ord. of 6-4-2001]
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle such that one or more of the tires of that vehicle are
on the curb or sidewalk.
§ 70-140.6. Unauthorized parking of vehicle in loading zone. [Ord. of 6-4-2001]
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in a loading zone unless the vehicle is in fact
parked in that space for the purpose of loading or unloading articles from such vehicle. In
any event, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in such space for longer than 30 minutes
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
§ 70-140.7. Vehicle parked in no parking zone. [Ord. of 6-4-2001]
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in a no parking zone.
§ 70-140.8. Vehicle parked too close to driveway. [Ord. of 6-4-2001]
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle such that the vehicle extends beyond a marked
parking space into an adjacent driveway.
§ 70-140.9. Parking in traffic lane. [Ord. of 6-4-2001]
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle within a lane of traffic. Such lane shall be defined
as the area in which cars regularly drive which has not been reserved or designated as a
marked parking space.
§ 70-140.2 ABINGDON CODE § 70-141
70:16
§ 70-141. Parking for longer than 30 minutes between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on
certain days. [Code 1985, § 11-34; Ord. of 6-4-2001]
No person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than 30 minutes
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on such days as may be designated by the
Town Manager and indicated by proper signs. This section shall not apply to physicians
on emergency calls and authorized emergency vehicles.
§ 70-142. Parking in spaces reserved for handicapped persons. [Code 1985,
§ 11-34.1; Ord. of 6-4-2001]
§ 70-143. Display of lights upon parked vehicle. [Code 1985, § 11-20; Ord. of
6-4-2001]
Whenever any vehicle is parked in accordance with the provisions of this chapter at night
upon any street in the Town no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
§ 70-144. Prohibited at specified times. [Code 1985, §§ 11-35, 11-36; Ord. of
6-4-2001]
The Council may from time to time determine portions of streets on which parking is
prohibited at specified times.
§ 70-145. Penalties. [Code 1985, § 11-44; Ord. of 12-2-1991; Ord. of 6-4-2001]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a parking
violation shall be punished by a fine of $15.
§ 70-146. through § 70-155. (Reserved)
(a) Pursuant to the authority of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1237, no vehicles other than
those displaying disabled parking license plates, organizational removable
windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards, or temporary
removable windshield placards issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-731 or DV
disabled parking license plates issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-739B shall be
parked in any parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities on public
property or at privately owned shopping centers and business offices.
(b) A penalty for the violation of this section shall not exceed that prescribed for a Class
4 misdemeanor.
§ 70-141 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-146
70:17

DIVISION 2
Bus Stops and Taxistands
§ 70-156. Establishment. [Code 1985, § 11-37]
The Town Manager shall establish bus stops and taxistands on such streets, in such
places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public.
§ 70-157. Use of bus stops. [Code 1985, § 11-38]
§ 70-158. Use of taxistands. [Code 1985, § 11-39]
§ 70-159. through § 70-170. (Reserved)
(a) No driver of a bus shall park upon any street at any place other than at a bus stop;
except, that this provision shall not prevent the driver of a bus from temporarily
stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. No
owner of a bus shall permit the driver of a bus to violate the foregoing provisions
of this section.
(b) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, when
any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed.
(a) No driver of a taxicab shall park upon any street at any place other than at a
taxistand; except, that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle
from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations
at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
passengers. No owner of a taxicab shall permit the driver of a taxicab to violate the
foregoing provisions of this section.
(b) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxistand when
such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed.
§ 70-156 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-159
70:19

DIVISION 3
Curb Loading Zones
§ 70-171. Determination of locations and hours of use. [Code 1985, § 11-40]
The Town Manager shall determine, as he deems necessary, the location of passenger
and freight curb loading zones and the hours during which they are to be used as such.
§ 70-172. Permits. [Code 1985, § 11-41]
The Town Manager shall not designate or assign any curb loading zone upon the special
request of any person unless such person makes application for a permit for such zone
and for two signs to indicate the ends of each zone.
§ 70-173. Use of passenger curb loading zones. [Code 1985, § 11-42]
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other
than for the expeditious loading and unloading of passengers in any place marked as a
passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb
loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes.
§ 70-174. Use of freight curb loading zone. [Code 1985, § 11-43]
§ 70-175. through § 70-185. (Reserved)
(a) No person shall, except as provided in Subsection (b) of this section, stop, stand or
park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious
unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a
freight curb loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to such
zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading materials
exceed 30 minutes.
(b) The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a
freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading
or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor
vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or is about
to enter such zone.
§ 70-171 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-175
70:21

DIVISION 4
Parking Signs
§ 70-186. Zones; historical homes excepted. [Code 1985, § 11-45; Ord. of 6-4-2001]
§ 70-187. Town Manager to install signs. [Code 1985, § 11-46; Ord. of 6-4-2001]
The Town Manager shall install signs in all parking zones designated pursuant to Section
70-186, in such numbers and at such places as in his judgement may be necessary to
regulate, control and make inspection of the parking of vehicles therein, including the
reservation of loading zones for commercial vehicles.
§ 70-188. Method of installation. [Code 1985, § 11-47; Ord. of 6-4-2001]
Parking signs installed in parking zones shall be placed upon the curb immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces described in the following section.
§ 70-189. Marking of spaces; parking vehicles within lines. [Code 1985, § 11-48;
Ord. of 6-4-2001]
The Town Manager shall have lines or markings painted upon the curb or street adjacent
to any parking space shall park within such lines or markings. It shall be unlawful for
any person to park any vehicle across any such line or marking or to park a vehicle in
such a position that it shall not be entirely within the space designated by such lines and
markings.
§ 70-190. through § 70-191. (Reserved)15
§ 70-192. Parking overtime; "holiday" defined. [Code 1985, § 11-51; Ord. of
6-4-2001]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his
name or operated or controlled by him to be in any parking space for a time period
longer than that permitted by a controlling sign between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. of any day, Sundays and legal holidays excepted. Within the meaning of this
article, the word "holiday" shall include the following days only: January 1st, the third
Monday in January, the third Monday in February, the last Monday in May, July 4th, the
first Monday in September, the second Monday in October, November 11th, the fourth
Thursday in November and December 25th.
(a) The Council may from time to time designate any streets or portions of streets as
parking zones.
(b) "No Parking" sign will be placed in front of an historical home which has been so
designated by the county historical society. "No Parking" signs will be installed in
front of such homes.
15. Editor's Note: Former §§ 70-190 and 70-191, which referred to deposit of coin and parking time limit, and parking time
limits in 220 West Main Street parking lot and derived from Code 1985, §§ 11-49 and 11-50, were repealed by Ord. of
6-4-2001.
§ 70-186 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-193
70:23
§ 70-193. (Reserved)16
§ 70-194. Penalty for violation. [Code 1985, § 11-53; Ord. of 12-2-1991; Ord. of
6-4-2001]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of
any provision of this division shall be punished by a fine of not more than $10.
§ 70-195. through § 70-215. (Reserved)
16. Editor's Note: Former § 70-193, which pertained to the collection and disposal of coins and derived from Code 1985,
§ 11-52, was repealed by Ord. of 6-4-2001.
§ 70-193 ABINGDON CODE § 70-195
70:24
ARTICLE VI
Bicycles, Skateboards And Similar Devices
§ 70-216. Registration of serial numbers. [Code 1985, § 11-67]
Any resident of the Town who owns a bicycle may register its serial number with the
police department.
§ 70-217. Operating on sidewalks. [Ord. No. 87-11-1, 11-2-87; Ord. of 4-3-2000]
The use of roller skates, skateboards or the riding of bicycles on all sidewalks or
crosswalks in the Town is prohibited, including those of any church, school, recreational
facility or any business property open to the public, where such activity is prohibited.
Signs indicating such prohibition shall be conspicuously posted by the Town.
A violation of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $50 per
violation.
§ 70-218. Riding on roadways and bicycle paths. [Code 1985, § 11-69]
§ 70-219. Crossing sidewalk. [Code 1985, § 11-70]
The operator of any bicycle entering or leaving any alley or driveway that crosses any
sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk.
§ 70-220. Carrying articles. [Code 1985, § 11-71]
No person operating a bicycle or moped on a highway shall carry any package, bundle,
(a) Any person operating a bicycle or moped on a roadway shall ride as close as
practicable to the right curb or edge of the roadway, except under any of the
following circumstances:
(1) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction;
(2) When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway; and
(3) When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not limited to,
fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, pedestrians, animals,
surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue
along the right curb or edge.
(b) For purposes of this section, a "substandard width lane" is a lane too narrow for a
bicycle or moped and another vehicle to pass safely side by side within the lane.
(c) Persons riding bicycles on a highway shall not ride two or more abreast except on
paths or parts of highways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(d) Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway,
bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway.
§ 70-216 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-220
70:25
or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand on the handlebars.
§ 70-221. Penalty for violation of article. [Code 1985, § 11-72]
Any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
Class 4 misdemeanor.
§ 70-222. Disposition of unclaimed bicycles and mopeds. [Ord. No. 3-2002,
5-6-2002]
Any bicycle or moped which has been in the possession of the police department,
unclaimed, for more than 30 days may be sold at a public sale or donated to a charitable
organization. Any bicycle or moped found and delivered to the police department by
a private person which thereafter remains unclaimed for 30 days after the final date of
publication as required herein may be given to the finder; however, the location and
description of the bicycle or moped shall be published at least once a week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the locality. In addition,
if there is a license tag affixed to the bicycle or moped, or if the serial number on the
bicycle has been registered with the police department pursuant to Section 70-216, the
record owner shall be notified directly.
§ 70-220 ABINGDON CODE § 70-222
70:26
ARTICLE VII
Mopeds And Electric Power-Assisted Bicycles
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 70-223. Definition, age of operation, ID required. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings as herein described
below:
ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE — A self-balancing twonon-tandem wheeled device that is designed to transport only one person and powered
by an electric propulsion system that limits the device's maximum speed to 15 miles per
hour or less. For purposes of this article, an electric power assistive mobility device shall
be a vehicle when operated on a street.
ELECTRIC POWER-ASSISTED BICYCLE/SCOOTER — A vehicle that travels on
not more than three wheels in contact with the ground and is equipped with (i) pedals
that allow propulsion by human power and (ii) an electric motor with an input of no more
than 1,000 watts that reduces the pedal effort required of the ride. For purposes of this
article, an electric power-assisted bicycle shall be a vehicle when operated on a street.
MOPED/SCOOTER — Every vehicle that travels on not more than three wheels in
contact with the ground that has (i) a seat that is no less than 24 inches in height,
measured from the middle of the seat perpendicular to the ground; and (ii) a gasoline,
electric, or hybrid motor that displaces less than 50 cubic centimeters. For purposes of
this article, a moped shall be a vehicle when operated on a street. No person under the
age of 16 years shall operate a moped on any street in the Town. Further, pursuant to this
article, the operator of a moped shall be required to carry with himself/herself a current
identification that includes name, address and date of birth.
§ 70-224. Penalties. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
Any person who shall remove, change, alter or mutilate any electric power-assisted
bicycle or moped frame number in violation of Section 70-223 of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor; and except as otherwise provided herein, any
person who shall violate any other provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
traffic infraction which shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $200.
§ 70-225. Summons. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
Whenever any police or other officer charged with the duty of enforcing this article shall
discover any person violating any of the provisions of this article, such officer shall take
the name and address of such person and issue a summons to or otherwise notify such
person in writing, if such person be under 18 years of age, to appear before the Judge of
the Washington County Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court and if such person be 18
years of age or over, to appear before the Washington County General District Court, at
a time to be specified in such summons or notice, to be there dealt with according to the
provisions of this article and the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
§ 70-223 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-226
70:27
§ 70-226. through § 70-238. (Reserved)
§ 70-226 ABINGDON CODE § 70-226
70:28
DIVISION 2
Operation
§ 70-239. Compliance with safety equipment requirements. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
Every person operating a moped, as defined above, on a public street, road, alley or
highway within the Town, shall wear a face shield, safety glasses, or goggles of a type
approved by the Superintendent of Virginia State Police or have his/her moped equipped
with safety glass or a windshield at all times while operating such vehicle. Further,
operators and passengers thereon, if any, shall at all time wear protective helmets of a
type also approved by the Superintendent of Virginia State Police.
Any person who knowingly violates this article shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and
subject to a fine of not more than $50.
§ 70-240. Compliance with traffic signals. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
Every person riding a bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle or moped over any public
street shall comply with all traffic signs, signals and lights and with all directions by
voice, hand or otherwise, given by any officer of the police department and shall have
all of the rights and duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle, unless the context
of the Town Code clearly indicates otherwise.
§ 70-241. Hand on handlebars. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
No person shall ride a bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle or moped on any street
without having at least one of his or her hands upon the handlebars and no person
operating a bicycle or moped on a street shall carry any package, bundle, or article which
prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand on the handlebars.
§ 70-242. Riding on sidewalks. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
No person shall ride a bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle or moped upon any
sidewalk or cross a roadway on a crosswalk, whether paved or unpaved, in the Town.
§ 70-243. Reckless riding. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
No person shall ride a bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle or moped recklessly or at
a speed or in a manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of the rider or of any
other person.
§ 70-244. Carrying/transporting other persons. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
No person riding a one-seated bicycle or electric power-assisted bicycle shall carry any
additional person on the same.
§ 70-245. Holding on to moving vehicle. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
No person riding a bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle or moped shall take or catch
hold of or attach the same or himself to any moving automobile, bus or other vehicle of
any kind upon any street, for the purpose of being drawn or propelled by the same.
§ 70-239 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-246
70:29
§ 70-246. Hand signals. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
Operators of mopeds shall use the electronic signaling devices that the moped is
equipped with before turning or altering course of operation. If operating a moped
with malfunctioning signal devices, or no signaling devices, the operator shall use hand
signals.
Before turning or altering the course of operation of any bicycle or electric powerassisted bicycle, the operator thereof shall give signals by extension of the hand to
indicate the direction in which it is intended to proceed.
§ 70-247. Method of riding. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
§ 70-248. Brakes. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
Every motor vehicle when driven on a highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate
to control the movements of and to stop and hold such vehicle. The brakes shall be
maintained in good working order and shall conform to the provisions of this article.
(a) Any person operating a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric
power- assisted bicycle, or moped on a street at less than the normal speed of traffic
at the time and place under conditions then existing shall ride as close as safely
practicable to the right curb or edge of the street except under any of the following
circumstances:
(1) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction;
(2) When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway;
(3) When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not limited to,
fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, pedestrians, animals,
surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue
along the right curb or edge;
(4) When avoiding riding in a lane that must turn or diverge to the right; and
(5) When riding upon a one-way street, a person may also ride as near to the lefthand curb or edge of such street as safely practicable.
(b) For purposes of this section, a "substandard width lane" is a lane too narrow for
bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle,
motorized skateboard or scooter, or moped and another vehicle to pass safely side
by side within the lane.
(c) Persons riding bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, or electric
power-assisted bicycles on a street shall not ride more than two abreast. Persons
riding two abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
shall move into a single file formation as quickly as is practicable when being
overtaken from the rear by a faster moving vehicle, and, on a laned roadway, shall
ride in a single lane.
§ 70-246 ABINGDON CODE § 70-248
70:30
Every bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle, and moped, when operated on a highway,
shall be equipped with a brake that will enable the operator to make the braked wheels
skid on dry, level, clean pavement. Every electric personal assistive mobility device,
when operated on a highway, shall be equipped with a system that, when activated or
engaged, will enable the operator to bring the device to a controlled stop.
§ 70-249. Lamps. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
§ 70-250. Riding out of lanes, alleys and driveways. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
Every person riding a bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle or moped out of a lane,
alley or private driveway across a sidewalk or sidewalk area shall first bring such
bicycle, electric power- assisted bicycle or moped to a complete stop before crossing
such sidewalk or sidewalk area.
§ 70-251. Law enforcement officers. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
§ 70-252. Requirement of safety equipment for mopeds. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
(a) Every bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted
bicycle, and moped when in use between sunset and sunrise shall be equipped with
a headlight on the front emitting a white light visible in clear weather from a
distance of at least 500 feet to the front and a red reflector visible from a distance
of at least 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of
headlights on a motor vehicle. Such lights and reflector shall be of types approved
by the superintendent.
In addition to the foregoing provisions of this section, a bicycle or its rider may be
equipped with lights or reflectors. These lights may be steady burning or blinking.
(b) Every bicycle, or its rider, shall be equipped with a taillight on the rear emitting a
red light plainly visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
rear when in use between sunset and sunrise and operating on any highway with a
speed limit of 35 mph or greater. Any such taillight shall be of a type approved by
the superintendent.
(a) Any law enforcement officer of the Town, operating a bicycle, electric powerassisted bicycle or moped during the course of his or her duties, shall be exempt
from the provisions of this division.
(b) Any bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle or moped being operated by a law
enforcement officer of the Town, during the course of his or her duties, shall be
deemed to be a law- enforcement vehicle and shall have the same rights and
privileges as any other law-enforcement vehicle when the bicycle or moped is being
operated in response to an emergency call, while engaged in rescue operations or in
the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law.
(a) Any person who operates a moped on a public street shall wear a face shield, safety
glasses, or goggles of a type approved by the superintendent of the Virginia State
Police, or have the moped equipped with safety glass or a windshield at all times
while operating such moped, and operators and passengers thereon, if any, shall
§ 70-248 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES § 70-252
70:31
§ 70-253. Persons riding upon mopeds. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
No person other than the operator thereof shall ride upon a moped unless such moped
is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon a
separate and permanent seat attached thereto; provided, however, that such moped is also
equipped with a footrest for such passenger. A violation of this section shall constitute a
traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $200.
§ 70-254. Penalties. [Ord. of 7-5-2011]
Unless the enumerated foregoing provisions herein specify otherwise, any person who
shall violate any section thereof shall be deemed guilty of a traffic infraction which shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $200.
wear a protective helmet of a type approved by the Superintendent of the Virginia
State Police.
(b) Any person who knowingly violates this section shall be guilty of a traffic
infraction and be subject to a fine of not more than $50.
(c) A violation of this section shall not constitute negligence, be considered in
mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence or be the
subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising
out of the operation, ownership, or maintenance of a moped, nor shall anything in
this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any civil
action.
§ 70-252 ABINGDON CODE § 70-254
70:32
Chapter 74
UTILITIES
§ 70-254 UTILITIES § 70-254
74:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 74-1. through § 74-25. (Reserved)
§ 74-1 UTILITIES § 74-1
74:3

ARTICLE II
Sewers And Sewage Disposal
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 74-26. Abbreviations. [Ord. of 2-7-201117]
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BMR — Baseline monitoring report.
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand.
C.F.R. — The Code of Federal Regulations.
CIU — Categorical industrial user.
COD — Chemical oxygen demand.
EPA — The Environmental Protection Agency.
gpd — Gallons per day.
IU — Industrial user.
l — Liter.
mg — Milligrams.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter.
NPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works.
RCRA — Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
SIC — The Standard Industrial Classification.
SIU — Significant industrial user.
SNC — Significant non-compliance.
SWDA — The Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.
TRC — Technical Review Criteria.
TSS — Total suspended solids.
U.S.C. — The United States Code.
VPDES — Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
§ 74-27. Definitions. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning:
17. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. II, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from
an ordinance adopted 2-5-1996.
§ 74-26 UTILITIES § 74-27
74:5
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Department of Environmental Quality of the
Commonwealth of Virginia.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER —
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 74-91 and Section 74-92 [40 CFR
403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures,
and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal,
or drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND — The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five
days at 20° C. expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter
(mg/l)).
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of
the building and conveys it to the building sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user
to the POTW.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — The National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or pretreatment standard.
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation
in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation;
a.
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation
facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales
or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second quarter 1980 dollars),
if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the
manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
b.
(1)
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
(2)
If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
the activities of the government facility, or his designee.
The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) above may designate
another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the
authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company and the written
authorization is submitted to the Town.
(3)
§ 74-27 ABINGDON CODE § 74-27
74:6
COLLECTION SYSTEM SUPERINTENDENT — The person responsible for
overseeing the maintenance and operation of the Town's collection system.
COLOR — The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption,
relative to distilled water. 100% transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer which conveys both sewage and stormwater or
other drainage.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5
),
suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants
identified in the Town's treatment facility VPDES permit, or Town's collection
system, where the treatment facility is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact,
does treat such pollutants to the degree required by the treatment facility's VPDES
permit.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of
either flow or time.
CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which comes in direct
contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished
product.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Town.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DEQ — The Department of Environmental Quality of the Commonwealth of
Virginia.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the State of Virginia.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS or DIRECTOR — The director of public works
of the Town or the official performing the duties of director of public works or his
authorized representative.
DIRECTOR OF WASTEWATER OPERATIONS or DIRECTOR — The director
of wastewater operations of the Town or the official performing the duties of
director of wastewater operation or a duly authorized representative.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE SUPERVISOR — The person designated by
the Town to oversee the implementation of the industrial pretreatment program and
who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities including, but not limited
to, issuing permits, conducting inspections, determining compliance, and enforcing
this article. The term also means a duly authorized representative of the facility
manager.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY — The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a
designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or operation
of which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is
§ 74-27 UTILITIES § 74-27
74:7
thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
FACILITY MANAGER — The person designated by the Town to supervise the
operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities
by this chapter, or a duly authorized representative.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
GREASE — A material composed primarily of fats, oils and grease (FOG) from
animal or vegetable sources.
GREASE TRAP or INTERCEPTOR — A passive grease control device identified
as a large tank, usually 1,000 gallons or more capacity with various chambers and
plumbing components that is installed on the exterior of the FSE. The term can
also mean a smaller device usually 35 gallons per minute (gpm) that is used for
installation inside an FSE. Both tanks require periodic maintenance for effective
operation.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, grease traps or interceptors, and
vacuum-pump tank trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — All pollutants other than compatible
pollutants as defined in this section.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic
pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the
stream).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge, or a nondomestic
discharge to a POTW.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The liquid waste from industrial or commercial
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT — The
maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any
time, determined from the analysis of any discreet or composited sample collected,
independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge
or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore,
is a cause of a violation of the POTW's VPDES Permit or of the prevention of
the biosolids use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/
regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or
local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including
title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air
§ 74-27 ABINGDON CODE § 74-27
74:8
Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical
wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act
(33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users and which
appears in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 405 through 471.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface water or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may
be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the
Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at
which no other source is located;
a.
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process
or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or
b.
The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an
existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new
facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source shall be considered.
c.
(1)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a
modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new
building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsections
(1)b, or (1)c of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing
process of production equipment.
(2)
Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced
if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction
program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment;
or
1.
a.
(3)
§ 74-27 UTILITIES § 74-27
74:9
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which does not
come in direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product,
or finished product.
NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Normal sewage in which the concentration
of suspended materials and five-day 20° C. BOD does not exceed 250 parts per
million and 250 parts per million, respectively.
PASS THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the Town's VPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, Joint Stock Company, trust, estate, governmental entity
or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This
definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical
waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste,
and certain characteristics of wastewater such as pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity,
color, BOD, COD, toxicity, odor, etc.
POLLUTION — The manmade and man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to
a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such
pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except
by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or
removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment.
2.
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities
or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this subsection.
b.
§ 74-27 ABINGDON CODE § 74-27
74:10
PRETREATMENT EQUIPMENT — Refers to grease, oil, and sand interceptors
or traps for food service establishments, oil and water separators for automotive
facilities, silver recovery systems for photo-processing and dental facilities and
other equipment required for installation as determined by the environmental
compliance supervisor or authorized representative.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard
imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibitive discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR STANDARDS — Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear
in Section 74-92 of this chapter.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER or SEWER MAIN — A common sewer directly controlled by
public authority.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works as
defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned by the Town.
This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment
plant, but does not include pipe, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a
facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, "POTW" shall also
include any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW from persons outside
the Town who are, by contract or agreement with the Town, users of the Town's
POTW.
RESIDENTIAL USER (CLASS I) — All premises used only for human residency
and which are connected to the treatment works.
SAMPLING MANHOLE — A special manhole that will allow sampling of a waste
stream without interference or mixing of other waste streams.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and excludes stormwater,
surface water and groundwater.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SERVICE AREA — The Abingdon Service Area as delineated on the Abingdon
and Environs Wastewater Service Areas Map generally encompasses the current
corporate limits of the Town of Abingdon, the service area of the Wolf Creek Water
Reclamation Facility, the "201 Service Area" as more particularly described on a
plat bearing that title on file in the office of the Town Clerk, the Exit 22 service
area, and the area referred to as the Wilson Subdivision.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.).
§ 74-27 UTILITIES § 74-27
74:11
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER LATERAL — That section of the sanitary sewer extending from the
public sewer or sewer main to the line of the street easement in which such sewer
is located. If there is no specified easement width, the lateral shall be that section
extending 10 feet along the lateral from the public sewer.
SEWERAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — A network of wastewater collection
and conveyance facilities, including, but not limited to, intercepting sewers, outfall
sewers, sewage collection systems and pumping stations.
SIC CODE — The standard industrial classification code, a numbering system used
to identify various types of industries.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — An industrial user's violations which meet
one or more of the following criteria:
(1) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
A user that discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater
to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown
wastewater);
(2)
A user that contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW;
(3)
A user that has significant impact, either singularly or in combination with
other significant discharges, on the treatment works or the quality of its
effluent;
(4)
A user that is designated as such by the Town on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsections (2) through (5)
hereof has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation
or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town may at any
time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and
in accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R. 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user
should not be considered a significant industrial user.
(5)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which
66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period
exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for
the same pollutant parameter;
(1)
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33% or
§ 74-27 ABINGDON CODE § 74-27
74:12
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twenty-fourhour concentration of flow during normal operation.
SLUG LOAD — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause
a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 74-92 of this chapter
or any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an
accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER — A sewer which conveys stormwater and
surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling or process water.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of a natural
precipitation and resulting therefore including snowmelt.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of,
or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by
laboratory filtering.
TOWN — The Town of Abingdon.
TOWN MANAGER or MANAGER — The administrative and executive head of
the Town or his/her authorized representative.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the environmental protection
more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a
six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily average maximum
limit or the average limit times the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS,
fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
Any other discharge violation that the control authority determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human
health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise
of its emergency authority under paragraph (f)(1)(vi)(B) of this section [40
C.F.R. 403.8] to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule
milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order; for
starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such
as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic selfmonitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violation or group of violations which the control authority
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment programs.
(8)
§ 74-27 UTILITIES § 74-27
74:13
§ 74-28. Administration. [Ord. of 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 2020.03.02.D, 3-2-2020]
agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts.
USEPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the Town's POTW.
VDEQ — The Virginia Department of Environmental Quality.
VPDES — The Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program,
as administered by the commonwealth.
WASTE PHARMACEUTICALS AND MEDICATIONS — Expired, unwanted,
or unusable over-the counter and prescription antibiotics, hormones, steroids,
chemotherapy agents, pain killers, decongestants, and related pharmaceutical
products for human or animal application.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present,
whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the
POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — As set forth in Division 4 of this
article.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating wastewater.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems
and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border
upon the state or any portion thereof.
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, the Town Manager shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Town Manager may
delegate any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Town Manager to other
Town personnel.
(b) To protect the POTW, the Town Manager or designee may prepare and implement
discharge policy documents that regulate the discharge of specific wastes deemed
appropriate by the Town Manager or designee. These policy documents must be
approved by Town Council and will become an enforceable component of this
article.
(c) The Town may enter into contracts or agreements with other jurisdictions to
provide wastewater conveyance and treatment services. These contracts or
agreements shall require the jurisdiction to comply with all provisions of this
chapter, at a minimum, and shall specify the party responsible for the administration
of the program within that jurisdiction.
§ 74-27 ABINGDON CODE § 74-29
74:14
§ 74-29. Depositing of excrement, garbage or objectionable wastes. [Ord. of
2-7-2011; Ord. No. 2020.03.02.D, 3-2-2020]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Town, or in any area
under the jurisdiction of the Town, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
§ 74-30. Discharges into natural outlets. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town or in any area
under the jurisdiction of the Town any sewage or other polluted water, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this
article.
§ 74-31. Sewage disposal facilities. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
§ 74-32. Installation and connection of toilet facilities. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(a) The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the service area and
abutting any street, alley, right-of-way or easement in which there is located, now
or subsequent to the adoption of this section, a public sanitary sewer of the Town
shall install suitable toilet facilities therein at his expense and connect such facilities
directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article
within 180 days after the date of official notice to do so, except that:
(1) Facilities with functioning septic tanks will not be required to connect to the
public sewer. Such persons may be required to pay a sewer availability fee.
(2) At such time an existing septic system becomes inadequate or fails, the user
will be required to connect to the Town's sewer system if access to the Town's
sewer system is available as defined in this article.
(3) Sewer use fees or sewer availability fees shall not be charged for vacant lots
until the earliest of the following dates:
a. The date use of the sewer begins.
b. The date that actual connection to the sewer is made.
c. The effective date of the certification of occupancy for a new house or
other served facility.
(b) In any case where the apparent ground, street, sewer and floor elevations are such
as to cause the property owner to seek relief from mandatory connection to the
sewer and/or connection fees by claim that the premises cannot be served by gravity
flow to the appropriate sewer main, the following rule shall govern: If both a
kitchen and bath cannot be served by gravity, the mandatory sewer connection will
§ 74-29 UTILITIES § 74-32
74:15
§ 74-33. Disturbing, interfering with sewage works. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Unless specifically authorized by the Town, no person shall operate, disturb, connect,
disconnect or otherwise interfere with any pipe, manhole or other part of the sewage
works of the Town, or remove or interfere with any light or barricade or other device
maintained or operated in the construction, maintenance or repair of any part of such
sewer system.
§ 74-34. Application for service. [Ord. of 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 2020.03.02.D,
3-2-2020]
Application for sewer service shall be made to the Town on such form as the Town may
furnish. The connection application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Town Manager or
designee. The Town Manager or designee may refuse any application, if in the sole
discretion of the Town Manager or designee, there is insufficient capacity in the sewage
works to allow a new connection.
§ 74-35. Costs of installations. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
be waived.
(a) The Town shall extend sewer service from an existing line to a point at or near the
edge or border of property to be served, located nearest to the line to be extended,
for the standard sewer connection fee for the type of service rendered or actual cost
of making the sewer connection whichever is greater.
(b) In instances where the actual cost is greater than the standard connection fee, the
customer requesting such extension shall bear that portion of the cost of extending
such service which exceeds the aforementioned connection fee.
(c) As a prerequisite to the commencement of such extension, any customer requesting
such extension may be required by the Town to place on deposit with the Town
sufficient surety to assure the customer's payment of the costs referred to in
Subsection (b) of this section. The amount of such surety required may equal 25%
of the estimated cost of constructing extensions for individual, single-family
residential property. The amount of such surety required may equal up to 100% of
the estimated cost of constructing extensions for multiple units of residences or
other commercial or industrial property. Such estimated costs shall include all labor
and material required, including, but not limited to, pipe, fittings, manholes,
cleanouts, reconstruction or upgrading of existing sewer mains to which the
proposed extension will be connected, acquisition of necessary easements, and the
Town's appropriate charges for supervision, engineering, insurance, equipment,
legal costs and accounting.
(d) Up to 75% of the requesting customer's share of such extensions to serve individual
single-family residences may be paid by deferred installments which may be
arranged with terms and conditions to be determined by the Town Manager. Such
installment payments shall be designed to recover the Town's cost of financing such
extension.
§ 74-32 ABINGDON CODE § 74-35
74:16
§ 74-36. Measurements, tests and analyses. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with 40 C.F.R.
Part 136 and shall be determined at the sampling manhole provided or upon suitable
samples taken at such sampling manhole. In the event that no special manhole exists,
the sampling manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. The facility
(e) To the extent that funds for such purpose are available from sources referred to in
Subsection (f) of this section, customers who have previously borne the cost of such
extensions shall be partially reimbursed by the Town for such expenses on an
equitable prorated basis as other customers within a five-year period who
subsequently tap directly onto such extended lines. In no event shall any extending
customers be reimbursed more than their share of the actual cost for such extension,
nor shall any reimbursement be made for customers tapping onto and beginning use
of such extended sewer service lines after the expiration of 10 years from the date
of completion of the extension to the first customer to request the extension
involved.
(f) The Town shall collect an appropriate contribution from any customer who
subsequently connects to such an extended line within a five-year period, the cost
of any portion of which extension has previously been borne by one or more other
customers. Such contribution shall be in addition to ordinary tapping fees, and shall
be a condition prerequisite to a subsequent customer tapping into such an extended
line. Funds from such contributions so collected shall be used as the funds from
which earlier extending customers shall be reimbursed, as set forth in Subsection
(e) of this section. The amount of such contribution to be required shall be
determined by the Town Manager as a fair share of the total cost of the extension to
be tapped, considering the proportion of the total length and cost of the extension
attributable to the extension up to the intervening property from which the proposed
connection is to be made. In determining the amount of such contribution, the sewer
connection fee shall be subtracted from what was determined to be the fair share of
such connection cost of the total extension.
(g) For all purposes pertaining to this section, extension to a residential subdivision,
apartment complex or condominium complex shall be deemed to be extension to a
single property, and subsequent extensions or connections within such subdivision
or complex shall not be governed by any part of this section.
(h) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any extensions of sewer lines
required by the order of any duly constituted annexation court of competent
jurisdiction.
(i) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the Town from
extending sewer service lines at its own expense for the purpose of encouraging
and/or servicing commercial or industrial development within the Town or from
providing service to existing single-family residential properties which have failed
or failing septic systems, or for protecting the health and safety of the citizens of
the Town or for any other reasonable governmental purpose, the Town hereby
expressly reserving unto itself such right.
§ 74-35 UTILITIES § 74-36
74:17
manager may require any user to install a sampling manhole at the user's expense in
order to collect representative samples from the user's discharge. The location of the
manhole will be determined on a case-by-case basis and must be approved by the facility
manager. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the
effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards
to life, limb and property.
§ 74-37. Special treatment agreements. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial concern whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Town for
treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial concern.
§ 74-38. through § 74-45. (Reserved)
§ 74-36 ABINGDON CODE § 74-38
74:18
DIVISION 2
Private Sewage Disposal
§ 74-46. Compliance with article. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 74-49, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with
the provisions of this article.
§ 74-47. Permit — required. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner
shall obtain a written permit for such system from the state health department.
§ 74-48. Same — when effective; inspection of system. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the
installation is completed to the satisfaction of the state health department.
Representatives of the department shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the state health
department when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered.
§ 74-49. Specifications. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall
comply with all requirements of the state health department. No septic tank shall be
permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
§ 74-50. Connection to public sewer. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private
sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 74-49, a direct connection shall be made
to the public sewer within 180 days after the date of official notice to do so.
§ 74-51. Operation. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary
manner at all times and at no expense to the Town.
§ 74-52. Conflict with state regulations. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any
requirements that may be imposed by the state health department.
§ 74-53. Privately owned sewer systems prohibited. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
After the effective date of this article, all subsequent sewage collection systems within
the service area shall be publicly owned and maintained. Pump stations shall be designed
with adequate capacity and be located so as to serve major sewer basins as designated
by the Town. No private sewage collection system pump station shall be connected to
§ 74-46 UTILITIES § 74-53
74:19
the Town's POTW except for abutting individual single family residential connections
or individual single business commercial connections.
§ 74-54. through § 74-65. (Reserved)
§ 74-53 ABINGDON CODE § 74-54
74:20
DIVISION 3
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 74-66. Use of old sewers and laterals. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Old building sewers and laterals may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found on examination and test by the collection system superintendent to
meet all requirements of this article.
§ 74-67. Specifications and methods of installations. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer and the
methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joining, testing and backfilling
the trench shall conform to the requirements of the plumbing code and other applicable
regulations and standards of the Town.
§ 74-68. Elevation. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation
below the lowest floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be
lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
§ 74-69. Surface runoff and groundwater. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
No person shall make connection of roof drains, foundation drains, areaway drains or
other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain
which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 74-70. Notice of readiness for inspection; supervision of connection. [Ord. of
2-7-2011]
The applicant for the building sewer connection shall notify the collection system
superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
sewer lateral. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the collection
system superintendent or his/her representative.
§ 74-71. through § 74-80. (Reserved)
§ 74-66 UTILITIES § 74-71
74:21

DIVISION 4
Wastewater Discharge
Subdivision I: In General
§ 74-81. Purpose and policy. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
§ 74-82. Administration. [Ord. of 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 2020.03.02.E, 3-2-2020]
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Town Manager shall administer, implement,
and enforce the provisions of this division. The Town Manager may delegate any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Town Manager to other Town personnel.
(a) This division sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors
into the wastewater collection and/or treatment systems owned or operated by or
for the Town, and enables the Town to comply with all applicable state and federal
laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the general pretreatment
regulations (40 C.F.R. 403) and Va. Permit Regulation Part VII issued and amended
from time to time by the commonwealth.
(b) The objectives of this regulation are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Town's wastewater systems
which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the
resulting sludge;
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Town's wastewater systems
which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters
or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) Ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained
at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable
statutes and regulations;
(4) Promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the
POTW;
(5) Enable the Town to comply with its VPDES permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW
is subject;
(6) Protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge
in the course of their employment and to protect the general public;
(7) Provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance, and improvement of the POTW.
(c) This division shall apply to the Town and to persons outside the Town, including
Washington County, who are, by contract or agreement with the Town, users of the
Town's sewage collection systems and/or sewage treatment facilities.
§ 74-81 UTILITIES § 74-83
74:23
§ 74-83. through § 74-90. (Reserved)
Subdivision II: Regulations
§ 74-91. General discharge prohibitions. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which will cause pass through or interfere with the operation or performance
of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether
or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
§ 74-92. Specific prohibitions. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(a) A user may not discharge the following substances to any POTW owned and/or
operated by the Town:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but
not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° F.
or 60° C. using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. 262.
(2) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer
or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities,
such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half
inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair,
hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent
lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, dough, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt
residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or
glass grinding or polishing wastes.
(3) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or wastewater having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW.
(4) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly
or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any
wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, cause
the POTW's effluent to fail a toxicity test therefore create a toxic effect in the
receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a
categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be
limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Act.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or
hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their
maintenance and repair.
(6) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of
the POTW, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process where the
POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a
§ 74-83 ABINGDON CODE § 74-92
74:24
substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge
use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean
Water Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used.
(7) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial
wastes.
(8) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its VPDES and/or state
disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards.
(9) Any waste producing excessive discoloration of wastewater or treatment plant
effluent.
(10) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in
the POTW treatment resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with
a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40° C. (104°
F.).
(11) Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released
at a flow and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants, will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a
slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants
that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal
operation.
(12) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the facility manager in a
wastewater discharge permit.
(13) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Town in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
(14) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public
nuisance.
(15) Any slug discharge of such high volume or strength to cause interference.
(16) Any water or wastewater discharges which contain substances that may:
a. Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the
sewers.
b. Overload skimming and grease handling equipment.
c. Pass to the receiving water without being effectively treated by the
normal wastewater treatment process due to the non-amenability of the
substance to bacterial action.
d. Deleteriously affect the wastewater treatment process due to excessive
quantities.
§ 74-92 UTILITIES § 74-92
74:25
(17) Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin
in amounts that will cause interference or pass through, but in no instance shall
exceed 100 mg/l for discharges to the POTW.
(18) Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater
than 200 mg/l for discharges to the POTW.
(19) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within
the POTW in quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
(20) Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points designated by the
POTW.
(21) Detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause
excessive foaming in the POTW.
(22) Any wastewater originating from truck and automobile washes where
placarded trucks, tankers or trailers carrying chemicals are washed.
(23) Any significant quantities of unpolluted water, such as rainwater, stormwater,
groundwater, street drainage, yard drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds,
or lawn sprays.
(24) Any significant quantities of single pass cooling water.
(25) Any excessive amounts of deionized water, distilled water, steam condensate,
heating and/or air conditioning condensate or cooling water, and/or discharges
from heat pumps.
(26) Any excessive quantity of blow-down or bleed water from cooling towers or
other evaporative coolers exceeding one-third of the makeup water.
(27) Any significant quantities of inorganic material.
(28) Any waste containing dissolved sulfides in amounts which would be
hazardous, cause damage to the sewerage system, or create a public nuisance.
(29) Any waste containing solids of such character and quantity that special and
unusual attention is required for their handling.
(30) Any significant quantity of total toxic organics (TTO) which exceeds 2.13 mg/
l, or in which the BTEX (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene)
concentration exceeds one mg/l.
(31) Any waste which would be a hazardous waste as defined under 40 C.F.R. 261
and VR 672-10-1, Part I.
(32) Any waste pharmaceuticals or medications, including expired or unused
human or animal treatment prescription or over-the-counter medications.
(b) Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be
processed in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. Bulk
storage areas shall be contained such that spillage or leakage cannot enter the
sanitary sewer system.
§ 74-92 ABINGDON CODE § 74-92
74:26
§ 74-93. Federal categorical pretreatment standards generally. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
405 through 471, are hereby incorporated.
§ 74-94. State requirements. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
State requirements and limitations on pretreatment discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this
division.
§ 74-95. Local limits. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(c) All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the
user's pretreatment facility before connecting to the POTW, or shall be plugged or
disconnected.
(a) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the
mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the facility manager may
impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 C.F.R.
403.6(c).
(b) When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms
of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the facility manager may convert the
limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per
day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations
applicable to individual industrial users in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2).
(c) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with
wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the facility manager shall impose
an alternative limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 C.F.R. 403.6(e).
(d) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user
can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R.
403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the
factors considered by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment
standard.
(e) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance
with 40 C.F.R. 403.15.
(a) The Town may apply local limits through issuance of industrial user permits or
general permits, as provided in subdivision III of this division. The Town may
apply local limits based on EPA categorical pretreatment standards, state water
quality standards or criteria, treatment plant process inhibitions, or sludge disposal
standards, as necessary to comply with the general prohibitions against pass
through, interference, and sludge contamination in 40 C.F.R. Part 403 and 9 VAC
25-31-10, Part VII. The local limits may be stricter than EPA categorical limits, if
determined necessary by the POTW.
(b) The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and
interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the
§ 74-92 UTILITIES § 74-95
74:27
§ 74-96. Town's right of revision. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The Town reserves the right to establish by regulation more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to
comply with the objectives presented in this division.
§ 74-97. Excessive discharge/dilution. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in anyway, attempt to dilute
a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the Town or state.
§ 74-98. through § 74-107. (Reserved)
following daily maximum limits.
0.68 mg/l arsenic
0.07 mg/l cadmium
1.73 mg/l chromium
0.31 mg/l hexavalent chromium
1.66 mg/l copper
0.21 mg/l cyanide
0.81 mg/l lead
0.0007 mg/l mercury
1.34 mg/l nickel
0.12 mg/l selenium
1.91 mg/l silver
27.9 mg/l total phenols
1.35 mg/l zinc
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the
POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless
indicated otherwise. The Town Manager may impose mass limitations in addition
to the concentration based limitations above.
(c) The facility manager may develop best management practices (BMPs), by
ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits, to
implement local limits and the requirements of Section 74-91 and Section 74-92.
(d) The discharge of wastewater containing BOD5, total suspended solids, ammonia,
chloride, and other constituents in excess of those found in normal wastewater must
be approved by the facility manager or other authorized representative, and may be
subject to surcharges.
§ 74-95 ABINGDON CODE § 74-108
74:28
§ 74-108. Pretreatment facilities. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this
article and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards,
local limits, and the prohibitions set out in Section 74-92 above within the time
limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the facility manager, whichever is more
stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and
maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing the pretreatment facilities
and operating procedures shall be submitted to the facility manager or environmental
compliance supervisor for review, and shall be acceptable to the facility manager or
environmental compliance supervisor before construction of the facilities. The review
of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable
to the Town under the provisions of this article.
§ 74-109. Additional pretreatment measures. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(a) Whenever deemed necessary, the facility manager may require users to restrict their
discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged
only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate
sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as
may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the industrial user's
compliance with the requirements of this article.
(b) The facility manager may require any person discharging into the POTW to install
and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flowcontrol facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may
be issued solely for flow equalization.
(c) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
facility manager or authorized representative, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users.
(1) All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the facility
manager or authorized representative and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected,
cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at his expense.
(2) The facility manager or authorized representative shall require any restaurant,
cafe, fast food chain, cafeteria, or other business or individual discharging
grease or other kitchen waste into the sewer system of the Town which would
substantially interfere with or be incompatible with the waste treatment works
or to install a grease trap in its sewer lines, of a type and size to be prescribed
by the facility manager or authorized representative.
(3) In the issuance of building permits on newly constructed buildings, the facility
manager or authorized representative shall require restaurants, cafes, fast food
chains, cafeterias, businesses or individuals who will be discharging grease or
other kitchen waste to install adequate grease traps of a type and size to be
prescribed by the facility manager, or authorized representative.
§ 74-108 UTILITIES § 74-109
74:29
§ 74-110. Accidental discharges/slug control plans. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(4) Any person who refuses to install such adequate grease trap after being
notified by the Town's facility manager or authorized representative shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and each day's violation shall be punished as a Class
I misdemeanor.
(d) Any establishment (dental offices, medical offices, radiology offices, veterinary
clinics, and photo-processing and printing businesses, etc.) that produce and
discharge waste containing silver shall be required to install pretreatment
equipment to remove silver to meet local limits. An alternative to pretreating silver
bearing waste is to store on-site for subsequent off-site disposal.
(e) Any establishment (garages, shops, car and truck washes, etc.) that may discharge
hydrocarbons and other petroleum products into the Town's sewer systems shall be
required to install oil/water separators as specified by the facility manager or
authorized representative.
(f) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to
install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(g) Other new and existing business establishments with the potential to discharge
pollutants of a nature or concentration that may impact the POTW, as determined
by the Town, may be required to install the appropriate pretreatment facilities and
abide by all pretreatment standards and requirements.
(a) Each user shall provide protection from any accidental or slug discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to
prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the owner's or users' own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be approved by
the Town before construction of the facility. No user who commences contribution
to the POTW after the effective date of this division shall be permitted to introduce
pollutants into the system until accidental discharge/slug control procedures have
been approved by the Town. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the
user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. In the case of
an accidental or slug discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone and notifies the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective
actions.
(b) The Town may require any industrial user to develop and implement an accidental
discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two years the Town shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs such a plan. Any industrial user
required to develop and implement an accidental discharge/control slug plan shall
submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges.
(2) Description of stored chemicals.
§ 74-109 ABINGDON CODE § 74-110
74:30
§ 74-111. Hauled wastewater. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug
discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would
violate any of the prohibited discharges in Section 74-92 of this division.
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge.
Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of
storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(c) Within 10 days following an accidental or slug discharge, the user shall submit to
the Town a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any
fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other
applicable law.
(d) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent
place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge.
Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a
dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(a) Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated
by the facility manager, and at such times as are established by the facility manager.
Such waste shall not violate any requirements established by the Town. The facility
manager may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge
permits.
(b) Grease trap waste from commercial food establishments discharging wastewater to
the Town sewer system may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the facility manager, and at such times as are established by the
facility manager. Such waste shall not violate any requirements and regulations
established by the POTW and the Town. The facility manager may require waste
haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
(c) The facility manager shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater
discharge permits. The facility manager may require generators of hauled industrial
waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The facility manager may also
prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial
waste is subject to all other requirements of this division.
(d) Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the
facility manager. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the facility
manager. The facility manager or his authorized agent may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The facility manager
§ 74-110 UTILITIES § 74-111
74:31
§ 74-112. Vandalism. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or
other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be
subject to the sanctions set out in sections 74-191 through 74-197 and 74-203 through
74-207 of this division.
§ 74-113. through § 74-122. (Reserved)
Subdivision III: Administration
§ 74-123. Wastewater analysis. [Ord. of 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 2020.03.02.E,
3-2-2020]
When required by the Town Manager or designee, a user must submit information on the
nature and characteristics of its wastewater by completing a wastewater survey within
60 days of the request. The Town Manager or designee is authorized to prepare a form
for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update this information.
Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the
user and shall be considered a violation of this article.
§ 74-124. Permit — requirement. [Ord. of 2-7-2011; Ord. No. 2020.03.02.E,
3-2-2020]
may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior
to discharge.
(e) Industrial waste haulers, septic waste haulers, and grease waste haulers must
provide an approved hauling manifest for every load. The manifests shall be
provided by the Town for each waste hauler to use.
(f) The Town has the right to inspect, investigate, and monitor the waste haulers, the
loads that are brought to the POTW, and the customers that the waste haulers
service.
(a) Individual wastewater discharge permit requirement:
(1) No user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a
wastewater discharge permit from the Town Manager or designee, except that
a user that has filed a timely application pursuant to Section 74-125 of this
division may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
(2) The Town Manager or designee may require other users to obtain wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purpose of this division.
(3) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit
shall be deemed a violation of this division and subjects the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 74-191 through 74-197
and 74-203 through 74-207 of this division. Obtaining a wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal
and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
§ 74-111 ABINGDON CODE § 74-124
74:32
§ 74-125. Permitting existing connections. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit or general permit who was
discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this division and
who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 60 days after official
notification by the Town, apply to the facility manager for a wastewater discharge permit
or general permit in accordance with Section 74-128 of this division, and shall not cause
or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 120 days of the notification date,
requirements of federal, state, and local law.
(b) General permits requirement:
(1) At the discretion of the Town Manager, the Town Manager or designee may
use general permits to control discharges to the POTW if the following
conditions are met. All facilities to be covered by a general permit must:
a. Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations;
b. Discharge the same types of wastes;
c. Require the same effluent limitations;
d. Require the same or similar monitoring; and
e. In the opinion of the Town Manager or designee, are more appropriately
controlled under a general permit than under individual wastewater
discharge permits.
(2) To be covered by the general permit, the SIU or discharger must file a written
request for coverage that identifies its contact information, production
processes, the types of wastes generated, the location for monitoring all wastes
covered by the general permit, any requests in accordance with Section
74-161(b) for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected
to be present in the discharge, and any other information the Town Manager
or designee deems appropriate. A monitoring waiver for a pollutant neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge is not effective in the
general permit until after the Town Manager has provided written notice to the
SIU or discharger that such a waiver request has been granted in accordance
with Section 74-161(b).
(3) The Town Manager or designee will retain a copy of the general permit,
documentation to support the his or her determination that a specific SIU or
discharger meets the criteria in Section 74- 124(b.1) and applicable state
regulations, and a copy of the user's written request for coverage for three
years after the expiration of the general permit.
(4) The Town Manager or designee may not control an SIU or discharger through
a general permit where the facility is subject to production-based categorical
pretreatment standards or categorical pretreatment standards expressed as
mass of pollutant discharged per day or for IUs whose limits are based on the
combined waste stream formula [§ 74-93(c)] or net/gross calculations
[§ 74-93(e)].
§ 74-124 UTILITIES § 74-125
74:33
except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the facility manager.
§ 74-126. Permitting new connections. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit or general permit who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging industrial waste into the POTW must
obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior or general permit to the beginning or
recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit or
general permit, in accordance with Section 74-128 of this division, must be filed at least
120 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
§ 74-127. Permitting extra-jurisdictional industrial users. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
§ 74-128. Application contents. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(a) Any existing significant industrial user located beyond the Town corporate limits
shall submit a wastewater discharge permit application, in accordance with Section
74-128 below, within 60 days of the effective date of this division. New significant
industrial users located beyond the Town's corporate limits shall submit such
applications to the Town 120 days prior to any proposed discharge into the POTW.
(b) Alternately, the Town may enter into an agreement with the neighboring
jurisdiction in which the significant industrial user is located to provide for the
implementation and enforcement of pretreatment program requirements against
such industrial user.
(a) Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall
complete and file with the Town an application in the form prescribed by the Town
and accompanied by a fee as set by the Town. Existing users shall apply for a
wastewater discharge permit or general permit within 90 days after the effective
date of this division and proposed new users shall apply at least 120 days prior to
connecting to or contributing to the POTW. The facility manager may require all
users to submit as part of an application the following information:
(1) All information required by Section 74-158(b) of this division;
(2) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises,
including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility
which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;
(3) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual
hours of operation of the pretreatment plant;
(4) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of
production;
(5) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(6) The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show
all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size,
location and elevation and all points of discharge;
(7) Time and duration of discharges;
§ 74-125 ABINGDON CODE § 74-128
74:34
§ 74-129. Application signatories and certification. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
All wastewater discharge permit applications, general permit applications, and user
reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the
following statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared
under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that
qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on
my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best
of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations."
§ 74-130. Decisions. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The facility manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge
permit application, the facility manager will determine whether or not to issue a
wastewater discharge permit or a general permit. The facility manager may deny, with
just cause, any application for a wastewater discharge permit or general permit.
§ 74-131. Treatability study. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The facility manager may require that a treatability study be performed to determine if
the waste to be discharged is treatable by the POTW. Establishing a protocol for the
study is the responsibility of the user and must be approved by the facility manager
before commencing. The cost of the study shall be borne by the user. Acceptance of
waste as a result of the study does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply
with other requirements of this division and all local, state, and federal pretreatment
standards.
(8) Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved monitoring
waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the
discharge based on Section 74-161(b) [40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)].
(9) Any request to be covered by a general permit based on Section 74-124(b).
(10) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Town to evaluate
the wastewater discharge permit application and;
(11) All applicable permit fees as determined by the Town.
(b) The facility manager will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the
Town may issue a wastewater contribution permit or general permit subject to the
terms and conditions provided herein. These preceding provisions apply to any
building additions and/or renovations.
(c) Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to
the user for revisions.
§ 74-128 UTILITIES § 74-132
74:35
§ 74-132. through § 74-139. (Reserved)
§ 74-140. Permit issuance — duration. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
A wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall be issued for a specified period,
not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A permit may be issued
for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall
apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's
existing permit, except, in such cases where the permit has been issued for a period of
one year or less, the user shall apply for a permit reissuance a minimum of 60 days prior
to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit
may be subject to modification by the Town during the term of the permit as limitations
or requirements as identified in this division are modified or other just cause exists. The
user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to
the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include
a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
§ 74-141. Contents of permit. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
A wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall include such conditions as are
deemed reasonably necessary by the facility manager to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plants effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect
against damage to the POTW.
(a) Wastewater discharge permits and general permits must contain the following
conditions:
(1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no
event shall exceed five years.
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without
prior notification to and approval from the Town, in accordance with Section
74-144 of this division, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit.
(3) Effluent limits, including best management practices, applicable to the user
based on applicable standards in federal, state, and local law.
(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping
requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants
to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type
based on federal, state, and local law.
(5) Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
(6) The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge or a waiver for decreased
frequency of monitoring in accordance with Section 74-161(b).
§ 74-132 ABINGDON CODE § 74-141
74:36
(7) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the facility manager (section
74-161(b)) must be included as a condition in the user's permit.
(8) A statement that indicates the application and reapplication requirements as
described in Section 74-128 and Section 74-146 of this article.
(9) A statement that indicates that the facility manager may modify a permit with
good cause as described in Section 74-143.
(10) A statement that indicates that the Town may revoke or terminate a permit
with good cause including, but not limited to, the reason indicated in Section
74-145 and Section 74-197.
(11) A statement that indicates that the permittee must adhere to proper operation
and maintenance standards as described in Section 74-108.
(12) A statement that indicates that the facility manager may also immediately
suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that
threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or
may present, an endangerment to the environment as described in Section
74-196.
(13) A statement that indicates that all sampling reports submitted to the POTW
must include a chain-of-custody document.
(b) Wastewater discharge permits or general permits may contain the following:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge,
and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution
control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment
works;
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans
or other special conditions including management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the
amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of
the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling
facilities and equipment;
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not
relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable
federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become
effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit;
(8) Requirements for notification of slug discharges; and
§ 74-141 UTILITIES § 74-141
74:37
§ 74-142. Appeals. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The facility manager shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater
discharge permit or general permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the
facility manager to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit or general
permit within 30 days of its issuance.
§ 74-143. Modification of permit. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(9) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the facility manager to ensure
compliance with this division, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
(a) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the
administrative appeal.
(b) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit or
general permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.
(c) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall not
be stayed pending the appeal.
(d) If the facility manager fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall
be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit
or a general permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit or a general permit,
or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit or a general permit, shall be
considered final administrative action for the purpose of judicial review.
(e) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater
discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the circuit court of
the county within 30 days.
(a) The facility manager may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation,
processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater
discharge permit issuance;
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the
Town's POTW, Town personnel, or the receiving waters;
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
§ 74-141 ABINGDON CODE § 74-143
74:38
§ 74-144. Transfer of permit. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
§ 74-145. Revocation of permit. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(7) Revisions of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit;
(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or
operator.
(b) The facility manager may modify a general permit for good cause, including, but
not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
(2) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(3) To correct typographical or other errors in the individual wastewater discharge
permit; or
(4) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or
operator where requested in accordance with Section 74-144.
(c) The filing of a request by a permittee for a wastewater discharge permit
modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition.
(a) Wastewater discharge permits or coverage under general permits may be
transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days'
advance notice to the facility manager and the facility manager approves the
wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the facility manager must
include a written certification by the new owner or operator which:
(1) States that the new owner or operator has no immediate intent to change the
facility's operations and processes;
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater
discharge permit.
(b) Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge
permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
(a) The facility manager may revoke a wastewater discharge permit or coverage under
a general permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the facility manager of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge;
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the facility manager of changed
§ 74-143 UTILITIES § 74-145
74:39
§ 74-146. Reissuance of permit. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater
discharge permit or general permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application, in accordance with Section 74-128 of this division. The user shall apply for
permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
permit, except, in such cases where the permit has been issued for a period of one year
or less, the user shall apply for a permit reissuance a minimum of 60 days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing permit.
§ 74-147. Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
condition(s) pursuant to Section 74-162 of this division;
(3) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application;
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(6) Refusing to allow the facility manager timely access to the facility premises
and records;
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit
application;
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility; or
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the
wastewater discharge permit or this division.
(b) Wastewater discharge permits or coverage under general permits shall be voidable
upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater
discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new
wastewater discharge permit to that user.
(a) If users located outside the Town limits, but in the county, contribute wastewater to
the Town's POTW, the Town Manager shall enter into an intergovernmental
agreement with the county.
(b) Prior to entering into an agreement required by Subsection (a) above, the director
shall request the following information from the county:
(1) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the
POTW by the county;
§ 74-145 ABINGDON CODE § 74-147
74:40
§ 74-148. through § 74-157. (Reserved)
§ 74-158. Baseline monitoring reports. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(2) An inventory of all users located within the county that are discharging to the
POTW; and
(3) Such information as the Town may deem necessary.
(c) An intergovernmental agreement, as required by Subsection (a) above, shall contain
the following conditions:
(1) A requirement for the county to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least
as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as
applicable local limits adopted by the Town. The requirements shall specify
that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes
made to the Town's ordinance or local limits;
(2) A requirement for the county to submit a revised user inventory on at least an
annual basis;
(3) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities,
including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and
enforcement, will be conducted by the county; which of these activities will be
conducted by the Town; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly
by the county and the Town;
(4) A requirement for the county to provide the Town with access to all
information that the county obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
(5) Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the county's wastewater at the
point where it discharges to the POTW;
(6) Requirements for monitoring the county's discharge;
(7) A provision ensuring the Town access to facilities of users located within the
county's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and
other duties deemed necessary by the Town; and
(8) A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the
intergovernmental agreement.
(a) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment
standard, or the final administrative decision on a categorical determination under
40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently
discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the facility
manager a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b) below. At
least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources
that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall submit to the facility manager a report which contains
the information listed in paragraph (b) below. A new source shall also be required
to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and
§ 74-147 UTILITIES § 74-158
74:41
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(b) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
(1) Identifying information. The name and address of the facility including the
name of the operator and owner.
(2) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or
for the facility.
(3) Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of
production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried
out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram
which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated process.
(4) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from the regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(5) Measurement of pollutants.
a. The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated
process.
b. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
facility manager of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample
shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 74-167
of this division.
c. Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in
Section 74-168 of this division.
(6) Certification. A statement reviewed by the authorized representative and
certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(7) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required
to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user
will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in Section 74-159
of this division.
(8) Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with Section 74-108 of this division.
§ 74-158 ABINGDON CODE § 74-159
74:42
§ 74-159. Compliance schedule progress report. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by Section 74-158(b)(7)
of this division:
§ 74-160. Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
[Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical
pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of
the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment
standards and requirements shall submit to the facility manager a report containing the
information described in Section 74-158(b)(4) through (6) of this division. For users
subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the
procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or
other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during
the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Section 74-129 of this division.
§ 74-161. Periodic compliance reports. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(a) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
(b) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
(c) The user shall submit a progress report to the facility manager no later than 14 days
following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance, including, as
a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason
for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the
established schedule; and
(d) In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress to the facility
manager.
(a) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the facility
manager but in no case less than twice per year in June and December, submit a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 74-129 of this division.
(b) The facility manager may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical
pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and
§ 74-159 UTILITIES § 74-161
74:43
other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present
in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and
without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user. This
authorization is subject to the following conditions:
(1) The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to be present
solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided that the
sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and
otherwise includes no process wastewater.
(2) The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of
the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer than five
years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver
can be granted for each subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit.
See Section 74-128(a)(8).
(3) In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user
must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process
wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative
of all wastewater from all processes.
(4) The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with
Section 74-27, and include the certification statement in Section 74-129 (40
CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii)).
(5) Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration that a
pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136
with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the
analysis.
(6) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Town Manager must be included as
a condition in the user's permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any
information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be
maintained by the Town Manager for three years after expiration of the waiver.
(7) Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's permit by
the Town, the industrial user must certify on each report with the statement in
Section 74-171, that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its
wastestream due to activities of the industrial user.
(8) In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be
present because of changes that occur in the user's operations, the user must
immediately: Comply with the monitoring requirements of Section 74-161(a),
or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the facility
manager, and notify the facility manager.
(9) This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements
established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as otherwise
specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
(10) The Town may reduce the requirement for periodic compliance reports [see
Section 74-161(a) (40 CFR 403.12(e)(1))] to a requirement to report no less
§ 74-161 ABINGDON CODE § 74-161
74:44
frequently than once a year, unless required more frequently in the
pretreatment standard or by the state, where the industrial user's total
categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following:
a. Five thousand gallons per day as measured by a continuous effluent flow
monitoring device unless the industrial user discharges in batches;
b. 0.5 pounds per day organic load;
c. 0.000135 pounds per day arsenic;
d. 0.0000141 pounds per day cadmium;
e. 0.000338 pounds per day chromium;
f. 0.0000609 pounds per day hexavalent chromium;
g. 0.000365 pounds per day copper;
h. 0.000044 pounds per day cyanide;
i. 0.000160 pounds per day lead;
j. 0.00000028 pounds per day mercury;
k. 0.000263 pounds per day nickel;
l. 0.0000276 pounds per day selenium;
m. 0.000369 pounds per day silver;
n. 0.0054 pounds per day total phenols; and
o. 0.000392 pounds per day zinc.
(c) Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have in the last two years
been in significant noncompliance, as defined in Section 74-185 of this article. In
addition, reduced reporting is not available to an industrial user with daily flow
rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that, in the
opinion of the Town, decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user
would result in data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the
reporting period.
(d) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater
monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean,
and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim
that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(e) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant
more frequently than required by the facility manager, using the procedures
prescribed in Section 74-167 of this division, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report.
(f) The Town may elect to sample and analyze in lieu of requiring the users to conduct
§ 74-161 UTILITIES § 74-161
74:45
§ 74-162. Report of changed conditions. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Each user must notify the facility manager of any planned significant changes to the
user's operations or system which might after the nature, quality, or volume of its
wastewater at least 120 days before the change.
§ 74-163. Reporting new or increased discharges. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
All industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any new or increased
discharge. The Town may deny or condition new or increased contributions of
pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where
such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and regulations or
where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its VPDES permit.
§ 74-164. Reports of potential problems. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
sampling and analysis. If this option is exercised, the user may be billed for the
service.
(a) The facility manager may require the user to submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a
wastewater discharge permit under Section 74-128 of this division.
(b) The facility manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section
74-130 of this division or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under
Section 74-143 of this division in response to changed conditions or anticipated
conditions.
(c) For the purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not
limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any previously
unreported pollutants.
(a) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges,
discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a
slug load that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the facility manager of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
(b) Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the
facility manager, submit a detailed written report describing the causes(s) of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be
imposed pursuant to this division.
(c) A notice shall be permanently posted to the user's bulletin board or other prominent
place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in
paragraph (a) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause
such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
§ 74-161 ABINGDON CODE § 74-164
74:46
§ 74-165. Reports from non-significant industrial users. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and not required
to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the facility
manager as the facility manager may require.
§ 74-166. Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the facility
manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat
the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the facility
manager within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required
to resample if the POTW is monitoring at the user's facility at least once a month, or if
the POTW samples between the users' initial sampling and when the user receives the
results of this sampling.
§ 74-167. Analytical requirements. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a
wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
§ 74-168. Sample collection. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(d) Significant industrial users are required to notify the Town immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.
(a) Except as indicated in Subsection (b) and (c) below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the facility
manager may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four
grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative
sample of the effluent being discharged. Using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple
grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior
to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may
be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and
grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for
other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in
approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the Town, as appropriate. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with the instantaneous
discharge limits.
(b) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile
organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
(c) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day compliance
reports required in sections 74-158 and 74-160 [40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a
§ 74-164 UTILITIES § 74-168
74:47
§ 74-169. Timing. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For
reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S.
Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
§ 74-170. Recordkeeping. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make
available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any
monitoring activities required by this division and any additional records of information
obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements and documentation associated with best management practices established
under Section 74-95. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were
performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and
the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least
three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation
concerning the user or the Town, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the facility manager.
§ 74-171. Certification of pollutants not present. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Users that have an approved monitoring waiver based on Section 74-161(b) must certify
on each report with the following statement that there has been no increase in the
pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the user.
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR _____ [specify applicable
National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge
and belief, there has been no increase in the level of _____ [list pollutant(s)] in the
wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report
under Sec. 74-161A.
§ 74-172. through § 74-180. (Reserved)
§ 74-181. Compliance monitoring — monitoring facilities. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical
sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are
available, the facility manager may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports
required by paragraphs Section 74-161 (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the
industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to
assess and assure compliance by with applicable Pretreatment Standards and
Requirements.
(d) All monitoring reports submitted to the POTW that include sampling data are
required to include a chain-of-custody document.
(a) The Town shall require to be provided and operated, at the user's own expense,
§ 74-168 ABINGDON CODE § 74-181
74:48
§ 74-182. Right of entry for inspection and sampling. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
monitoring facilities to allow inspections, sampling, and flow measurement of the
building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should
normally be situated on the user's premises, but the Town may, when such a
location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility
to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not
be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
(b) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling,
and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition at the expense of the user.
(c) Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Town's requirements and all
applicable local constructions standards and specifications. Construction shall be
completed within 90 days following written notification by the Town.
(a) The facility manager or authorized representative shall have the right to enter the
premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all
requirements of this division and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder. Users shall allow the facility manager ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying, and the performance of additional duties.
(1) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of
suitable identification, personnel from the Town, state, and EPA will be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
(2) The Town, state, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property,
or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling
and/or metering of the user's operations.
(3) The Town may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary.
The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense.
All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated
semiannually to ensure their accuracy.
(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility
to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the
written or verbal request of the facility manager and shall not be replaced. The
costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the facility manager access to the user's
premises shall be a violation of this division.
(6) All applicable inspection, sampling analysis, enforcement, and related
§ 74-181 UTILITIES § 74-182
74:49
§ 74-183. Search warrants. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
If the Town Manager or authorized representative has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this division or that there is a need to inspect
and/or sample to verify compliance with this division or any permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community,
then the Town Manager or authorized representative may seek issuance of a search
warrant from the general district court of the county.
§ 74-184. Confidential information. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge
permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from
the facility manager's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public
without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Town, that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission
of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing
a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report
which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but shall be made immediately available upon request to
governmental agencies for uses related to the VPDES program or pretreatment program,
and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302
will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public
without restriction.
§ 74-185. Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance. [Ord. of
2-7-2011]
The Town shall publish annually, in the largest newspaper published in the municipality
where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months,
were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean:
program fees as determined by the POTW and the Town shall be paid by the
user.
(b) If sampling and monitoring facilities are required by the facility manager, it shall
be provided in accordance with the Town's requirements and all applicable local
constructions standards and specifications, and shall be completed within 90 days
following written notification by the facility manager.
(a) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which
66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed
the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any
amount;
(b) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33% or
§ 74-182 ABINGDON CODE § 74-185
74:50
§ 74-186. through § 74-190. (Reserved)
Subdivision IV: Enforcement
§ 74-191. Administrative remedies — notification of violation. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
When the Town finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provisions
of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town may serve upon such user a written
notice of violation. Within 30 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Town. Submission of this
plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Town to take action, including emergency actions or any enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
§ 74-192. Consent orders. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The Town may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user
to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the document.
Such documents shall have the same force and effects as the administrative orders
issued pursuant to sections 74-194 and 74-195 of this division and shall be judicially
more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a sixmonth period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the
average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and
grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(c) Any other discharge violation that the Town believes has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
(d) Any other discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the
public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Town's exercise of its emergency
authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(e) Failure to provide, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule
milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for
starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(f) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including
baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards and deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(h) Any other violation(s) which the Town determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
§ 74-185 UTILITIES § 74-192
74:51
enforceable.
§ 74-193. Show-cause hearing. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
§ 74-194. Compliance orders. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
When the Town finds that the user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard, the Town may issue an order to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the
user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service and/or
water service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-
(a) The Town may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge or
violates any Town regulations to show cause before the Town Council why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Town Council
regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed
enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the Town Council
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least 10 days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent
or officer of a corporation.
(b) The Town Council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may
designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the assigned department
to:
(1) Issue in the name of the Town Council notices of hearings requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant
to any matter involved in such hearings;
(2) Take the evidence;
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other
evidence together with recommendations to the Town Council for action
thereon.
(c) At any hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony taken must be under oath
and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available
to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual
charges thereof.
(d) After the Town Council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the
sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, and
devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. A show cause hearing
shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
§ 74-192 ABINGDON CODE § 74-194
74:52
monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount pollutants
discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order
relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance
of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or be a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
§ 74-195. Cease and desist orders. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
§ 74-196. Emergency suspensions. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(a) When the Town finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are
likely to recur, the Town may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
(b) Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or be a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user.
(a) The Town may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the
user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Town may also immediately
suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or
eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Town may take such steps
as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection,
to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or
endangerment to any individuals. The Town may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the Town that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in Section 74-197 of this division are initiated against the user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting
imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing
the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any
future occurrence, to the Town, prior to the date of any show cause or
termination hearing under sections 74-193 or 74-197 of this division.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any
emergency suspension under this section.
§ 74-194 UTILITIES § 74-197
74:53
§ 74-197. Termination of discharge. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
§ 74-198. Administrative penalties. [Ord. of 6-6-2011]
§ 74-199. through § 74-202. (Reserved)
(a) In addition to the provisions in Section 74-145 of this article, any user that violates
any one or more of the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of
its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume,
constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring or sampling;
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections 74-91 through 74-97 of this
division. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 74-193 of this
division as to why the proposed termination of discharge should be taken.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any
emergency suspension under this section.
(a) When the Town finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this article, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town may fine such user in
an amount not to exceed $2,500. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation,
per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits,
fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
(b) Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an
additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter
at a rate of 10% per month. A lien against the user's property may be sought for
unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
(c) Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the Town to
reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of
being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the Town may convene a
hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment,
together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The Town
may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices
and orders, to the fine.
(d) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.
§ 74-197 ABINGDON CODE § 74-203
74:54
§ 74-203. Judicial remedies — injunctive relief. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
When the Town finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town may petition the circuit court of the
county through the Town's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this division on
activities of the user. The Town may also seek such other action as is appropriate
for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct
environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not bar against, or be a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
§ 74-204. Civil penalties. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
§ 74-205. Criminal prosecution. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(a) A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement shall be liable to the Town for a maximum of civil damages
as may be permitted by the circuit court of the county. In the case of a monthly or
other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during
the period of the violation.
(b) The Town may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses
associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring
expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the Town.
(c) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all
relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by
the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit
gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance
history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
(d) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or be a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against a user.
(a) A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this division, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 and/or imprisonment for not more than
one year, or both.
(b) A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which
causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
Class I misdemeanor and be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 and/or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. This penalty shall be in addition
to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under
state law.
(c) A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications
in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed or required to
§ 74-203 UTILITIES § 74-205
74:55
§ 74-206. Recovery of costs incurred. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
In addition to civil and criminal liability, the permittee violating any of the provisions of
this permit or causing damage to or otherwise inhibiting the POTW shall be liable to the
Town for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The Town
may bill the permittee for the costs incurred for sampling, analysis, and labor costs.
Other billable costs include, but are not limited to, cleaning, repair or replacement work
caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 74-207. Remedies nonexclusive. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The remedies provided for in this division are not exclusive. The Town may take
any, all, or combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the Town's enforcement
response plan; however, the Town may take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the Town is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
§ 74-208. through § 74-211. (Reserved)
§ 74-212. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations — upset. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
be maintained, pursuant to this division, wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this division shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 and/or imprisonment for
not more than one year, or both.
(d) In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$1,000 and/or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
(a) For the purpose of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which
there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset
does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
(b) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of
paragraph (c) are met.
(c) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate,
through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant
evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike
manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
§ 74-205 ABINGDON CODE § 74-212
74:56
§ 74-213. Prohibited discharge standards. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
§ 74-214. Bypass. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the Town within 24 hours
of becoming aware of the upset; if this information is provided orally, a written
submission must be provided within 10 days:
a. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not
corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
(d) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an
upset shall have the burden of proof.
(e) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset
only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards.
(f) Users shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain
compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure
of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of
treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other
things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
(a) A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against
it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in Section 74-91 of this division
or the specific prohibitions in Section 74-92 of this division, if it can prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its
discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause
pass through or interference and either:
(1) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
(2) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature
or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the Town was regularly in
compliance with its VPDES permit, and, in case of interference, was in
compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(b) Pursuant to 40 CFR Section 403.5(a)(2), the affirmative defense outlined in this
section cannot apply to specific prohibitions in subsections 74-92(a)(1), (3) and
(20).
(a) "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user's treatment facility. "Severe property damage" means substantial physical
damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
§ 74-212 UTILITIES § 74-214
74:57
§ 74-215. through § 74-219. (Reserved)
Subdivision V: Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 74-220. Pretreatment charges and fees. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The Town may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and
operating the Town's pretreatment program, which may include:
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which
can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
(b) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards
or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to
assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of
paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section.
If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to
the facility manager, at least 10 days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(c) A user shall submit oral notice to the facility manager of an unanticipated bypass
that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it
becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within
10 days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission
shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The facility manager may waive
the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within
24 hours.
(d) Bypass is prohibited, and the facility manager may take enforcement action against
a user for a bypass, unless:
(1) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe
property damage;
(2) There was no feasible alternative to bypass, such as the use of auxiliary
treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during
normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
(3) The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. The
facility manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the facility manager determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in the first paragraph of Subsection (d) of this section.
(a) Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications and pretreatment permit
applications including the cost of processing such applications;
§ 74-214 ABINGDON CODE § 74-220
74:58
§ 74-221. Severability. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
If any provision of this division is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 74-222. through § 74-231. (Reserved)
(b) Fees for filing appeals;
(c) Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the cost of
collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports
submitted by users;
(d) Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
(e) Fees for consistent removal by the Town of pollutants otherwise subject to federal
pretreatment standards;
(f) Other fees as the Town may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained
herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are
separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the Town.
§ 74-220 UTILITIES § 74-222
74:59

DIVISION 5
Fees and Charges
§ 74-232. Connections. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
§ 74-233. Availability charges. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Availability charges shall be as authorized by the Town Council from time to time.
§ 74-234. Rates for sewer service. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
The charges for sewer service shall be as authorized by the Town Council from time to
time. These include:
(a) The tap fee or charge for a sewer connection, either inside or outside the Town,
shall be as authorized by the Town Council from time to time.
(b) In addition to such tap fees or charges for sewer connections, persons making such
connections shall pay refundable deposits for such sewer service, as authorized by
the Town Council from time to time.
(a) Base rates for all sewage works users. These fees reflect the cost for the treatment
of normal domestic wastewater.
(b) High strength surcharge:
(1) All users who discharge a waste which contains more than 250 milligrams per
liter of BOD or more than 250 milligrams per liter of suspended solids shall
pay a surcharge on the amount of BOD and suspended solids that exceed the
above amounts. Other wastes containing concentrations of constituents that
require treatment in excess of that required for normal wastewaters may be
subject to surcharge at rates established by the Town.
(2) Surcharges for high strength shall be based on samples collected and analyzed
by the Town or from results submitted to the Town in accordance with the
requirements of an industrial discharger permit. Samples shall be collected on
a periodic basis but not less than once a year.
(3) High strength wastes will only be accepted when it can be demonstrated that
they will not damage the collection or treatment facilities and will not impair
the treatment process.
(4) The rate for high strength wastes shall be calculated on the basis of the number
of pounds of BOD and suspended solids discharged to the sewer in excess of
250 milligrams per liter of BOD and 250 milligrams per liter of suspended
solids.
(c) Hauled wastewater fees. Fees for the treatment of hauled wastes shall be established
by the Town to reflect the costs of treating these wastes. These fees shall be
authorized by the Town from time to time.
(d) Sewer line maintenance fees. All costs associated with the cleaning and repairing
of sewer lines and restoring service to the affected areas plus any damages as may
§ 74-232 UTILITIES § 74-234
74:61
§ 74-235. Churches. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
For the purposes of assessing sewer use fees, churches will be classified as residential
accounts. However, churches are not exempt from pretreatment fees or regulations as
specified by the Town Manager. Churches are defined for this purpose to exclude those
which operate day schools on a routine continuing basis.
§ 74-236. Additional metering. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
Owners or occupants using private water supplies which are disposed of in the public
sewer shall install at their own expense a metering installation satisfactory to the Town
for determining the volume of such water as a basis for sewer service charge. Similarly,
owners or occupants who use significant amounts of water in such a way that the water is
not discharged to the sewer may, upon approval of the Town, establish separate accounts
for the purpose of separating such usage.
§ 74-237. Billing, when due and payable. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
§ 74-238. Annual review of charges. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
be assessed by the Town due to blockages or manhole overflows in the collection
system that are caused by residential, industrial or other users. Successive
occurrences within 12 months of the previous occurrence - A $1,000 penalty plus
all costs associated with cleaning the sewer lines and restoring service to the
affected areas, plus any damages as may be assessed by the Town.
(a) For residential, industrial and commercial users, monthly user charges will be based
on actual water usage. If a residential, commercial or industrial user has a
consumptive use of water, or in some other manner uses water which is not
discharged into the wastewater collection system, the user charge for that
contributor may be based on readings of a wastewater meter or separate water meter
installed and maintained at the user's expense.
(b) Each user shall pay for the services provided by the Town based on each user's use
of the treatment works as determined by water meter readings acceptable to the
Town.
(c) All users, including those having sewer services available to them under this
division even though not connected to their premises, shall be billed monthly.
Payments are due within 10 days after the billing date. Any payment not received
within 25 days after the billing date shall be delinquent. A late payment penalty of
10% of the user charge bill will be added to each delinquent bill. When any bill is
more than 20 days in default, water and/or sewer service to such premises shall be
discontinued until such bill is paid.
(a) The Town will review the user charges at least annually and recommend to the
Town Council the revision, if any, of rates as necessary to ensure that adequate
revenues are generated to pay the costs of operation and maintenance, including
replacement, and to provide for the systems' continuance for the proportional
distribution of operation and maintenance, including replacement costs among
users and user classes.
§ 74-234 ABINGDON CODE § 74-238
74:62
§ 74-239. Fee for reconnection of water service upon payment of delinquent
charges. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
For restoring the water supply to any premises in which the sewer account is delinquent,
the property owner or occupant shall pay to the Town such fee as specified by the
Washington County Service Authority for restoring the service. Such fee shall be
collected by the Washington County Service Authority as a part of the delinquent
account.
§ 74-240. Lien for unpaid service charges. [Ord. of 2-7-2011]
All unpaid charges for sewer service, together with the penalties and interest thereon,
shall constitute a lien on the property served and shall be collected in the same manner
as delinquent real estate taxes or such other method as may be permitted by applicable
law at the discretion of the Town.
(b) The Town will notify all users by appropriate public notice of any change in the
rate being charged or to be charged for operation and maintenance, including
replacement of the treatment works.
§ 74-238 UTILITIES § 74-240
74:63

Chapter 78
TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION
§ 74-240 TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION § 74-240
78:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 78-1. Short title. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Town's "Vegetation Ordinance."
§ 78-2. Purpose and intent. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
The Town recognizes that its urban forest is a vital part of the community and wishes to
ensure its citizens right to enjoy the many benefits provided by public trees while being
protected from the attendant risks of personal injury and property damage. Accordingly,
it is the purpose and intent of this ordinance to preserve and protect the public health
safety and general welfare by regulating the planting, maintenance and removal of public
trees and the removal or trimming of vegetation where a hazard exists; and, it shall be
the policy of the Town to:
§ 78-3. Definitions. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE — The area beneath a tree's canopy that falls within the tree's
drip line; "drip line" is defined as a continuous line which is a vertical projection of the
outermost portion of the tree's canopy onto the ground.
DBH — The diameter of a tree trunk measured at 4.5 feet above grade.
HARDSCAPE — The nonorganic components of an urban landscape such as streets,
gutters, curbs and sidewalks.
HAZARDOUS TREE — Any tree which because of condition, surroundings and/or
tendency to fail constitutes a risk to life, health or property.
MAINTENANCE — All operations which might be performed on a tree, including
(without limitation) trimming, pruning, spraying, injecting, fertilizing, treating, bracing,
cabling, and cutting either above or below the ground.
(a) Establish and maintain maximum tree cover.
(b) Maintain trees in a healthy condition through good arboricultural practices.
(c) Establish and maintain trees at an optimal level of age and species.
(d) Promote conservation of tree resources.
(e) Select, situate and maintain trees appropriately to maximize benefits and minimize
hazard, nuisance, hardscape damage and maintenance costs.
(f) Centralize tree management under one person having the necessary expertise.
(g) Promote efficient and cost-effective management of the urban forest.
(h) Foster community support for a local urban forestry program and encourage good
tree management on privately owned properties.
§ 78-1 TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION § 78-3
78:3
PARK — That portion of the public area so named and designated by the Town.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC AREA — All land and rights-of-way within the Town's corporate limits owned
or held by the Town, including parks, cemeteries and rights-of-way for streets, alleys,
sidewalks, utility lines and facilities and median strips.
PUBLIC TREE — Any tree planted in a public area.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Any corporation, company, individual, association
or cooperative that is a "public utility" as defined in Code of Virginia, 1950, § 56-232 as
amended.
TOP or TOPPING — The cutting of the branches and/or trunk of a tree in a manner that
substantially reduces the overall size of the spatial area occupied by the tree and destroys
the symmetrical appearance or natural shape of the tree as shown at Page 21 of the A300
Pruning Standard described in Sec. 78-10(b) of this ordinance.
TOWN — The Town administration and/or Town Council unless the context indicates
otherwise.
TOWN ARBORIST — A person with the qualifications set out in sec. 78-5(a) of this
article who is trained or competent in the practice of arboriculture or forestry; and, who
is employed by or under contract with the Town and charged with the responsibility for
carrying out the provisions of this ordinance.
TREE — Any self-supporting woody plant growing upon the earth that usually
possesses one main trunk and produces a more or less distinct and elevated head with
many branches.
URBAN FOREST — The collection of trees, shrubs and other vegetation that make up
a community's urban landscape.
§ 78-4. Applicability of ordinance. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
All trees and shrubs now existing or hereafter planted in any public area shall become
the property of the Town, and be subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
§ 78-3 ABINGDON CODE § 78-4
78:4
ARTICLE II
Creation of Town Arborist Position and Tree Commission
§ 78-5. Town arborist. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
There is hereby created the position of Town arborist, who shall act under the direction
and control of the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall employ or contract for the
services of the Town arborist.
(a) Qualifications. Where possible the Town arborist shall be a person trained in
arboriculture or forestry, with appropriate certification in the particular field or
fields concerned, failing which the Town Manager may employ or enter into a
contract with a person who has at least three years experience in municipal tree
work or its equivalent and possesses sufficient administrative and management
skills to perform the duties specified in this ordinance. If the person appointed is
not so certified, the Town Manager shall specify a six month probationary period
within which the person must, as a condition of employment, obtain an arborist
certification by the International Society of Arboriculture or comparable
certification.
(b) Duties. The Town arborist shall; in coordination with the Town's public works or
other departments, or private contractors when approved by the Town Manager,
plant, maintain and otherwise care for, or if necessary remove, any public tree or
shrub. The responsibilities of the Town arborist shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Advising the Town Manager, Town Council and the Town's public works and
other departments on all matters pertinent to public trees; and, reviewing, and
supervising all municipal tree care operations and site plan work involving
public trees.
(2) Attending each meeting of the tree commission and informing it in advance
about all pending and proposed municipal tree care operations and site plan
work involving public trees in sufficient time for the tree commission to take
any action permitted or required under the provisions of this article.
(3) Under the supervision of the Town Manager, applying for federal, state or
private grants, funding or other assistance to accomplish the purposes and
intent set forth in sec. 78-2 of this article.
(4) Developing, implementing and maintaining an urban forestry management
program which provides for annual public tree planting and establishes care,
maintenance and replacement standards and procedures for public trees.
Reducing such program to writing in the form of a comprehensive tree
management plan for review by the tree commission and the Town Council.
(5) Preparing annually for review by the Town public works department and tree
commission, a municipal tree care budget together with an annual report on
the work of the Town arborist including (but not limited to) all municipal tree
care operations and site plan work involving public trees and an evaluation of
the progress made in meeting the goals of this ordinance.
(6) In cooperation with the Town Manager and tree commission, promoting, by
§ 78-5 TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION § 78-5
78:5
§ 78-6. Tree commission. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the "tree commission." The
tree commission shall be composed of five voting members appointed by the Town
Council. In addition, the Town arborist shall be a non-voting member. A quorum for the
transaction of business by the commission shall be at least three voting members.
conducting public seminars, courses, lectures, workshops, continuing
education and other educational programs, public appreciation for the Town's
urban forest and importance of the standards and procedures established in this
article.
(7) When and as requested by the Town Manager and tree commission, providing
private citizens with advice regarding the care and maintenance of their trees.
Supporting other groups interested in urban forestry.
(8) Reporting directly to the Town Manager on any or all municipal tree
operations and site plan work involving public trees, as the Town Manager
may from time to time direct, and taking such other action as shall be needed
to accomplish the purposes of this ordinance.
(9) Coordinate, by meeting and consulting with appropriate public utility
personnel in advance, all public utility operations that might adversely affect
public trees.
(a) Qualifications and compensation. The five voting members of the tree commission
shall be persons who have expressed interest in the care and preservation of the
Town's urban forest. All of the members of the tree commission shall serve without
compensation, but all necessary expenses of the tree commission shall be paid by
the Town pursuant to appropriate action by the Town Council.
(b) Terms of office. The five voting members appointed by the Town Council shall be
appointed for three year staggered terms and serve until their respective successors
are appointed. Of the members initially appointed one shall serve for one year, two
shall serve for two years, and two shall serve for three years. Thereafter, all
members shall serve three year terms. Vacancies caused by death, resignation or
otherwise shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner original
appointments are made. The Mayor shall have the discretion to appoint members to
serve consecutive terms and also to remove them for habitual failure to attend
meetings. Members may serve any number of terms but not more than two terms
consecutively.
(c) Duties of tree commission. The duties of the tree commission shall be as follows:
(1) Within a reasonable time after appointment, conduct an organizational
meeting to elect a chairman, vice-chairman and standing committee chairs as
needed, and provide for the adoption of rules and procedures for holding
public meetings. The Town arborist shall act as secretary and conduct the daily
affairs of the tree commission. The secretary shall cause a record to be kept of
all proceedings, resolutions, findings and actions taken by the tree
commission. The commission's records shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
§ 78-5 ABINGDON CODE § 78-6
78:6
§ 78-7. Tree management plan. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
With the advice and participation of the tree commission, the Town arborist is hereby
authorized and directed to formulate, revise and administer a comprehensive tree
management plan to govern the planting, maintenance and replacement of trees planted
in public areas. The comprehensive tree management plan shall make provision for
educating the public about trees and include (but not be limited to) an inventory of tree
resources, standard planting, maintenance, replacement and tree cover specifications and
needed maintenance work complete with cost and time schedules.
(2) To provide regular meetings at least once each month and such special
meetings as the tree commission deems necessary, each open to the public; to
support the efforts of other groups interested in urban forestry: to sponsor tree
planting projects and the observance of National Arbor Day; and, to conduct
seminars, workshops and other public education programs.
(3) To assist the Town arborist with the formulation and revision of the
comprehensive tree management plan, as well as a yearly evaluation of
progress toward meeting the goals set in this section.
(4) To assist the Town arborist in applying for federal, state or private grants,
funding or other assistance.
(5) With the assistance of the Town arborist, to review each pending and proposed
municipal tree care operation and site plan work involving trees. Any
differences of opinion about what protective procedures should be followed in
any such matter shall be resolved by majority vote at a meeting of the
commission.
(6) To provide by its public meetings a forum in which interested persons shall
have the opportunity to submit for discussion their questions and opinions
regarding the Town's tree management.
§ 78-6 TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION § 78-7
78:7

ARTICLE III
Supervision and Authority in Municipal Tree Care Operations
§ 78-8. Responsibility of Town arborist coordination with Town departments.
[Ord. of 8-7-2000]
The Town arborist shall be responsible for reviewing, preparing comments on and
supervising all proposed municipal tree care operations and site plan work and taking
such other action as shall be needed to accomplish the purposes of this article. To enable
performance of such duties, the Town's public works and all other affected departments
shall coordinate with the Town arborist prior to commencing any public work that might
require the removal of or cause injury to any public tree or its root system, as follows:
(a) Applicability to specific projects. This section covers but is not limited to all (a)
plans to install water or sewer lines, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways or any
other improvements that might cause injury to public trees; and, (b) planting,
maintenance, protection and all other work pertinent to public trees.
(b) Notice requirement. Prior to the commencement of any work specified in this
section, the department concerned shall give notice outlining the proposed project
in sufficient detail and providing a sufficient amount of time to enable the Town
arborist to inspect the work site, evaluate the degree of the risk of injury and submit
to the party responsible for the work written instructions designed to protect any
tree or trees at risk.
(c) Supervisory authority. When and as appropriate the Town arborist shall advise
Town work crews about matters relating to planting, maintenance, removal and
protection of public trees. Additionally, the Town arborist shall have supervisory
authority in all municipal tree care and site plan work and authority to inspect such
work, together with the duty to inspect, to the end that all work done under the terms
of this section shall be in full compliance with any instructions by the Town
arborist.
(d) Applicability to independent contractors. All of the provisions of this section shall
apply in full force and effect to independent contractors and their crews hired by
the Town to perform any of the services or operations specified. Nothing stated in
this subsection in any way relieves the Town's public works or any other
department of the responsibility of providing notices to the Town arborist as
required in Subsection (b).
§ 78-8 TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION § 78-8
78:9

ARTICLE IV
Planting, Maintenance and Protection of Public Trees
§ 78-9. Planting of public trees. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
This article charges the Town arborist with the responsibility of insuring that any tree
or shrub planted in a public area is one of an approved species which is properly
planted according to the standards and guidelines outlined in the comprehensive tree
management plan.
§ 78-10. Maintenance of public trees. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
§ 78-11. Protection of public trees and shrubs, planting restrictions and removal
of unsafe vegetation. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
The following provisions to protect public trees and provide protective regulations
governing planting and removal of unsafe vegetation shall apply to all persons, including
natural persons, independent contractors, public utility companies, public works and
other Town departments:
(a) Independent contractors. Any independent contractor hired for pruning or other
maintenance on public trees shall (1) be subject to the direction and supervision of
the Town arborist: (2) have, pursuant to the Code, a current Town business license
to provide such services; and (3) furnish proof of liability and workman's
compensation insurance coverage in amounts specified by the Town Manager. The
independent contractor must maintain such insurance coverage throughout its term
of its license.
(b) Standards for pruning or trimming public trees. In the absence of a written waiver
by the Town arborist, all trees on public areas must be pruned or trimmed in
accordance with the standards described in the American National Standards
Institute's A300 Pruning Standard, published on January 18, 1995 by the Secretariat
of the National Arborist Association, Inc., or any changes to such standards
approved by the Town Council.
(c) Topping public trees. Except as permitted under a public utility franchise, it shall
be unlawful to top any public tree. Provided, that trees severely damaged by storms
or other causes, or certain trees in close proximity to utility wires or other
obstructions may be exempted from this section, at the discretion of the Town
arborist.
(a) Trees endangered by excavation or construction. In the absence of a written waiver
by the Town arborist, any public tree located within 20 feet of any proposed (i)
excavation, or (ii) construction of a building or other structure, or (iii) street work
shall have its critical root zone protected from all building material, dirt or other
debris which might be generated by the operation concerned. To accomplish such
protection, the Town arborist shall submit written instructions and the party
responsible for the excavation, construction or work shall, in advance of
commencing the operation, comply with such instructions by erecting a substantial
fence, frame, shield or box not less than three feet high at a location calculated to
protect the tree's critical root zone.
§ 78-9 TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION § 78-11
78:11
(b) Trees endangered by public works and other ditches. Without prior notification of
and discussion with the Town arborist and strict adherence to the Town arborist's
instructions relative to tree protection, no person shall change the natural grade,
excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any line, within 10 feet of the critical
root zone of any tree in any public area. Provided that (i) the Town arborist is
notified as soon as practical after the work is done and (ii) the particular operation
would not increase the existing utilities beyond their original capacity, the
provisions of Subsection (b) shall not apply to any person performing emergency
work to restore existing underground utilities within the same trench.
(c) Trees put at risk by placement of materials on public property. No person shall
deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place any stone, brick, sand,
concrete or other materials that might impede the free passage of air, water or
fertilizer to the roots of any public tree.
(d) Distance of certain trees from public sewers. Poplar, willow, American elm or
cottonwood trees planted anywhere in the Town after the effective date of this
ordinance shall be placed at least 100 feet away from public sewers.
(e) Planting in park or in or near public right-of-way.
(1) Shade or ornamental trees. No shade or ornamental tree or shrub shall be
planted in any public right-of-way or within five feet of such right-of-way or
in any public park until such tree or shrub shall have first been approved and
the place where it is to be planted designated by the Town Manager and a
permit granted therefore.
(2) Prohibited species. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant in any park or
public right-of-way or within five feet of such right-of-way line the following
trees: poplar, willow, cottonwood, fruit trees (except ornamental types), nut
trees (except oak and hickory), ailanthus, mountain ash, mimosa, silver maple,
American elm and sycamore maple.
(f) Attaching rope, sign or other device. No person shall fasten any rope, wire, sign,
poster, handbill or other device to a tree or shrub or to any guard about such tree or
shrub on a public right-of-way or in a park.
(g) Wires in right-of-way or park.
(1) Protection of trees and shrubs. Every person having or maintaining any
electric, telephone, telegraph or other wires running through a public right-ofway or park shall securely fasten and maintain such wires in such a manner as
will safeguard the trees and shrubs against any damage therefrom and shall
make periodic adjustments whenever necessary to prevent damage to trees and
shrubs growing in any public right-of-way or park.
(2) Consolidation. Persons having or maintaining any electric, telephone,
telegraph or other wire running through a public right-of-way shall consolidate
their wires so as to place as few poles as possible in the right-of-way and shall,
whenever possible, place such poles in alleys, utility easements and along rear
lot lines.
§ 78-11 ABINGDON CODE § 78-11
78:12
(h) Trimming or cutting of overhanging trees.
(1) The trimming or cutting of trees, the limbs of which overhang streets or
sidewalks of the Town, or trees located on the sidewalks or streets of the
Town, shall be done in the discretion and under the authority of the Town
Manager and supervision of the Town arborist. Such work shall be done in a
proper manner with the least possible damage to the trees trimmed or cut.
(2) Any person applying for the privilege of trimming or cutting trees to promote
the efficiency of a public utility shall pay all expenses incident to such work.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any owner of property adjacent to a street to obstruct
or interfere with the cutting or trimming of trees under the provisions of
Subsection (h).
(i) Vegetation impeding, etc., movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic —
Generally.
(1) Whenever it shall be determined by the department head of any department of
the Town that there is growing vegetation which impedes, hinders or makes
unsafe the movement of either vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic, the
department head shall make a written report to the Town Manager, with copy
to the Town arborist, giving location and other pertinent information.
Thereafter, the Town arborist shall supervise any measures taken to correct the
hazardous condition, as directed by the Town Manager.
(2) The Town Manager shall forthwith notify the owner of the property where
such vegetation exists and shall demand that the owner shall, within the space
of 10 days, either completely remove such vegetation or trim such vegetation
to such an extent as to remove any hazard. Such notice shall be served
personally on the owner of the property if he resides on the property or is a
resident of the Town; otherwise, such notice shall be served on the owner by
registered or certified mail with provision made for a return receipt. If the
property is rental property, a copy of such notice shall be served on one of the
tenants occupying it. If the owner of the property is a nonresident of the state
and has an agent within the state who collects the rents from the property or
has control of the property, then service of the notice upon such agent shall
constitute service upon the owner. If any person shall fail to comply with the
terms of such notice for a period of 10 days, then the Town shall abate the
nuisance and all costs or charges incurred in connection therewith and duly
assessed may be collected by the Town from the owner of the premises as
taxes and levies are collected, or may be recovered by suit as any other debt.
The failure, neglect or refusal of any such owner or agent to comply with the
terms of any such notice shall be unlawful. Each 24 hours subsequent to the
time limit provided for by this section shall be taken to constitute a separate
offense.
(j) Same — lien for unpaid charges. Every charge authorized and duly assessed under
Subsection (i) shall, so long as it remains unpaid, constitute a lien against the real
property in question.
(k) Pruning, injuring, removing vegetation. No person shall, without a permit from the
§ 78-11 TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION § 78-11
78:13
Town Manager, cut, prune, break, injure or remove any tree, shrub or plant on a
public right-of-way or in a park or cut, disturb or interfere in any way with any root
of a tree, shrub or plant on a public right-of-way or in a park.
(l) Spraying or injecting. No person shall, without a permit from the Town Manager,
spray or inject with any chemical any tree, shrub or plant on a public right-of-way
or in a park.
(m) Removing, injuring guards. No person shall, without a permit from the Town
Manager, remove or injure any guard or device placed to protect any tree or shrub
on a public right-of-way or in a park.
(n) Closing or obstructing open space about base. No person shall, without a permit
from the Town Manager, close or obstruct any open space provided about the base
of a tree or shrub to permit the access of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of such
tree or shrub on a public right-of-way or in a park.
(o) Allowing harmful substances to come in contact with roots or leaves. No person
shall, without a permit from the Town Manager, allow any gaseous, liquid or solid
substances harmful to the trees or shrubs on a public right-of-way or in a park to
come in contact with the roots or leaves of such trees or shrubs.
§ 78-11 ABINGDON CODE § 78-11
78:14
ARTICLE V
Hazardous Trees on Public Property
§ 78-12. Remedies for hazardous trees. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
Upon determination by the Town arborist that same are a hazard, the Town shall provide
for removal of dead, diseased or other hazardous trees or shrubs in any public area.
§ 78-12 TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION § 78-12
78:15

ARTICLE VI
Administrative Provisions
§ 78-13. Appeals process. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
Any action by the tree commission may be appealed to and heard by the Town Council,
the decision of which shall be final. To be effective the appeal must be in writing,
specify the reason or reasons for which a hearing is requested, and be filed with the
Town Manager within 15 days after the complaining party receives notification of the
offending action of the tree commission.
§ 78-14. Penalties for violation. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
Unless specifically provided in this ordinance, the violation of any of Sections 78-10(b),
10(c), 11(a), 11(b), 11(c), 11(d), 11(e), 11(f), 11(h)(3), 11(k), 11(l), 11(m), 11(n), and
11(o) shall be a Class 4 misdemeanor punishable as specified in Section 1-6 of the Code.
§ 78-15. Performance evaluation of ordinance. [Ord. of 8-7-2000]
The Town arborist shall collect and maintain all records and data necessary or desirable
to evaluate whether progress is being made toward the stated goals of this chapter. At
its first meeting for 2001 and each year thereafter the Town arborist shall present to the
Town Council its summary and analysis for the preceding calendar year, together with
any recommendations for changes in the procedures outlined in this chapter. Thereafter,
the Town Council shall consider the report and recommendations and take all actions
deemed necessary to accomplish the goals of this ordinance, including (but not limited
to) revision or amendment of the ordinance or the adoption of other resolutions or
ordinances.
§ 78-13 TREES, SHRUBS AND VEGETATION § 78-15
78:17

Chapter 82
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
§ 78-15 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 78-15
82:1

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 82-1. through § 82-25. (Reserved)
§ 82-1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 82-1
82:3

ARTICLE II
Taxicabs
DIVISION 1
Generally
§ 82-26. Definitions. [Ord. of 1-4-201618]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia.
COUNCIL — The elected governing body of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia.
DRIVER — Any person driving or in actual physical control of a taxicab.
OWNER — Any person having control of the operation or maintenance of a taxicab or
of the collection of revenue derived from its operation.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle having a seating capacity of not more than six
passengers, excluding the driver, not operating on a regular route or between fixed
terminals used in the transportation of passengers for hire or for compensation, and not
a common carrier, restricted common carrier, transportation network company, TNC
partner, or nonemergency medical transportation carrier as defined in Virginia Code §
46.2-2000.[Amended 7-6-2021 by Ord. No. 2021.07.06A]
TOWN — The municipality of Abingdon, Virginia.
§ 82-27. Compliance. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, taxicabs in
the Town except as provided in this article. Any owner of a taxicab who violates or
knowingly permits any of his employees to violate any of the provisions of this article
may, in addition to any other penalty provided by this article, have his certificate of
public convenience and necessity and any license granted him hereunder suspended or
revoked.
§ 82-28. Maintenance and inspection of vehicles; display of owner's name. [Ord.
of 1-4-2016]
Every taxicab for which a certificate of public convenience and necessity (See Division
2, below) has been issued shall be kept in good mechanical condition and reasonably
clean and sanitary at all times, and all such taxicabs shall be subject to police inspection
and shall bear evidence of current state inspection approval at all times. The name of the
owner of such taxicab shall be displayed in letters not less than two inches in height on
both sides of the outside of each taxicab.
18. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. II, §§ 82-26—82-69, which pertained to similar subject matter
and derived from Code 1985, §§ 18-1, 18-2, 18-4—18-20.
§ 82-26 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 82-29
82:5
§ 82-29. Service to be provided. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
The Council may require each owner of a taxicab to have in operation at least one such
taxicab for a reasonable number of business hours each day at the discretion of the
Council, seven days a week, and to answer promptly all calls for service unless all his
taxicabs are in use.
§ 82-30. Maximum work day for drivers. [Code 1985, § 18-6; Ord. of 1-4-2016]
No driver shall be on duty for more than 12 hours in any twenty-four-hour period.
§ 82-31. Rates — determination by Council. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
Rates charged for the use of taxicabs shall be as proposed by staff in such regulations as
the Council may approve and adopt from time to time by general resolution.
§ 82-32. Same — posting. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
The rates, proposed by staff and approved by Council, as provided in Section 82-31,
above, shall be posted in a conspicuous place inside each taxicab and shall be exhibited
to any person upon his/her request.
§ 82-33. Penalty for violation. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle used as a vehicle for the transportation
of persons for a consideration on any highway, street, road, lane or alley in the Town
who violates any of the provisions of this article or any Virginia DMV requirement or
statute of the commonwealth, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof be fined not more than $250 for the first offense and not more than $500 for each
subsequent offense.
§ 82-34. Services provided on non-discriminatory basis. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
In providing services as described herein, no operator or driver will discriminate on the
basis of race, sex, religion, age or national origin.
§ 82-35. Services provided pursuant to ADA where applicable. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
In providing services to the public, operators and/or drivers will adhere to any/all
applicable regulations under 49 CFR Part 38 required pursuant to the Americans with
Disabilities Act to be in compliance with handicap transportation requirements and
regulations.
§ 82-36. through § 82-45. (Reserved)
§ 82-29 ABINGDON CODE § 82-36
82:6
DIVISION 2
Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity
§ 82-46. Prerequisite to business license. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
No business license for the operation of a taxicab shall be issued under Chapter 18 by
the business office and neither shall the annual license tax schedule be determined until
a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued for such taxicab.
§ 82-47. Filing and contents of application. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
Every owner or proposed owner of a taxicab who desires to operate or have a taxicab
operated in the Town shall make an annual application to the Town Council for a
certificate of public convenience and necessity to operate such taxicab. The application
shall contain, but is not necessarily limited to, the following information:
(a) The full name, home and business addresses, e-mail address and telephone numbers
(home and cell) of the applicant and/or the applicant's operator, in addition to any/
all other pertinent contact information. Notice of any changes, residence or
business, made in address, phone numbers or any other pertinent contact
information shall be given in written form to the Town no later than 15 days
following said change by applicant for himself/herself and/or his/her operators.
(b) A written disclaimer statement as to the financial status and responsibility of the
applicant, including applicant's current credit score.
(c) The name and complete contact information of every person or entity lending
money or furnishing capital to the applicant, if any.
(d) The VIN number, year, model, make, seating capacity, license number, design and
color scheme of such taxicab.
(e) A list of convictions or pleas of guilty, if any, of the applicant for the violation of
any law, along with a signed release allowing for a full background check of
applicant.
(f) A statement as to the experience of the applicant in transporting passengers for hire
and signed release for the VDMV driving history of the applicant and/or operator.
(g) A statement as to the reasons why the applicant believes public convenience and
necessity require granting of his/her application.
(h) The address within the Town from which the taxicabs for which application is made
will be dispatched and the address at which or place where such taxicabs when on
duty but not engaged will be parked and/or available.
(i) Complete information as to insurance policy held on the vehicle and amounts of
coverage on both bodily injury and property damage, as evidenced by submission
of a certificate of insurance.
(j) Proof of fee payment to VDMV (approximately $53, permit fee and operating
authority fee, all subject to change per VDMV and its rate adjustments) and proper
registration and license plate requirements through Virginia Department of Motor
§ 82-46 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 82-47
82:7
§ 82-48. Where application filed; investigation and report by Chief of Police.
[Ord. of 1-4-2016]
The application required by Section 82-47 shall be filed in duplicate by the applicant
with the Town Clerk pursuant to and in accordance with Section 82-52. The Town
Clerk shall, upon receipt of such application, deliver one copy to the chief, who shall
investigate the matter and report in writing to the Town Clerk prior to the Council's next
regular meeting. The Town Clerk then shall submit such application and report to the
Council. Applicant can expect to appear before Council within six to eight weeks.
§ 82-49. Hearing on applications. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
The Council shall hear the applicants for certificates of public convenience and necessity
after notice has been given as to the time and place of the hearing to all holders of
certificates and applicants for certificates, by registered or certified mail, to the address
shown on the certificates and applications for certificates. Such notice shall be mailed
at least 10 days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time
without further written notice.
§ 82-50. Granting or refusal. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
§ 82-51. Term; transfer. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
Every certificate of public convenience and necessity issued under the provisions of this
division shall expire on December 31 of the year for which issued, regardless of the date
of issuance. No such certificate shall be transferable.
Vehicles.
(a) The Council, after the hearing provided in Section 82-49, and after considering the
reports submitted by the chief, shall determine whether the public convenience and
necessity require the operation of the taxicabs for which each application is filed. It
may grant or refuse the certificate applied for in any case, and may grant a
certificate for a lesser number of vehicles than that specified in the application.
(b) No certificate shall be so granted until the matter has been advertised, at applicant's
own expense, once a week for two successive weeks within a month prior to the
regular meeting of the Council at which application will be made in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town, giving the name of the applicant, the date of the
regular meeting of the Council at which application will be made, and the fact that
he is applying for a certificate for operation of a taxicab. The application for any
additional certificate shall be granted or denied at such meeting or a subsequent
meeting of the Council after hearing and a consideration of the report and
recommendation made by the chief.
(c) When the Council grants a certificate, the Town Clerk shall prepare and transmit
such certificate to the applicant giving the name of the owner, VIN number, model,
make and description of the taxicab to be operated thereunder, and the date of
issuance and expiration date of the certificate.
§ 82-47 ABINGDON CODE § 82-52
82:8
§ 82-52. Revocation of certificates. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
The Council may for violation of any of the provisions of this article or of Section
70-158 cancel or revoke or suspend any certificate after notice to the holder of the
certificate.
§ 82-53. Substitution of vehicles. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
No taxicab shall be substituted for a taxicab for operation of which a certificate of
public convenience and necessity has been issued until such substituted vehicle has been
inspected and approved by the chief and his approval has been endorsed on the certificate
by him. Further, any substitute taxicab must also meet any/all applicable requirements
set forth in the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended or by regulations of the VDMV.
§ 82-54. Insurance. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
Every owner of a taxicab in operation in the Town shall keep in effect at all times
such policies of insurance as are required under the rules, requirements, minimums
and regulations of the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles, the terms of which
as of May 2015 are $125,000 bodily injury and property damage, said terms being
subject to amendment. Each policy of insurance shall contain a clause obligating the
company issuing the same to give 20 days' notice in writing to the Town Manager before
cancellation thereof. The responsible party, owner or driver, shall furnish certificates of
insurance with the Town listed as an additional insured to the office of the chief at the
time application is accepted.
§ 82-55. Drivers. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
(a) No person shall drive a taxicab while it is in service without a taxicab driver's
certificate/license in his or her possession. The driver shall present same to a law
enforcement officer upon request.
(b) The application for said certificate/license shall be in writing, sworn to and
presented o the chief. It shall contain the following information:
(1) The full name, residence, places of residence (city or Town, state and country)
since the applicant's 18th birthday, age, height, race, eye and hair color, sex,
place of birth and places of previous employment of the applicant;
(2) Proof of valid Virginia driver's license;
(3) Department of motor vehicles driver's record for every state in which the
applicant has been licensed to drive;
(4) Two black and white passport photos.
(c) In the interest of public welfare and safety, it is necessary to determine if the past
criminal conduct of the applicant would be compatible with the duties of a driver of
a taxicab. The chief is therefore directed to forward the applicant's fingerprinting
and personal descriptive information through the Central Criminal Records
Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining
criminal history record information regarding such applicant in accordance with the
§ 82-52 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 82-55
82:9
§ 82-56. through § 82-65. (Reserved)
Virginia Code, 1950, as amended, § 15.2-1503.1.
(d) The application fee shall be $20 for initial application; $10 for each renewal. If the
police department obtains the national criminal history record, then the applicant
shall pay the cost of the record check to the department with the application.
(e) The chief shall issue a taxicab driver's license to the applicant upon finding the
following:
(1) The applicant is of age of 18 years or more;
(2) The applicant possesses a valid Virginia driver's license;
(3) The applicant has fewer than eight demerit points on his or her DMV record
(or out of state equivalent);
(4) The applicant has not been convicted of driving under the influence, or
reckless driving within five years previous to the date of the application, any
drug offense within 10 years pervious to the date of the application, and sex
offense, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or any felony.
(f) Each license shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of its issuance. A
materially false statement on the application voids the license.
§ 82-55 ABINGDON CODE § 82-56
82:10
DIVISION 3
Driver's Certificate/License
§ 82-66. Required. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
As set forth in Section 82-57 above, no person shall drive a taxicab in the Town unless
he has obtained from the chief the special license designated a taxicab driver's license
for that purpose, as well as a business license via the business office of the Town of
Abingdon, Virginia, per Section 82-46 above.
§ 82-67. Issuance. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the chief shall grant a license under this
division unless the applicant therefore is, in the opinion of the chief, disqualified because
of his physical condition, defective hearing or defective eyesight, or because of his
addiction to intoxicating liquors, narcotics or drugs, or because he has been convicted
of a violation of a criminal law. The chief, at his sole discretion, may require that an
applicant for a license take a medical examination and submit the finding to the chief.
§ 82-68. Term, renewal. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
A license issued under this division shall be for the same term as the driver's license
required by Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. § 46.2, and shall be renewed by the
chief subject to the criteria of this division.
§ 82-69. Grounds for revocation or suspension. [Ord. of 1-4-2016]
The general district court may revoke or suspend the license required by this division for
repeated violations of the traffic laws, violation of any law involving moral turpitude,
failure to report an accident, aiding and abetting known violators of laws and ordinances
to escape, operation of a taxicab not in good order, a conviction of reckless driving,
charging illegal rates, violations of laws and ordinances, or failure or refusal to complete
accepted calls without satisfactory reasons and unreasonable delay in completing such
calls.
§ 82-66 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 82-69
82:11

Appendix
§ 82-69 VEHICLES FOR HIRE § 82-69
82:13

Appendix A
SUBDIVISIONS
[Printed herein is the Subdivision Ordinance, adopted by the Council on 12-5-2005.
This ordinance also repealed the prior Subdivision Ordinance, adopted 9-21-1980.
Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by history notes following amended
provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains
unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation
errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform
system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and
expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances.]
§ 82-69 SUBDIVISIONS § 82-69
A:1

ARTICLE I
Title
§ 1.1. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and cited as "The Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of
Abingdon, Virginia, or the "subdivision ordinance."
§ 1.2. Purpose.
The Subdivision Ordinance of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia is intended to establish
procedures and regulations, for the subdivision of land, within the corporate limits of the
Town of Abingdon, Virginia, and to accomplish the objectives listed below:
(a) To guide and facilitate the orderly, beneficial growth of the community, and to
assure the equitable handling of all subdivision applications by providing uniform
procedures and standards for the subdivision of land.
(b) To assure the orderly subdivision of land and its development and for the general
purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the public and of
further accomplishing the objectives of the Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2240, et seq.,
as amended.
(c) To guide future growth and development in accordance with the policies of the
comprehensive plan, applicable zoning regulations and other adopted policy
documents of the Town.
§ 1.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 1.2
A:3

ARTICLE II
Rules Of Construction And Definitions
§ 2.1. Rules of construction.
Words and terms generally: For the purpose and within the limits of this ordinance,
certain words and terms used, herein, shall be interpreted or defined as follows, and
words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular includes the
plural, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates
otherwise; the word "lot" includes the word "plot," and "parcel," the word "shall"
is mandatory; the word "approve" shall be considered to be followed by the words
"or disapprove"; any reference to this ordinance includes all ordinances amending, or
supplementing the same; all distances and areas refer to measurement in a horizontal
plane.
§ 2.2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this appendix, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ALLEY — A permanent service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting
properties and not intended for general traffic circulation.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Town of Abingdon.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — That document as required by the Code of Virginia and
as approved and adopted by the Council.
COUNCIL — The Town Council of Abingdon, Virginia.
COUNTY — The County of Washington, Virginia.
DEVELOPER — An individual, corporation, or registered partnership engaged in the
subdivision of land.
DIRECTOR OF PLANNING — The Director of Planning for the Town of Abingdon
or the official performing the duties of the director of planning or his authorized
representative.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of Public Works for the Town of
Abingdon or the official performing the duties of the director of public works or his
authorized representative.
EASEMENT — A right expressed in a recorded writing, given by the owner of land to
another party for specific limited use of that land.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL — A person who is qualified to practice engineering
by reason of his special knowledge and use of mathematical, physical and engineering
sciences and the principles and methods of engineering analysis and design acquired by
engineering education and experience, and whose competence has been attested, through
licensure, as a professional engineer.
ENGINEER, TOWN — An employee of the Town of Abingdon who reviews
subdivision plans and site plans for new developments or upgrades to existing
§ 2.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 2.2
A:5
developments as well as reviews all infrastructure plans of the Town to insure that such
plans are in compliance with Town ordinances and other applicable regulations.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of the 100-year floodplain required to carry and
discharge flood waters of a given magnitude.
FRONTAGE — The width of a lot along the frontage street. The width shall be
measured from one side lot line to the other along a straight line on which no point shall
be farther away from the street than the minimum building setback lines.
HEALTH OFFICIAL — The health director or sanitarian of Washington County,
Virginia, or the director's duly authorized representative.
JURISDICTION — The area or territory subject to the legislative control of the Town
Council.
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL — For the purpose of this ordinance, a licensed
professional is a land surveyor or professional engineer duly licensed by the State of
Virginia.
LOT — A numbered and recorded portion of a subdivision intended for transfer of
ownership or for building development for a single building and its accessory buildings.
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot with only one street frontage.
MANAGER — The Town Manager for the Town of Abingdon or his authorized
representative.
PERFORMANCE BOND — A surety bond, cash deposit or letter of credit approved by
the Town Attorney and made out to the Town of Abingdon in an amount equal to the
full cost of the improvements which are required by these regulations, said cost being
estimated by the developer's engineer and approved by the Town engineer, and said
surety bond or cash deposit being legally sufficient to secure to the Town that the said
improvements will be constructed in accordance with these regulations.
PLANS, IMPROVEMENT — The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat
and showing the specific location and design of public improvements to be installed in
the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the subdivision ordinance as a
condition of approval of the plat.
PLAT — Includes the terms: map, plan, plot, replat, or replot; a map or plan of a tract or
parcel of land which is to be, or which has been subdivided. When used as a verb, "plat"
is synonymous with "subdivide."
PLAT, FINAL — The map of a subdivision submitted and approved by the Town, and
subsequently recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Washington
County, Virginia.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The preliminary drawing or drawings, including the
elements required by this ordinance, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the
subdivision, to be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval.
PROPERTY — Any tract, lot, parcel or several of the same collected together for the
purpose of subdividing.
RESERVE STRIP — A narrow plot of land adjacent to a public street, of insufficient
§ 2.2 ABINGDON CODE § 2.2
A:6
depth for subdivision, retained by the subdivider to prevent access to the street, by the
owner of adjoining property.
RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH — The total width of the strip of land dedicated or for public
travel within which roadway, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, planting strips and undeveloped
land may be located.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC — A legally established area or strip of land on which an
irrevocable public right of passage has been recorded, and which is occupied or intended
to be occupied by a street, utility service, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or
other similar use.
ROADWAY — That paved portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, and
where curbs are laid, the portion from face to face of curbs.
SETBACK — The minimum distance by which any building or structure (exclusive of
steps and landing) must be separated from the front lot or street line. Any area covered
by a roof, such as a porch, will be subject to setback requirements.
SIDEWALK — A paved walk, located in a right-of-way, adjacent to the public street.
STREET — A public way which affords the principal means of access to abutting
properties. The term "street" includes all property dedicated or intended for public
or private use for access to abutting lands or subject to public easements therefore,
and whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
expressway, road, drive, court, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle, or however
otherwise designated.
STREET WIDTH — The total width of the strip of land, dedicated or reserved, for
public travel, including roadways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and planting strips.
STREETS, ARTERIAL OR THOROUGHFARE — Streets designated as thoroughfares
on the Town of Abingdon Transportation Plan as such plan may be amended and updated
from time to time.
STREETS, COLLECTOR — Streets which carry traffic from local streets to the arterial
or thoroughfare streets. They provide the principal means for the collection of traffic
within or between major subdivisions or sections of Town.
STREETS, CUL-DE-SAC — Streets with only one outlet and an appropriate turnaround
for a safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
STREETS, LOCAL — Streets which are used primarily for access to the abutting
properties and may be designed to discourage their use by through traffic.
SUBDIVIDER — Anyone who subdivides or creates a subdivision of land.
SUBDIVISION — The act of dividing or the division of any tract, or parcel of land
into two or more parcels, parts, or sites, any one of which is less than five acres, for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development
and including all changes in street or lot lines. Provided, however, that the division or
partition of land into parcels, of more than five acres, not involving any new streets
and the sale, exchange or adjustment of parcels between adjoining lot owners, that
alter the existing lot lines and where such sale, exchange or adjustment does not create
additional building sites or create nonconforming lots shall meet the administrative
approval requirements of the Town Manager. The procedures for such administrative
§ 2.2 SUBDIVISIONS § 2.2
A:7
approval of the Town Manager are set forth in Addendum C.19
SURVEYOR, LAND — A person who, by reason of his knowledge of the several
sciences and of the principles of land surveying, and of the planning and design of
land developments acquired by practical experience and formal education, is qualified
to engage in the practice of land surveying, and whose competence has been attested
through licensure as a land surveyor.
TOWN — The Town of Abingdon, Virginia.
VDOT — The Virginia Department of Transportation.
YARD, REAR — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building between
the rear line of the building (exclusive of steps and landing) and the rear of the lot and
extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building between the
side line of the building (exclusive of steps and landing) and the side of the lot, and
extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
19. Editor's Note: Addendum C is on file and available for inspection in the Town offices.
§ 2.2 ABINGDON CODE § 2.2
A:8
ARTICLE III
Jurisdiction And Authority
§ 3.1. Application.
No person shall subdivide any tract of land that is located within the Town except
in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, the zoning ordinance and the
provisions of Virginia law relating to land subdivision and development. Prior to
subdividing any tract of land, consent shall be required from all legal owners of the
property to be subdivided and shall be so indicated on the final plat.
§ 3.2. Platting required.
Any owner or developer, of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of
the Town of Abingdon, Virginia, who subdivides the same shall cause a plat of such
subdivision, with reference to known or permanent monuments, to be made and recorded
in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Washington County, Virginia. No such
plat of a subdivision shall be submitted for recordation unless and until it shall have been
approved and certified in accordance with the regulations set forth in this ordinance. In
addition, no lot shall be sold in any such subdivision before the plat shall have been
approved in accordance with this ordinance and recorded. Before any permits are issued
to begin construction, a certified copy of the plat, with the clerk of the court's signature
and seal, shall be submitted to the building inspector, the director of planning, and the
director of public works that adequately verifies that the plat has been properly recorded
with the clerk of the circuit court in accordance with this ordinance.
§ 3.3. Authority.
The Planning Commission is charged with the responsibility of approving preliminary
plats, in accordance with the regulations herein contained. The commission shall
likewise consider final plats and make recommendations, for approval or disapproval,
to the Town Council which retains, unto itself, the authority for final approval of final
plats.
§ 3.4. Approval.
The Town Council may require the approval of final plats by the health official, the
Washington County Service Authority, and/or utility company or companies involved.
Such approval, when required, shall be indicated upon the plat.
§ 3.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 3.4
A:9

ARTICLE IV
Procedure
The subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat, improvement plans, a performance bond,
and a final plat, in accordance with these regulations.
§ 4.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 3.4
A:11

DIVISION 1
Preapplication
§ 4.1. Preapplication and concept sketch.
The applicant may schedule a conference, with the appropriate Town official(s), to
review a sketch for any proposed subdivision, in order to determine whether the concept
generally meets the requirements of the zoning and subdivision ordinances, and to
identify any concerns or issues raised by the proposed subdivision. The Town official(s)
comments shall be informal and shall not constitute a formal approval or disapproval of
the subdivision.
§ 4.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 4.1
A:13

DIVISION 2
Preliminary Plat
§ 4.2. Requirements.
The director of public works, Town engineer or director of planning shall discuss
the preliminary plat, with the subdivider, in order to determine whether or not the
preliminary plat generally conforms to the requirements of the subdivision ordinance
and the zoning ordinance. The subdivider shall then be advised in writing, which may
be by formal letter or by legible markings on a copy of one of the preliminary plats
submitted, concerning any additional data that may be required, such as contour intervals
or street grading plans; specific changes that are required in the preliminary layout; the
character and extent of public improvements that will have to be made; and an estimate
of the cost of construction or improvements and the amount of the performance bond.
In determining the cost of required improvements and the amount of the performance
bond, the Town shall require the developer's engineer to prepare the data for review by
the Town engineer.
§ 4.3. Copies and fees.
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, the subdivider or his authorized
representative shall submit four copies of a preliminary plat complying with the
requirement of Article VII and of this article. Said plans shall be accompanied by a fee
which may be established by the Town Council from time to time. The preliminary plat
shall be submitted to the Town engineer not less than 15 work days prior to the next
regular meeting of the commission. The Town engineer shall carefully examine said
plats as to its compliance with the laws and regulations of the Town, the existing street
system, and good engineering practices, and shall submit any findings to the commission
together with one copy of the plat received.
§ 4.4. Approval of other departments.
In order to insure that there are adequate provisions for drainage and flood control
and other public purposes, and for light and air, and for identifying soil characteristics,
the commission may require that approval be given by other departments, such as the
health department, the Washington County Service Authority and/or utility company or
companies involved.
§ 4.5. Consideration by Planning Commission.
The commission shall, at the next regular meeting after receiving the Town engineer's
report, consider said report, and act upon the plat. It shall then set forth its
recommendation in writing of approval, modification or disapproval. In case of
modification or disapproval, it shall give its reasons therefore. The commission shall
forthwith return one copy of the approved, modified or disapproved preliminary plat to
the subdivider.
§ 4.6. Approval and terms.
(a) Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the commission, the subdivider may
proceed with the preparation of the final plat and detailed construction drawings
§ 4.2 SUBDIVISIONS § 4.6
A:15
and specifications for the improvements required under these regulations.
(b) The approval of the preliminary plat by the commission is revocable, as set forth
herein, does not constitute a guarantee of approval of the final plat, and does not
constitute a final approval or acceptance of the subdivision by the Town Council or
authorization to proceed on construction of improvements within the subdivision,
but shall constitute approval of layout and general engineering proposals and plans.
Once a preliminary subdivision plat is approved, it shall be valid for a period of five
years, provided the subdivider (i) submits a final subdivision plat for all or a portion
of the property, within one year of such approval and (ii) thereafter diligently
pursues approval of the final subdivision plat. "Diligent pursuit of approval" means
that the subdivider has incurred extensive obligations or substantial expenses
relating to the submitted final subdivision plat or modifications thereto. However,
no sooner than three years following such preliminary subdivision plat approval,
and upon 90 days' written notice, by certified mail to the subdivider, the
commission may revoke such approval upon a specific finding of facts that the
subdivider has not diligently pursued approval of the final subdivision plat.
§ 4.6 ABINGDON CODE § 4.6
A:16
DIVISION 3
Final Plat
§ 4.7. Submittal.
The subdivider shall submit to the director of planning and Town engineer an original
full-scale Mylar, or equivalent, and 11 inches by 17 inches copies of a final subdivision
plat no less than 15 work days before the commission's next meeting. However, before
submitting the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish all plans and information, as listed
in Article VIII, necessary for the detailed engineering consideration of the improvements
necessary to obtain the approval of the director of planning and the Town engineer.
§ 4.8. Action of the Commission.
The commission shall, within 60 days from the date of submission of the final plat,
recommend to the Town Council to approve, modify, or disapprove such plat, and
failure to act within 60 days shall be deemed approval, unless the commission shall have
notified the subdivider, in writing, of a necessity to extend the period of its consideration
of the plat.
§ 4.9. Compliance.
The final plat shall not be approved until the subdivider has complied with the general
requirements and minimum standards of design, in accordance with this ordinance, and
has made satisfactory arrangements for performance bonds to cover the cost of necessary
improvements. The commission shall certify its approval, on said plat, by so indicating
on the final plat.
§ 4.10. Revisions.
No change, erasure or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat, nor on
accompanying data sheets, after approval has been endorsed, in writing, on the plat or
sheets, unless authorization for such change has been granted in writing.
§ 4.11. Action by the Commission.
When the final plat has been acted upon, by the commission, the final plat and
performance bond shall forthwith be transmitted to the Town Council, together with
documentation showing the action of the commission.
§ 4.12. Approval of final plat.
When the final plat has been approved by the Town Council, the performance bond
accepted, and the final plat has been signed and certified, one copy shall be delivered
to the Town engineer and one original Mylar to the subdivider for filing and recording
in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Washington County. If said plat is
disapproved by the Town Council, such disapproval shall point out in writing wherein
said proposed plat is objectionable.
§ 4.7 SUBDIVISIONS § 4.13
A:17
§ 4.13. Resolution of acceptance of plat.
The passage of the resolution accepting the plat shall constitute final approval of the
platting of the area shown on the final plat, but the owner shall cause such plat to be
recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Washington County, and shall
file satisfactory evidence of such recording with the Town engineer before the town shall
recognize the plat as being in full force and effect. Approval of the final plat shall not be
deemed the acceptance by the Town of any street, alley or other public space shown on
the plat for maintenance, repair or operation thereof, and shall be null and void if a copy
thereof is not recorded as required above, within six months after approval, unless such
time of recordation is extended by the Town Council.
§ 4.14. Relation to private contracts.
This ordinance bears no relation to any private easement, covenant, agreement or
restriction, nor is it the responsibility of any public official to enforce such private
easement, covenant, agreement or restriction. When this ordinance calls for more
restrictive standards than are required by private contract, the provisions of this
ordinance shall control.
§ 4.13 ABINGDON CODE § 4.14
A:18
ARTICLE V
General Requirements And Design Standards
DIVISION 1
General Provisions
§ 5.1. Private and public responsibility.
There is a mutual responsibility between the subdivider and the Town to subdivide land
in such a manner as to improve the general use pattern of the land being subdivided.
§ 5.2. Acreage subdivisions.
Whenever the area is divided into lots, containing one or more acres, and there are
indications that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into smaller building lots,
consideration must be given to the highway, street and lot arrangement of the original
subdivision so that additional local streets can be opened which will permit a logical
arrangement of smaller lots. Easements, providing for the future opening and extension
of such streets may, at the discretion of the Town Council, be made a requirement of the
plat.
§ 5.3. Flood control regulations.
The subdivider shall prepare a contour map of the proposed area, with contour intervals
of two feet and shall prepare drainage plans or flood control devices satisfactory to the
Town engineer. No plat shall be approved until the Town engineer shall certify that
the proper plans for drainage and flood control have been made. In the event that the
manager so certifies, the subdivider's engineer shall prepare the cost estimates for the
construction of such facilities.
§ 5.4. Adequate building site.
To ensure that owners will have sufficient land upon which to construct a structure
that is flood free, compliance with floodway widths and the 100-year flood elevations,
contained within the Town's Flood Insurance Study (FIS), is mandatory. The Town
engineer may require the applicant to provide elevation and flood profiles, based on a
100-year flood plain (which means that a flood of a magnitude likely to occur, on the
average, only once every 100 years), sufficient to demonstrate the land to be completely
free of the danger of flood water at an elevation of at least one foot below any probable
floor level of any structure for human occupancy.
§ 5.5. Street elevations.
Except as provided herein the Town engineer shall not approve streets subject to
inundation or flooding by water. All streets must be adequately located above the line
of flood elevation to prevent isolation of areas by flood. Drainage facilities in local,
collector and cul-de-sac streets shall be designed to handle a storm with an expected
return period of once in every 10 years. Drainage facilities in arterial streets shall be
designed to handle a storm with a twenty-five-year return period.
§ 5.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 5.6
A:19
§ 5.6. Streets.
The following regulations shall govern the layout and naming of streets.
§ 5.6 ABINGDON CODE § 5.6
A:20
DIVISION 1
Relation to Adjoining Property and Street Systems
§ 5.7. Adjoining property.
(a) Where it is necessary for the orderly extension of the Town's street system to
provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended
by dedication to the boundary line of such property. Half streets along the boundary
of land proposed for subdivision are not permitted.
(b) The arrangement of streets, in new subdivisions, shall make provision for the
continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas where streets already exist. Major,
collector and local streets shall be respectively extended as such. The street
arrangement must be such as to cause no unnecessary hardship to owners of
adjoining property.
(c) Should a subdivision abut on only one side of an existing street, the subdivider shall
dedicate enough land so that one-half of the width of such street, as measured from
the centerline to the subdivision property line, shall be one-half the standard width
of such street as classified.
§ 5.7 SUBDIVISIONS § 5.7
A:21

DIVISION 2
Level of Service
§ 5.8. Level of service.
No development shall be approved if such development, at ultimate build out, will result
in or increase traffic on the arterial or collector street to which it is connected, so that
the street does not function at an average daily traffic level of service C or better, or
a peak traffic level D, as described in "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways
and Streets," latest edition, published by the American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials. The applicant may propose and construct approved traffic
mitigation measures to provide adequate roadway capacity for the proposed
development. The applicant for any development shall provide a traffic impact analysis
which, at a minimum, includes the following information:
(a) Peak hour trip ends generated by the development as described in "Trip
Generation," latest edition, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
(b) Information on the street in which the connection is being made: peak hour traffic
along with its directional distribution, lane and shoulder widths, the type of terrain,
and the percentage of trucks, buses, and RV's on the connection street. The
development engineer shall use this information to conduct a traffic capacity
analysis as described in "The Highway Capacity Manual," latest edition, published
by the transportation research board. Additionally, the engineer shall determine if a
left or right turn lane is necessary utilizing the "Minimum Standards of State
Entrances" document, latest edition, published by the Virginia Department of
Transportation. All or part of the traffic analysis may be waived by the director of
public works depending upon the type and size of development, the condition of the
connection street, or an interpretation of the minimum information given above.
§ 5.8 SUBDIVISIONS § 5.8
A:23

DIVISION 3
Approach Angle
§ 5.9. Angle.
Local streets shall approach the major or collector streets at an angle of not less than 80°,
unless the commission, upon recommendation of the Town engineer, shall approve a
lesser angle of approach for reasons of contour, terrain, or matching of existing patterns.
§ 5.9 SUBDIVISIONS § 5.9
A:25

DIVISION 4
Streets in Relation to Railroads
§ 5.10. Railroad right-of-way.
When the area to be subdivided adjoins a railroad right-of-way, the intersection of the
centerline of any street or highway paralleling the railroad, with that of any street that
crosses the railroad, shall not be less than 150 feet from the line of the railroad right-ofway.
§ 5.10 SUBDIVISIONS § 5.10
A:27

DIVISION 5
Street and Alley Widths, Culs-De-Sac, Easements
§ 5.11. Minimum width.
§ 5.12. Alleys.
§ 5.13. Cul-de-sac.
Local terminal streets (cul-de-sac), designed to have one end permanently closed, shall
not be longer than 1,000 feet, to the beginning of the turn-around. Each cul-de-sac must
be terminated by a turn-around having a property line diameter of at least 100 feet. If
surface water drains into the turn-around, due to the grade of the street, necessary storm
drainage facilities and drainage easements shall be provided. Minimum face of curb
radius shall be 42 feet.
§ 5.14. Provisions for street access.
Where the commission requires provisions for street access to adjoining property,
proposed streets shall be extended by dedication and construction to the boundary of
(a) The minimum width of existing and proposed streets, measured from lot line to lot
line, shall be as shown on the street designation map incorporated in Addendum
A.20 The minimum width of streets, which do not appear on said map, shall be
classified according to potential traffic load determined by the public works
department as follows:
(1) Arterial or thoroughfare streets, not less than 80 feet, or as shown on the
current state transportation plan.
(2) Collector streets, not less than 60 feet.
(3) Local service streets which cannot be extended in the future, not less than 50
feet.
(4) Alleys, if permitted, not less than 20 feet.
(b) Whenever subdivided property abuts an existing half street the remainder of the
street shall be dedicated to make the right-of-way on the half-street abutting the
subdivision comply with these requirements.
(a) Alleys shall be provided in business and industrial districts, except that the
commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision
is made for service access, such as off-street loading and unloading, and parking
consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
(b) While not required, the commission may recommend alleys be provided to serve
residential properties where such alleys are considered necessary. In any case, dead
end alleys should be avoided where possible, but, if unavoidable, shall be provided
with adequate turn-around facilities as recommended by the commission.
20. Editor's Note: Addendum A is on file and available for inspection in the Town offices.
§ 5.11 SUBDIVISIONS § 5.14
A:29
such property. Such dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary turn-around.
§ 5.14 ABINGDON CODE § 5.14
A:30
DIVISION 6
Street Names and House Numbers
§ 5.15. Street names.
Unless the commission allows an exception, proposed streets which are obviously in
alignment with others already existing and named, shall bear the names of the existing
streets. In no case shall the name of the proposed streets duplicate existing street names
regardless of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, way, place or court.
Street names shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plats and shall be approved
by the commission. Names of existing streets shall not be changed except by the
approval of the Town Council. House numbers (911 addresses) shall be assigned by the
Town.
§ 5.15 SUBDIVISIONS § 5.15
A:31

DIVISION 7
Layout of Streets
§ 5.16. Intersections and right angles.
Whenever possible, streets should intersect at a right angle. Where a deflection angle
of more than 2° in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius
shall be introduced. On streets 60 feet or more in width the centerline radius of curvature
shall not be less than 300 feet, on other streets not less than 100 feet. Face of curb
radii at intersections shall generally be not less than 30 feet for collector streets nor less
than 20 feet for local streets. Face of curb radii at arterial street intersections shall be as
determined by the Town engineer.
§ 5.16 SUBDIVISIONS § 5.16
A:33

DIVISION 8
Street and Alley Grades
§ 5.17. Street grades.
On streets that are required to have a right-of-way width of 60 feet or more, grades shall
not exceed 6%. On streets and alleys permitted to have a right-of-way width of less than
60 feet, grades shall not exceed 12%.
§ 5.18. Private streets and reserve strips.
Unless otherwise provided herein or in the Town zoning ordinance, there shall be no
private streets platted in any subdivision. Every subdivided property shall be served from
a publicly dedicated street constructed to the standards of this code and accepted and
maintained by the Town of Abingdon. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access
to streets.
§ 5.19. Blocks.
§ 5.20. Lots.
(a) Minimum pavement width:
(1) Streets shall be graded to the cross section and profile approved by the
commission. Collector streets shall be surfaced to a width of 40 feet (face of
curb to face of curb) and local service streets shall be surfaced to a width of 34
feet (including gutter pans).
(2) The minimum pavement width for alleys shall be 16 feet.
(a) Length. Blocks shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length and they shall not be less than
400 feet in length.
(b) Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow for two tiers of lots at minimum depth
except where prevented by topographical conditions or width of property, in which
case the commission may alter the width.
(c) Crosswalks. In blocks over 800 feet in length, the commission may require one or
more public crosswalks, of not less than 10 feet in width, to extend entirely across
the block and at locations deemed necessary.
(d) Block orientations. Where a subdivision adjoins a major road, the commission may
require that the greater dimension of the block shall front or back upon such major
thoroughfare to avoid unnecessary ingress or egress.
(e) Business or industrial blocks. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall
be designed specifically for such purposes with adequate space set aside for offstreet parking and delivery facilities.
(a) Arrangement, design, and shape. The lot arrangement, design, and shape shall be
such that lots will provide satisfactory and desirable sites for buildings, and be
properly related to topography and conform to requirements set forth herein. Lots
shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations solely to provide necessary square
§ 5.17 SUBDIVISIONS § 5.20
A:35
§ 5.21. Reservation of land for public purposes, easements, etc.
The commission may require subdividers to set aside land for parks, playgrounds,
schools, libraries, municipal buildings and similar public uses, subject to the following
regulations:
footage of area which would be unusable for normal purposes.
(b) Conformance with zoning ordinance. All lots shown on the subdivision plat must
conform to the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance as to area and
dimensions, for the zone in which the subdivision is located.
(c) Each abut on a public street. Each lot shall abut on a street dedicated by the
subdivision plat or an existing publicly dedicated and maintained street, or on a
street which has become public by right of use. Interior lots having frontage on two
streets shall be avoided except where unusual conditions make other design
desirable.
(d) Corner lots. Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient for maintenance of
required building lines on both streets as required by the zoning ordinance.
(e) Lot lines. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles, or radial to the
street line.
(f) Lot remnants forbidden. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after
subdividing of a tract must be added to adjacent lots, rather than be allowed to
remain as unmarketable or nonconforming parcels.
(g) Subdivision property under single ownership. Where the land covered by a
subdivision includes two or more parcels in separate ownership and the lot
arrangement is such that a property ownership line divides one or more lots, the
land in each lot so divided shall be transferred by deed to single ownership before
approval of the final plat, and such transfer certified to the commission by the Clerk
of the Circuit Court of Washington County, Virginia.
(a) Limit as to extent of land dedicated. Subdividers shall not be required to dedicate
land for parks and playgrounds exceeding 5% of the area of the subdivision,
exclusive of street and drainage reservations, without reimbursement by the Town.
Where land is required in excess of this amount, the reimbursement by the Town
shall be based on a proportionate share of (i) cost of raw land, (ii) cost of
improvements, including interest on investment, (iii) development costs, (iv) plus
not more than 10% profit on the total of such costs.
(b) Reimbursement and time limit for certain dedications. Subdividers shall not be
required to reserve land for public purposes other than streets, storm drainage,
sanitary sewers, parks and playgrounds, except on a reimbursement basis. They
shall be reimbursed by the jurisdiction or agency requiring the land. They shall not
be required to hold the land longer than 12 months following the recording of the
plat for such purchase. If the land is not purchased within the said 12 months, it
platted. To facilitate such possible eventual sale of reserved land as separate lots,
the subdivider shall show on his final plat, by dotted lines and dotted numbers, the
sizes and dimensions of lots to be created within the boundaries of any such
§ 5.20 ABINGDON CODE § 5.21
A:36
§ 5.22. Monuments.
reserved land, and may sell such lots, after the expiration date of the reservations,
any such reserved land is divisible into lots and/or streets in a manner compatible
with the remainder of the subdivision, so that the subdivider will not be required to
reserve an unusable portion of his subdivision.
(c) Meeting with subdivider required for reservation of land. The commission shall not
require any such reservation of land unless and until responsible representatives of
the agencies for whom land is to be reserved have met with the commission and the
subdivider jointly to discuss the reservation. Such representatives may be required
by the commission to indicate the needs of their agency in writing. Insofar as is
reasonably possible, the commission shall require no dedication or reservation
which calls for reimbursement to the subdivider unless it has been assured that the
reservation will be required by the agency requiring it within 12 months following
the recordation of the final plat.
(d) Rezoning required for commercial land set-aside. Nothing herein shall be construed
to mean that land may be set aside for commercial purposes in a residential zone,
without the land so required for commercial use being rezoned appropriately in
accordance with the zoning ordinance by the Town Council.
(e) Easements required for utilities. Where alleys are not provided in the plat,
easements of not less than 10 feet in width shall be granted to the Town by the
owner on each side of all rear lot lines and where necessary, along side lot lines for
public utility requirements. Easements of greater width may be required along lot
lines or across lots when necessary for the extensions of main sewers or other
utilities. No buildings or structures will be permitted on easements. Easements 20
feet in width shall be required for all public sanitary sewer lines, centered on
existing or proposed sanitary sewer lines, within the area platted.
(f) Provision for drainage of surface waters required. Wherever any stream or surface
watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall at his
own expense, make adequate provisions for the proper drainage of surface water
and shall also provide and dedicate to the Town an easement along said streams and
watercourses meeting the approval of the commission.
(a) Upon completion of subdivision streets, sewers, and other improvements, the
subdivider shall make certain that all monuments required by the Town are clearly
visible for inspection and use. Such monuments shall be inspected and approved by
the director of public works before any improvements are accepted by the Town
Council.
(b) At least two concrete monuments four inches in diameter or square, two feet long,
with a flat top, or other standard acceptable to the public works department, shall
be set in each subdivision block. The top of the monument shall have an indented
cross to identify properly the location and shall be set flush with the finished grade.
A minimum of two monuments in each subdivision shall be tied to the Global
Positioning System (GPS).
§ 5.21 SUBDIVISIONS § 5.23
A:37
§ 5.23. Platting of part of a tract.
Whenever part of a tract is proposed for platting and it is intended to subdivide additional
parts in the future, a sketch plan for the entire tract shall be submitted with the
preliminary plat.
§ 5.24. Building lines to conform with zoning regulations.
Front setbacks, side yards, and rear yard lines conforming with zoning regulations shall
be shown on all lots within the platted area.
§ 5.25. Exceptions in planned large-scale developments.
Whenever a subdivision is developed as a planned unit development or other large-scale
development under appropriate provisions of the zoning ordinance, the commission may
vary the requirements of sections 5.6 through Section 5.20 of this article in order to allow
the subdivider more freedom in the arrangements of the streets, blocks and lots, but at the
same time protecting the convenience, health and safety of the probable future residents
of the subdivision as well as the general welfare of the surrounding area.
§ 5.26. Group housing development.
A comprehensive group housing development, including the large scale construction of
housing units together with necessary drives and ways of access may be approved by
the Planning Commission although the design of the project does not include standard
lot and subdivision arrangements, if departure from the foregoing standard can be made
without destroying the intent of the subdivision ordinance.
§ 5.23 ABINGDON CODE § 5.26
A:38
ARTICLE VI
Improvements
§ 6.1. Generally.
§ 6.2. Inspection of construction.
Inspection during and after installation of improvements will be made by representatives
of the Town and approving agencies to insure conformity with approved plans and
specifications. The subdivider shall notify the Town in writing three days before
commencing construction or installation on any item of improvement and of each phase
of street construction. The subdivider shall also notify the Town upon completion of
each improvement item or phase of street construction. The subdivider shall provide
adequate competent supervision on the project site, during construction of the required
improvements and shall keep one set of approved plans, profiles and specifications on
the project site at all times when work is being performed.
§ 6.3. Grades, streets and alleys.
All streets and alleys, including those within platted areas which are dedicated for public
uses, shall be graded to the full right-of-way width unless the Town Council permits a
lesser graded width. In all cases the centerline of the roadway shall coincide with the
centerline of the dedicated right-of-way.
§ 6.4. Roadways.
All roadways shall be paved with bituminous material, in accordance with the
requirements of the Town of Abingdon, Department of Public Works for acceptance by
that department and as approved by the Town Council after receiving the report and
recommendation of the Town Manager. The subdivider shall be responsible for bringing
roadways up to standard for initial acceptance by the Abingdon Department of Public
Works.
§ 6.5. Street name signs.
Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections at locations approved by
the director of public works. Sign plates shall be of metal, black letters on a white
background with letters and backgrounds fully reflectorized, attached to a post.
(a) The subdivider shall install and construct, at his cost, all improvements required by
this article, in subdivision lying wholly or in part in the Town of Abingdon, which
includes new streets, portions of existing streets, any easement, extension of
drainage, sewer or water systems, or right-of-way connecting two public streets. All
required improvements that are under the control of the Town of Abingdon shall be
installed and constructed in accordance with the specifications and under the
supervision of the Town engineer.
(b) Any improvements, which are installed and constructed as part of a subdivision or
development, which are not required but will come under control of the Town of
Abingdon, shall be installed and constructed, in accordance with good engineering
practices, and approved by the Town engineer.
§ 6.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 6.6
A:39
§ 6.6. Curb and gutter.
Curb and gutter shall be installed on both sides of all streets and shall conform to
the Virginia Department of Highways and Transportation standard CG-6. When in the
opinion of the Town engineer curbing alone will satisfy the needs of the subdivision,
curbs conforming to standard CG-2 shall be constructed on both sides of all streets. Curb
depth below surface of pavement may be modified if so recommended by the director of
public works.
§ 6.7. Sidewalks.
§ 6.8. Water lines.
The water distribution system in the subdivision shall be as required and approved by the
Washington County Service Authority. Mains shall be sized for adequate fire protection
and fire hydrants shall be installed not more than 1,000 feet apart in a business district
and not more than 2,000 feet apart in a residential district, as traveled by improved streets
from the fire hydrant to the property.
§ 6.9. Sewers.
All sewer installations shall conform to the requirements of the Town ordinance
pertaining to utilities (Chapter 74). The subdivider shall connect to the public sanitary
sewer system and shall provide, within the subdivision, a sanitary sewer system. The
sewer system shall be approved by the Town of Abingdon. Construction will be in
compliance with the technical specifications for sanitary sewer construction for the
Town of Abingdon and the State Department of Environmental Quality. Where sanitary
sewers are not available by gravity, other facilities as approved by the health official and/
or the Town of Abingdon must be provided for the adequate disposal of sanitary waste.
§ 6.10. Storm drainage.
Adequate facilities shall be provided for the disposal of storm water. The storm drainage
system shall be approved by the Town of Abingdon Department of Public Works. All
storm water facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements as set
forth in the Town's erosion and sediment control ordinance. Additionally, the use of
low impact development practices should be considered, and is encouraged wherever
practical.
§ 6.11. Street lighting.
(a) Sidewalks of concrete or other approved material with a minimum width of five
feet and a minimum thickness of four inches shall be installed on both sides of all
streets; provided, however, that where warranted, the Town Council may waive
these requirements.
(b) Where sidewalks and/or curbs and gutters are installed, drive entrances shall be
constructed conforming to Virginia Department of Transportation Standard CG-9B
or CG-9D as determined by the Town prior to construction. Where no sidewalk is
constructed, an apron two feet wide shall be constructed conforming to Section C-C
of CG-9B and Section A-A of CG-9D.
§ 6.6 ABINGDON CODE § 6.11
A:40
§ 6.12. Plans and specifications.
Plans and specifications furnished by the subdivider or his engineer shall be approved by
the public works department. The Washington County Service Authority shall approve
plans and specifications for the installation of the water system. Plans and specifications
approved by the Town shall be made available to the subdivider. Street improvements
shall be made in compliance with the latest edition of Road and Bridge Specifications of
the Virginia Department of Transportation, where applicable.
§ 6.13. Acceptance by Town of required improvements.
The Town shall accept all required improvements that have been constructed in
accordance, with the plans and specifications, as approved, by the public works
department and other applicable agencies.
§ 6.14. Bond.
Before any subdivision plat will be finally approved, the subdivider shall furnish a surety
or performance bond, made payable to the Town of Abingdon, by a surety company
authorized to do business in the State of Virginia and approved by the Town Attorney.
The amount of the bond, or letter of credit or cash escrow approved by the Town
engineer, shall be based on an estimate as provided in sections 2.2 and 4.2 calculated
to secure the installation of the required improvements in a workmanlike manner and in
accordance with the plans and specifications.
§ 6.15. Full or partial release of bond.
(a) Street lights shall be provided on all collector and arterial streets within or
contiguous to a subdivision. The street light layout shall be in accordance with the
VDOT Subdivision Street Guide (24VAC-30-91-160). The installation cost shall be
paid by the subdivider.
(b) Street lights are not required to be installed upon local streets but are permitted at
the subdividers option. The cost of providing street lights on local streets shall be
the subdividers responsibility.
(a) The Town shall periodically provide, for the partial release and final and complete
release of any performance bond, required herein, within 30 days after receipt of
written notice by the subdivider or developer of completion of part or all of any
public facilities required to be constructed herein. However, in the event that the
governing body, or its designated administrative agency, notifies the subdivider or
developer in writing of non receipt of approval, by any applicable state agency, of
any specified defects or deficiencies in construction and/or any defects or
deficiencies in any suggested corrected measures prior to the expiration of the 30
day notice above, the bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee
shall remain in full force and effect, until such time as the said approvals have been
received and any and all defects or deficiencies have been corrected.
(b) Upon final completion and acceptance of any public facilities, the governing body
or public works department shall release any remaining performance bond to the
subdivider or developer. No public facilities shall be finally accepted by the
§ 6.11 SUBDIVISIONS § 6.15
A:41
§ 6.16. Local ordinances.
The subdivider shall comply with all local ordinances applicable, including but not
limited to, the zoning ordinance and the erosion and sediment control ordinance.
governing body until the expiration of 12 months from the date that the governing
body receives written notice from the subdivider or developer of final completion
of said public facilities and is also approved by the public works department.
§ 6.15 ABINGDON CODE § 6.16
A:42
ARTICLE VII
Preliminary Plat
§ 7.1. Generally.
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100
feet or less and shall be plainly marked "preliminary plat." The preliminary plat may be
prepared by the owner of the land, urban planners, land planners, architects or others
having training or experience in subdivision planning or design.
§ 7.2. Contents.
The preliminary plat shall include the following:
(a) The proposed subdivision name or identifying title.
(b) Name and address of record owner, subdivider and preparer of the preliminary
layout.
(c) Location of property lines, existing easements, buildings, watercourses, areas
subject to flooding, including delineation of flood plain districts, existing and
proposed utilities, culverts and other essential features.
(d) The names of all subdivisions, immediately adjacent, and the names of owners of
record of adjacent property.
(e) Location, names and present width of existing and proposed streets, highways,
easements, building lines, alleys, location of existing and proposed utilities, parks
and other public open spaces.
(f) All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated for public use, the conditions of such
dedication, and percentage of land to be subdivided as common open spaces, park
or public lands.
(g) Date, magnetic north point, scale, and key map showing the general location of the
proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding developments and landmarks.
(h) Total acreage of the subdivision, deed reference, and map of survey of the tract
boundary made and certified by a land surveyor.
(i) Connections with existing sanitary sewers and existing water supply or alternate
means of sewage disposal and water supply.
(j) Provisions for collecting and discharging surface drainage and preliminary plans
for any bridges or culverts which may be required.
(k) The metes and bounds descriptions of the proposed lots and lot areas in acres and
square feet. The frontage of each lot and the frontage at the setback line.
(l) The zoning classifications and proposed use for the area being subdivided.
(m) Tax map designation or geographic parcel identification number, if available, for
the subject and surrounding properties.
§ 7.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 7.2
A:43
(n) Location and identification of graves, objects, or structures making a place of
human burial.
§ 7.2 ABINGDON CODE § 7.2
A:44
ARTICLE VIII
Final Plat Requirements
§ 8.1. Engineer to draw and certify.
§ 8.2. Owner's statement.
Every final plat, or the deed of dedication to which such plat is attached, shall contain
in addition to the surveyor's certificate a statement to the effect that, "the platting or
dedication of the following described land (here insert correct description of the land
subdivided) as appears in this plat is with the free consent and in accordance with the
desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any, "which shall be signed
by the owners, proprietors and trustee, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before
some officer authorized to take acknowledgments of deeds, and when thus executed
and acknowledged upon approval as herein specified, shall be filed and recorded in the
Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Washington County, Virginia, and indexed
under the names of the owners of the land signing such statement and under the name of
the said subdivision.
§ 8.3. Contents.
In addition to the requirements of sections 8.1 and 8.2, the following shall be shown on
the final plat:
(a) Every final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor or professional engineer duly
licensed by the State of Virginia, who shall endorse upon each plat a certificate
signed by him setting forth the source of the title of the land subdivided, and the
place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the plat is of land
acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall
be indicated upon such plat.
(b) Written and signed statements explaining how and when the subdivider proposes to
provide and install all required sewers or other disposal of sanitary wastes,
pavement, sidewalks, drainage structures, curb and gutters and water lines.
(c) Written and signed statements of the appropriate officials of the availability of gas,
electricity and water to the proposed subdivision.
(d) Any restrictions proposed to be included in the owner's declaration of plat.
(a) The subdivision plat submitted for final approval and subsequent recording shall be
clearly and legibly drawn on, translucent material such as Mylar or vellum or
acceptable equivalent, scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch on sheets not
larger than 18 inches by 34 inches or the largest size acceptable by the Circuit Court
of Washington County nor smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches in size with a oneinch clear margin on the left edge and a one-half-inch margin on all other edges. A
title box shall be located in the lower right hand corner.
(b) Names of subdivision, Town, magisterial district, county, state, owner and
subdivider; addresses of owner of record and subdivider; north point; the scale, date
of drawing and any revisions; number of sheets; and the name of the licensed
§ 8.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 8.3
A:45
professional making the survey. If shown on more than one sheet, match lines shall
clearly indicate where the several sheets join. Applicable certificates as required for
approval as shown in Addendum B.21
(c) Boundary survey with an error of closure within the limit of one in 10,000.
(d) When the subdivision consists of land acquired from more than one source of title,
the outlines of the various tracts shall be indicated by dash lines, and identification
of the respective tracts shall be placed on the plat. Replats shall indicate original
data.
(e) The accurate location and dimensions by bearings and distances, with all curve data
of all lot and street lines and center lines of streets; boundaries of all easements,
parks, school sites, or other public areas; the number and area of all building lots;
the total area of subdivision; the delineation of flood plains; the identification of
graves, objects or structures, marking a place of burial; all existing and platted
streets, their names, numbers and widths; names of owners and their property lines,
both within the boundaries of the subdivision and adjoining such boundaries.
(f) All dimensions shown in feet and decimals of a foot to the closest 1/100th of a foot;
all bearings in degrees, minutes and the nearest 10 seconds.
(g) The data for all curves along street right-of-way lines shall be shown in detail at the
curve or at a curve data table showing the following: delta, radius, arc, tangent,
chord and chord bearing.
(h) All survey monuments and bench marks, together with their description.
(i) Private restrictive covenants and their period of existence. Should these restrictions
be of such length as to make their lettering on the plat impracticable and thus
necessitate the preparation of a separate instrument, reference shall be made thereto
on the plat.
(j) The accurate outline, dimensions and purposes of all property which is offered for
dedication, is to be reserved for acquisition for public use, or is to be reserved by
deed covenant for the common use of the property owners in the subdivision.
(k) Temporary turnarounds where required. When one or more temporary turnarounds
are shown, the following note shall be included on the plat: "The area on this plat
designated as temporary turnaround will be constructed and used as other streets in
the subdivision until [name of street] is extended to [end point], at which time the
land in the temporary turnaround areas will be abandoned for street purposes and
will revert to adjoining lot owners."
(l) The location of all minimum building setback lines, side yards and rear yards.
(m) The following plans and information shall be submitted with, or prior to, the
submittal of the final plat:
(1) Drainage plans.
21. Editor's Note: Addendum B is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the Town offices.
§ 8.3 ABINGDON CODE § 8.3
A:46
(2) Soil erosion and sediment control plans.
(3) Street plans including cross sections and profiles, and other necessary data, as
described in Article IX, Improvement Plans.
(4) Natural gas, water supply and sewage disposal plans including drainage
courses, existing sewers, water and gas mains and culverts and other
underground structures, showing pipe sizes, invert elevations and grades.
§ 8.3 SUBDIVISIONS § 8.3
A:47

ARTICLE IX
Improvement Plans
§ 9.1. Plans, profiles and cross sections.
§ 9.2. Procedure for approval.
§ 9.3. Revisions to approved plans.
The Town must approve, in writing, by written change order format, any significant
deviation from previously approved plans and specifications. Requests for such
(a) The subdivider shall submit to the Town the following plans, profiles and cross
sections, drawn to a horizontal scale of at least one inch to 30 feet and a vertical
scale of one inch to five feet or less, and specifications for the construction of the
improvements for the subdivision as required in these regulations. All elevations
shall be referred to mean sea level with one or more benchmarks described on the
plans. Improvement plans shall be prepared by a professional engineer or land
surveyor, who shall endorse the plan.
(b) The plans and profiles of each street with proposed grades and street intersection
elevations and all drainage and utility features required.
(c) The cross sections of the proposed streets showing the width of roadways, present
and proposed grade lines and location and size of utility mains. The cross sections
shall be taken and withdrawn at intervals of not more than 50 feet along the
centerline, unless otherwise required by the Town, and shall extend out to the sides
to that point where the proposed grade intersects the existing grade. In no case shall
these cross sections be extended less than the full width of the right-of-way.
(d) The plan and profile of proposed sanitary sewers and storm water drains, with
grades and pipe sizes indicated, and a plan of the proposed water distribution
system showing pipe sizes and location of valves and fire hydrants.
(e) Standards, specifications and special provisions, approved by the department of
public works, may be required.
(a) Improvement plans for the design and construction of required public facilities shall
be submitted prior to or with the final plat. The Town engineer shall approve or
disapprove plans within 30 days of their submission. In the event of the failure of
the Town engineer to act within such period, the plans may be submitted, after 10
days' notice to the Town, to the circuit court for its approval or disapproval.
(b) Prior to final approval, by the Town, improvement plans shall be signed by the
owner of the land proposed for subdivision. The signature shall certify that the
owner is aware of the design requirements imposed by the plan and other applicable
Town codes, and shall further certify that the owner agrees to comply with these
requirements, unless modified in accordance with the Town Code.
(c) The improvements plans shall include the information and notes, as set forth in the
improvement plan submittal requirements, as published and revised, from time to
time, by the Town of Abingdon Department of Public Works.
§ 9.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 9.3
A:49
deviations, accompanied by revised plans, shall be made by the licensed professional,
that prepared the plans, and presented to the director of public works, who will
implement the review and approval process.
§ 9.4. Submittal of as-builts required.
The contractor shall keep at all times, on the job site, a set of approved plans and project
specifications. Within five work days, after completion of the project, the contractor
shall return to the licensed professional, that prepared the plans, one set of marked plans
showing the as-built condition. This shall include the sanitary sewer, water distribution
system, street lighting, street(s), drainage, and other construction as identified on the
approved construction plans and other documents. The information contained on the
contractor's as-built plans will then be transferred to the original drawings by the
licensed professional, that prepared the plans, and one set of paper prints and one set
of Mylar prints of as-built plans presented to the director of public works, prior to
acceptance by the Town.
§ 9.3 ABINGDON CODE § 9.4
A:50
ARTICLE X
Exceptions
§ 10.1. Modification of requirements.
Where, in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict
compliance, with the requirements of these regulations, would result in extraordinary
hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography; or other such non-selfinflicted conditions, peculiar to this site, or that these conditions would result in
inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of these regulations, the Planning
Commission may recommend to the Town Council a waiver or modification of a portion
or portions of these requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public
interest secured; provided, that such variance, notification, or waiver will not have the
effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. Any such waiver or
modification, authorized under the provisions of this section, shall be stated in writing,
on the plat, by the subdivider, with the reasoning set forth on which the waiver or
modification was justified.
§ 10.2. Minimum easing of requirements.
In no case shall any variation or modification be more than a minimum easing of the
requirements and in no instance shall it have the effect of reducing the traffic capacity of
any street below that shown on the comprehensive plan or be in conflict with any zoning
ordinance, resolution, or map.
§ 10.3. Vote required.
Such variance and waivers may be granted only by the affirmative vote of a majority of
the members of the Town Council present and voting.
§ 10.4. Conditions.
In granting variances and modifications, the Town Council may require such conditions
as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the requirements so varied
or modified.
§ 10.5. Planned unit developments.
Design standards, development plans and platting requirements, for planned unit
developments shall be as specified in Article 20 of the Town zoning ordinance.
§ 10.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 10.5
A:51

ARTICLE XI
Vacation Of Plats
§ 11.1. Applicable state law.
Vacation of recorded plats or portions of recorded plats may be accomplished with
approval of the commission and the Council in accordance with the procedures of the
Code of Virginia, 1950, §§ 15.2-2271 through 15.2-2278, as amended.
§ 11.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 11.1
A:53

ARTICLE XII
Changes And Amendments
§ 12.1. Authority and notice.
Any regulations or provisions of these regulations may be changed and amended from
time to time by the Town Council; provided however, that the commission shall not
recommend nor the Town Council adopt any change or amendment until notice of
intention to do so has been published once a week for two successive weeks in some
newspaper published or having general circulation in Abingdon. Such notice shall
specify the time and place of hearing at which persons affected may appear and present
their views, not less than five days nor more than 10 days after final publication.
§ 12.2. Preparation and recommendation.
The commission on its own initiative, or at the request of the Council, shall prepare
and recommend amendments to this ordinance; provided, that no such amendment
shall be adopted by the Council without a reference of the proposed amendment to
the commission for recommendation, nor until 60 days after such reference, if no
recommendation is made by the commission.
§ 12.3. Filing of copies.
When an amendment to this ordinance is adopted, a certified copy of the amendment
shall be filed in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Washington County,
Virginia.
§ 12.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 12.3
A:55

ARTICLE XIII
Violations And Penalties
§ 13.1. Violations.
§ 13.2. Enforcement.
(a) No person shall subdivide any tract of land that is located within the jurisdiction of
the Town except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and any other
applicable Town ordinance.
(b) No person shall subdivide land without making and recording a plat of such
subdivision in compliance with the provisions of this subdivision ordinance and
applicable statutory law.
(c) No such plat of any subdivision shall be recorded unless or until it shall have been
submitted and approved in accordance with this ordinance.
(a) Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this section shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $500 for each lot or parcel of land so subdivided or transferred
or sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
(b) In addition to a fine, the Town Attorney may take such other legal action as may be
necessary to enforce the provisions of this ordinance, including suit for injunction,
for abatement or other appropriate proceeding.
(c) The zoning administrator shall not approve a site plan nor issue a building permit
for a lot that was created in violation of this ordinance.
§ 13.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 13.2
A:57

ARTICLE XIV
Validity
§ 14.1. Generally.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason
held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision
shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portion of the ordinance.
The Town Council hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance and each
section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any
one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid.
§ 14.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 14.1
A:59

ARTICLE XV
Conflicting Ordinances
§ 15.1. Generally.
Where any ordinance or portion of any ordinance is in conflict with this ordinance, that
provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards or requirements shall
apply.
§ 15.1 SUBDIVISIONS § 15.1
A:61

Appendix B
ZONING ORDINANCE
A comprehensive ordinance regulating and restricting the use of land, the use and
location of buildings and structures; regulating and restricting the height and bulk
of buildings and structures and determining the areas of yards, courts, and other
places surrounding them; providing for nonconforming uses, special provisions,
amendments, administration and interpretation and definitions; dividing the Town
of Abingdon into districts; adopting the zoning map of said Town showing
boundaries and classifications of such districts; establishing a board of appeals and
prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions.
[Printed herein is the Zoning Ordinance, as adopted by the Council on 6-7-1993,
and effective on 7-8-1993. Subsequent amendments to this ordinance are indicated
by history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note
indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance.
Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation.
For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization,
citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to
conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by
brackets. The Zoning Map is not set out herein but is available for inspection in the
office of the Zoning Administrator.]
§ 15.1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 15.1
B:1

ARTICLE 1
Authority
§ 1-1. Authority.
(a) Whereas, by act of the General Assembly of Virginia as provided in Code of
Virginia, § 15.1-486 et seq., and amendments thereto, the Town Council does, by
this ordinance, divide the territory under its jurisdiction into districts of such
number, shape and area as it may deem best suited to carry out the purposes of this
article, and in each district may regulate, restrict, permit, prohibit and determine the
following:
(1) The use of land, buildings, structures and other premises for agricultural,
business, industrial, residential, floodplain and other specific uses;
(2) The size, height, area, bulk, location, erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, maintenance, razing or removal of structures;
(3) The areas and dimensions of land, water, and air space to be occupied by
buildings, structures and uses, and of courts, yards and other open spaces to be
left unoccupied by uses and structures, including variations in the sizes of lots
based on whether a public or community water supply or sewer system is
available and used;
(4) The excavation or mining of soil or other natural resources.
(b) Therefore, be it ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia,
for the purpose of promoting the health, safety or general welfare of the public and
of further accomplishing the objectives of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427, that the
following shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town
of Abingdon, Virginia," together with the accompanying map. This ordinance has
been designed:
(1) To provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire,
flood and other dangers;
(2) To reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets;
(3) To facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious
community;
(4) To expedite the provision of adequate police and fire protection, disaster
evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
forests, playgrounds, recreational facilities, airports, and other public
requirements;
(5) To protect against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas; and
(6) To protect against one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, undue
density of population in relation to the community facilities existing or
available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and
transportation or loss of life, health, or property from fire, flood, panic, or other
dangers.
§ 1-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 1-1
B:3

ARTICLE 2
Districts
§ 2-1. Enumeration of districts.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the incorporated areas of the Town of Abingdon,
Virginia are hereby divided into the following districts:
AFOS Agricultural, forestal and open space district
R-1 Residential district
R-2 Residential district
R-3 Residential district
R-4 Residential district
OH Old and historic district
OI Office and institutional district
B-1 Limited business district
B-2 General business district
B-3 Central business district
M-1 Limited industrial district
PTD Planned technology district
FH Flood hazard district (overlay)
§ 2-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 2-1
B:5

ARTICLE 3
AFOS Agricultural, Forestal, and Open Space District
§ 3-1. Permitted uses by right.
The following uses shall be permitted by right in the AFOS Agricultural, Forestal and
Open Space District:
§ 3-2. Special uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the AFOS agricultural, forestal and open space
district with a special use permit in accordance with regulations in Section 17-3 of this
ordinance:
3-1-1. Farm dwellings.
3-1-2. Agriculture.
3-1-3. Riding stables.
3-1-4. Temporary sawmills.
3-1-5. Roadside stands offering for sale only farm products produced on the premises.
3-1-6. Single-family dwellings.
3-1-7. Nurseries and greenhouses, including retail and wholesale sales of plant materials
and garden and related floral supplies.
3-1-8. Country clubs and other public and private recreation areas and facilities such as
golf courses and swimming pools.
3-1-9. Golf driving ranges.
3-1-10. Public and private campgrounds and related recreational facilities.
3-1-11. Home occupations category A and B. [See also sections 17-16 and 26-40].
3-1-12. Public utilities.
3-1-13. Accessory uses.
3-1-14. Signs as permitted by Article 21 of this ordinance.
3-1-15. Off-street parking as required by Section 17-6 of this ordinance.
3-2-1. Hospitals, including special care hospitals.
3-2-2. Veterinarian offices, animal hospitals, and commercial kennels.
3-2-3. Cemeteries.
3-2-4. Radio and television transmitting towers, studios and related facilities.
3-2-5. Mobile homes as farm labor quarters for laborers working on the premises.
§ 3-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 3-3
B:7
§ 3-3. Area regulations.
§ 3-4. Setback regulations.
§ 3-5. Frontage regulations.
The minimum frontage for permitted uses shall be 150 feet at the setback line.
§ 3-6. Yard regulations.
§ 3-7. Height regulations.
Buildings may be erected up to 35 feet in height; except that:
3-3-1. The minimum area of a farm shall be five acres. The minimum area for other
permitted uses shall be one acre.
3-3-2. Lots, regardless of area, served by public sewer and/or public water shall be
required to connect to the public systems. Buildings served by individual water and/
or sewer systems shall be connected to the public systems when the public systems
become available to the lot.
3-4-1. Structures shall be 50 feet or more from any street right-of-way which is 50 feet
or greater in width or 100 feet or more from the centerline of any street right-of-way
less than 50 feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line."
3-6-1. Side. The minimum side yard for each main structure shall be 25 feet, and the total
width of the two required side yards shall be at least 50 feet. Note: see Article 17,
Section 17-12 for corner lot provisions.
3-6-2. Rear. Each main structure shall have a minimum rear yard of 50 feet.
3-6-3. Accessory building. No accessory building shall be closer than five feet to any
property line.
3-7-1. The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to 45 feet and up to three
stories; provided that there are two side yards each of which is 25 feet or more, plus
one foot or more of side yard for each additional foot of building height over 35
feet.
3-7-2. Nonresidential buildings may be erected to a height of 60 feet; provided that
required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one foot for each foot in height
over 35 feet.
3-7-3. Spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, silos, chimneys, flues,
flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerials and radio and television
transmission towers are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four feet above the
height of the building on which the walls rest.
3-7-4. No accessory building which is within 20 feet of any party lot line shall be more
than one story high. All accessory buildings shall be no greater than the main
building in height.
§ 3-3 ABINGDON CODE § 3-7
B:8
ARTICLE 4
R-1 Residential District
§ 4-1. Permitted uses by right.
§ 4-3. Area regulations.
§ 4-4. Setback regulations.
§ 4-5. Frontage regulations.
§ 4-6. Yard regulations.
§ 4-7. Height regulations.

The following uses shall be permitted by right in the R-1 residential district:
4-1-1. Single-family dwellings.
4-1-2. Neighborhood parks and playgrounds.
4-1-3. Public utilities.
4-1-4. Accessory uses.
4-1-5. Signs as permitted by Article 21 of this ordinance.
4-1-6. Off-street parking as required by Section 17-6 of this ordinance.
§ 4-2. Special uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the R-1 residential district with a special use
permit in accordance with regulations in Section 17-3 of this ordinance:
4-2-1. Private neighborhood clubs, including recreation facilities and swimming pools.
4-2-2. Schools.
4-2-3. Churches and other places of religious assembly.

4-3-1. For lots served by public water and sewer, the minimum lot area shall be 12,000
square feet.
4-3-2. For lots served by individual sewage disposal systems, the minimum lot area shall
be 15,000 square feet.
4-3-3. Lots, regardless of area, served by public sewer and/or public water shall be
required to connect to the public systems. Buildings served by individual water and/
or sewer systems shall be connected to the public systems when the public systems
become available to the lot.
4-3-4. For permitted uses utilizing individual sewage disposal systems, the required area
for such use shall be approved by the health official. The administrator shall require
a greater area if considered necessary by the health official.
4-4-1. Structures shall be located 30 feet or more from any street right-of-way which is
50 feet or greater in width, or 55 feet or more from the centerline of any street rightof-way less than 50 feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line."
§ 4-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 4-5
B:9

Buildings may be erected up to 35 feet in height; except that:
4-5-1. The minimum width at the setback line shall be 80 feet for lots served by public
water and sewer.
4-5-2. The minimum lot width at the setback line shall be 100 feet for lots served by
individual sewage disposal systems.
4-6-1. Side. The minimum side yard for each main structure shall be 10 feet and the total
width of the two required side yards shall be 25 feet. Note: see Article 17, Section
17-12 for corner lot provisions.
4-6-2. Rear. Each main structure shall have a minimum rear yard of 35 feet.
4-6-3. Accessory structure. No accessory structure shall be closer than five feet to any
property line.
4-7-1. The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to 45 feet and up to three
stories; provided that each side yard, as required by Section 4-6-1 above, shall be
increased one foot or more for each additional foot of building height over 35 feet.
4-7-2. Nonresidential buildings may be erected to a height of 60 feet; provided that
required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one foot for each foot in height
over 35 feet.
4-7-3. Spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles,
television antennas, and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four
feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest.
4-7-4. No accessory building which is within 20 feet of any party lot line shall be more
than one story high. All accessory buildings shall be no greater than the main
building in height.
§ 4-5 ABINGDON CODE § 4-7
B:10
ARTICLE 5
R-2 Residential District
§ 5-1. Permitted uses by right.
The following uses shall be permitted by right in the R-2 residential district:
§ 5-2. Special uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the R-2 residential district with a special use
permit in accordance with regulations in Section 17-3 of this ordinance:
§ 5-3. Area regulations.
5-1-1. Single-family dwellings.
5-1-2. Two-family dwellings.
5-1-3. Parks and playgrounds.
5-1-4. Private neighborhood clubs, including recreation facilities and swimming pools.
5-1-5. Schools.
5-1-6. Churches and other places of religious assembly.
5-1-7. Nursery schools.
5-1-8. Public utilities.
5-1-9. Accessory uses.
5-1-10. Home occupations category A. [See also sections 17-16 and 26-40].
5-1-11. Signs as permitted by Article 21 of this ordinance.
5-1-12. Off-street parking as required by Section 17-6 of this ordinance.
5-2-1. Townhouses in accordance with regulations in Article 19 of this ordinance.
5-2-2. Home occupations category B. [See also sections 17-16 and 26-40].
5-3-1. For lots served by public water and sewer, the minimum lot area shall be 10,500
square feet for single-family dwellings and 12,000 square feet for two-family
dwellings.
5-3-2. For lots served by individual sewage disposal systems, the minimum lot area shall
be 15,000 square feet.
5-3-3. Lots, regardless of area, served by public sewer and/or public water shall be
required to connect to the public systems. Buildings served by individual water and/
or sewer systems shall be connected to the public systems when the public systems
become available to the lot.
5-3-4. For permitted uses utilizing individual sewage disposal systems, the required area
§ 5-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 5-3
B:11
§ 5-4. Setback regulations.
§ 5-5. Frontage regulations.
§ 5-6. Yard regulations.
§ 5-7. Height regulations.
Buildings may be erected up to 35 feet in height; except that:
for such use shall be approved by the health official. The administrator shall require
a greater area if considered necessary by the health official.
5-4-1. Structures shall be located 30 feet or more from any street right-of-way which is
50 feet or greater in width, or 55 feet or more from the centerline of any street rightof-way less than 50 feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line."
5-5-1. The minimum lot width at the setback line shall be 70 feet for single-family
dwellings and 80 feet for two-family dwellings and other permitted uses on lots
served by public water and sewer.
5-5-2. The minimum lot width at the setback line shall be 100 feet for lots served by
individual or public water and individual sewer.
5-6-1. Side. The minimum side yard for each main structure shall be 10 feet and the total
width of the two required side yards shall be 25 feet. Note: see Article 17, Section
17-12 for corner lot provisions.
5-6-2. Rear. Each main structure shall have a minimum rear yard of 35 feet.
5-6-3. Accessory structure. No accessory structure shall be closer than five feet to any
property line.
5-7-1. The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to 45 feet and up to three
stories; provided that each side yard, as required by Section 5-6-1 above, shall be
increased one foot or more for each additional foot of building height over 35 feet.
5-7-2. Nonresidential buildings may be erected to a height of 60 feet; provided that
required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one foot for each foot in height
over 35 feet.
5-7-3. Spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles,
television antennas, and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four
feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest.
5-7-4. No accessory building which is within 10 feet of any party lot line shall be more
than one story high. All accessory buildings shall be no greater than the main
building in height.
§ 5-3 ABINGDON CODE § 5-7
B:12
ARTICLE 6
R-3 Residential District
§ 6-1. Permitted uses by right.
The following uses shall be permitted by right in the R-3 residential district:
§ 6-2. Special uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the R-3 residential district with a special use
permit in accordance with regulations in Section 17-3 of this ordinance:
6-1-1. Single-family dwellings.
6-1-2. Two-family dwellings.
6-1-3. Multiple-family dwellings.
6-1-4. Townhouse in accordance with regulations in Article 19 of this ordinance.
6-1-5. Retirement homes.
6-1-6. Parks and playgrounds.
6-1-7. Private neighborhood clubs, including recreation facilities and swimming pools.
6-1-8. Schools.
6-1-9. Libraries.
6-1-10. Nursery schools.
6-1-11. Child care facilities.
6-1-12. Residential care facilities.
6-1-13. Rooming and boarding houses.
6-1-14. Tourist homes.
6-1-15. Bed and board homes.
6-1-16. Churches and other places of religious assembly.
6-1-17. Public utilities.
6-1-18. Accessory uses.
6-1-19. Home occupations category A and B. [See also sections 17-16 and 26-40].
6-1-20. Signs as permitted by Article 21 of this ordinance.
6-1-21. Off-street parking as required by Section 17-6 of this ordinance.
6-2-1. Manufactured home subdivision in accordance with regulations in Section 17-10
of this ordinance.
§ 6-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 6-2
B:13
§ 6-3. Area regulations.
§ 6-4. Setback regulations. [Ord. of 12-3-2007]
§ 6-5. Frontage regulations.
§ 6-6. Yard regulations. [Ord. of 12-3-2007]
6-2-2. Clubs and lodges.
6-2-3. Party houses.
6-2-4. Nursing homes.
6-3-1. For lots served by public water and sewer, the minimum lot area shall be:
(a) Eight thousand five hundred square feet for single-family dwellings.
(b) Ten thousand square feet for two-family dwellings.
(c) Ten thousand square feet plus 2,500 square feet for each additional dwelling
unit over two dwelling units for multiple-family dwellings. Multiple-family
dwellings shall only be permitted in areas served by public water and sewer
systems.
(d) Ten thousand square feet for other permitted uses.
6-3-2. For lots served by individual sewage disposal systems, the minimum lot area shall
be 15,000 square feet for all permitted uses except multiple-family dwellings as
indicated in Section 6-3-1(c) above.
6-3-3. Lots, regardless of area, served by public sewer and/or public water shall be
required to connect to the public systems. Buildings served by individual water and/
or sewer systems shall be connected to the public systems when the public systems
become available to the lot.
6-3-4. For permitted uses utilizing individual sewage disposal systems, the required area
for any such use shall be approved by the health official. The administrator shall
require a greater area if considered necessary by the health official.
6-4-1. Structures shall be located 20 feet or more from any street right-of-way which is
50 feet or greater in width, or 35 feet or more from the center line of any street
right-of-way less than 50 feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line."
6-4-2. Structures shall be located 15 feet or more from the property line along any
existing alley.
6-5-1. The minimum lot width at the setback line shall be 70 feet for single-family
dwellings and 80 feet for other permitted uses on lots served by public water and
sewer.
6-5-2. The minimum lot width at the setback line shall be 100 feet for lots served by
individual sewage disposal systems.
§ 6-2 ABINGDON CODE § 6-6
B:14
§ 6-7. Height regulations.
Buildings may be erected up to 35 feet in height; except that:
6-6-1. Side. The minimum side yard for each main structure shall be 10 feet, and the
minimum total width of the two required side yards shall be 25 feet. Note: see
Article 17, Section 17-12 for corner lot provisions.
6-6-2. Rear. Each main structure shall have a minimum rear yard of 15 feet.
6-6-3. Accessory building. No accessory building shall be closer than five feet to any
property line.
6-7-1. The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to 45 feet and up to three
stories; provided that each side yard, as required in Section 6-6-1, above, shall be
increased one foot or more for each additional foot of building height over 35 feet.
6-7-2. Nonresidential buildings may be erected to a height of 60 feet, provided that
required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one foot for each additional
foot in height over 35 feet.
6-7-3. Spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles,
television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four
feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest.
6-7-4. No accessory building which is within 10 feet of any party lot line may be more
than one story high. All accessory buildings shall be no greater than the main
building in height.
§ 6-6 ZONING ORDINANCE § 6-7
B:15

ARTICLE 7
R-4 Residential District
§ 7-1. Permitted uses by right.
The following uses shall be permitted by right in the R-4 residential district:
7-1-1. Single-family dwellings.
7-1-2. Two-family dwellings.
7-1-3. Multiple-family dwellings.
7-1-4. Townhouses in accordance with regulations in Article 19 of this ordinance.
7-1-5. Manufactured home subdivision in accordance with regulations in Section 17-10
of this ordinance.
7-1-6. Retirement homes.
7-1-7. Parks and playgrounds.
7-1-8. Private neighborhood clubs, including recreation facilities and swimming pools.
7-1-9. Schools.
7-1-10. Libraries.
7-1-11. Nursery schools.
7-1-12. Child care facilities.
7-1-13. Residential care facilities.
7-1-14. Rooming and boarding houses.
7-1-15. Tourist homes.
7-1-16. Bed and board homes.
7-1-17. Churches and other places of religious assembly.
7-1-18. Clubs and lodges.
7-1-19. Party houses.
7-1-20. Nursing homes.
7-1-21. Public utilities.
7-1-22. Accessory uses.
7-1-23. Home occupations category A and B. [See also sections 17-16 and 26-40.]
7-1-24. Signs as permitted by Article 21 of this ordinance.
7-1-25. Off-street parking as required by Section 17-6 of this ordinance.
§ 7-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 7-2
B:17
§ 7-2. Special uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the R-4 residential district with a special use
permit in accordance with regulations in Section 17-3 of this ordinance:
§ 7-3. Area regulations.
§ 7-4. Setback regulations.
§ 7-5. Frontage regulations.
7-2-1. Mobile home park in accordance with regulations in Section 17-8 of this
ordinance.
7-2-2. Special care hospital.
7-3-1. For lots served by public water and sewer, the minimum lot area shall be:
(a) 8,500 square feet for single-family dwellings.
(b) 10,000 square feet for two-family dwellings.
(c) 10,000 square feet plus 2,500 square feet for each additional dwelling unit over
two dwelling units for multiple-family dwellings. Multiple-family dwellings
shall only be permitted in areas served by public water and sewer systems.
(d) 10,000 square feet for other permitted uses.
7-3-2. For lots served by individual sewage disposal systems, the minimum lot area shall
be 15,000 square feet for all permitted uses except multiple-family dwellings as
indicated in Section 7-3-1(c) above.
7-3-3. Lots, regardless of area, served by public sewer and/or public water shall be
required to connect to the public systems. Buildings served by individual water and/
or sewer systems shall be connected to the public systems when the public systems
become available to the lot.
7-3-4. For permitted uses utilizing individual sewage disposal systems, the required area
for any such use shall be approved by the health official. The administrator shall
require a greater area if considered necessary by the health official.
7-4-1. Structures shall be located 30 feet or more from any street right-of-way which is
50 feet or greater in width, or 55 feet or more from the centerline of any street rightof-way less than 50 feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line."
7-4-2. Structures shall be located 15 feet or more from the property line along any
existing alley.
7-5-1. The minimum lot width at the setback line shall be 70 feet for single-family
dwellings and 80 feet for other permitted uses on lots served by public water and
sewer.
7-5-2. The minimum lot width at the setback line shall be 100 feet for lots served by
individual sewage disposal systems.
§ 7-2 ABINGDON CODE § 7-6
B:18
§ 7-6. Yard regulations.
§ 7-7. Height regulations.
Buildings may be erected up to 35 feet in height; except that:
7-6-1. Side. The minimum side yard for each main structure shall be 10 feet, and the
minimum total width of the two required side yards shall be 25 feet. Note: see
Article 17, Section 17-12 for corner lot provisions.
7-6-2. Rear. Each main structure shall have a minimum rear yard of 35 feet.
7-6-3. Accessory building. No accessory building shall be closer than five feet to any
property line.
7-7-1. The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to 45 feet and up to three
stories; provided that each side yard, as required in Section 7-6-1, above, shall be
increased one foot or more for each additional foot of building height over 35 feet.
7-7-2. Nonresidential buildings may be erected to a height of 60 feet; provided that
required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one foot for each additional
foot in height over 35 feet.
7-7-3. Spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles,
television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four
feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest.
7-7-4. No accessory building which is within 10 feet of any party lot line may be more
than one story high. All accessory buildings shall be no greater than the main
building in height.
§ 7-6 ZONING ORDINANCE § 7-7
B:19

ARTICLE 8
OH Old and Historic District
§ 8-1. Creation. [Ord. of 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 3-2005, 12-5-2005]
In order to (i) preserve the unique cultural heritage represented by the original section
of the Town of Abingdon and site of Black's Fort and the Town's historic resources
for future generations; and, (ii) promote historic resources for economic development
and financial stability, preserve historic resources for educational purposes, and promote
quality of life and a sense of place for current residents of the Town, an OH Old and
Historic District ("Old and Historic District") has been established.
§ 8-2. Permitted uses by right. [Ord. of 5-6-1991; Ord. of 3-2-1992; Ord. of
6-2-2003; Ord. No. 3-2005, 12-5-2005; Ord. of 11-6-2006; Ord. of 11-6-2006; Ord.
of 11-6-2006; Ord. No. 2020.07.01.B, 7-1-2020; Ord. No. 2020.07.01.C, 7-1-2020]
Certain uses shall be permitted by right in the OH Old and Historic District specifically
designated and located in the Old and Historic District Map as follows:
8-2-1. Bed and breakfasts.
Farmer's market
Hotels
Infrastructure
Lofts
Neighborhood parks
Professional studios
Professional offices
Restaurants
Single-family dwellings
Specialty retail shops
Theatres
Townhouses
8-2-2. Bed and breakfasts.
Churches
Home occupations
Infrastructure
Neighborhood parks
Professional offices
§ 8-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 8-2
B:21
Professional studios
Specialty retail shops
Single-family dwellings
Townhouse
Two-family dwellings
8-2-3. Bed and breakfasts.
Churches
Home occupations
Infrastructure
Lofts
Professional offices
Professional studios
Restaurants
Single-family dwellings
Specialty retail shops
Townhouses
8-2-4. Bed and breakfasts.
Churches
Courthouse
Home occupations
Infrastructure
Lofts
Neighborhood parks
Professional offices
Professional studios
Restaurants
Single-family dwellings
Specialty retail shops
Townhouses
§ 8-2 ABINGDON CODE § 8-2
B:22
8-2-5. Bed and breakfasts.
Churches
Home occupations
Single-family dwellings
Infrastructure
Lofts
Neighborhood parks
Townhouses
Professional offices
Professional studios
Restaurants
Specialty retail shops
8-2-6. Bed and breakfasts.
Infrastructure
Lofts
Neighborhood parks
Professional offices
Single-family dwellings
Specialty retail shops
Townhouses
8-2-7. Bed and breakfasts.
Home occupations
Infrastructure
Lofts
Neighborhood parks
Professional offices
Professional studios
Single-family dwellings
Townhouses
§ 8-2 ZONING ORDINANCE § 8-2
B:23
8-2-8. Cemeteries.
8-2-9. Bed and breakfasts.
Infrastructure
Lofts
Neighborhood parks
Professional offices
Professional studios
Single-family dwellings
Townhouses
8-2-10. Bed and breakfasts.
Educational facilities
Home occupations
Infrastructure
Library
Lofts
Museums
Neighborhood parks
Professional offices
Professional studios
Single-family dwellings
8-2-11. Bed and breakfasts.
Home occupations
Infrastructure
Lofts
Neighborhood parks
Professional offices
Professional studios
Single-family dwellings
Townhouses
§ 8-2 ABINGDON CODE § 8-2
B:24
§ 8-2A. Vested rights. [Ord. No. 3-2005, 12-5-2005; Ord. of 11-6-2006]
And current zoning use, in the Old and Historic District, that property is presently being
used for at the time of this amendment, shall be allowed and continued thereafter for the
8-2-12. Bed and breakfasts.
Home occupations
Infrastructure
Lofts
Museums
Neighborhood parks
Professional studios
Reconstruction of Black's Fort
Single-family dwellings
Specialty retail shops
Theatres
Townhouses
8-2-13. Restaurants.
Specialty retail shops
Museums
Professional studios
Lofts in existing buildings or portions of existing buildings
8-2-14. Bed and breakfasts.
Single-family dwellings
Multi-family dwellings
Museums
Party houses
8-2-15. Public utilities.
8-2-16. Accessory uses.
8-2-17. Signs as approved by board an as permitted by Article 21 of this ordinance. See
also Section 21-3-7.
8-2-18. Off-street parking as required by Section 17-6 of this ordinance.
§ 8-2 ZONING ORDINANCE § 8-2A
B:25
benefit of the present owner and his/her heirs. However, in the event the present owner
and/or his/her heirs shall convey his/her ownership rights unto another, and, at the time
of the conveyance, the use of the property is nonconforming with the uses allowed at
that time, the said nonconforming use shall only be allowed and continued in accordance
with Article 16 of this ordinance.
§ 8-2B. Special uses. [Ord. of 11-6-2006; Ord. of 11-6-2006; Ord. of 6-4-2007;
Ord. of 4-6-2009, eff. 5-6-2009]
The following uses shall be allowed with a special use permit, issued in accordance with
Section 17-3 of the Town zoning ordinance:
§ 8-3. Area, setback, frontage, yard and height regulations.
The old and historic district shall follow the general established pattern already in
existence in the district insofar as area, setback, frontage, yard and height regulations are
concerned.
§ 8-4. Certificate of appropriateness required to erect, construct, reconstruct,
alter, restore, move or demolish a building. [Ord. of 6-2-2003]
8-2B-1. In Section 8-2-14, Restaurants and Specialty Retail Shops.
8-2B-2. In all sub-districts, Museums, Distributor, Microbrewery.
8-4-1. In order to promote the general welfare through the preservation and protection of
historic places and areas of historic interest, the following review procedures shall
be followed:
(a) Certificates of appropriateness. Except as provided below in Sections 8-4-1(b)
and 8-13-3, no building or structure within the old and historic district may be
demolished or moved in whole or in part, nor may any architectural features
of said building or structure which are subject to public view from any public
street, right-of-way or place be altered in any way that affects the external
appearance of the building or structure, including such items as roofs,
chimneys, fences and color changes, without (i) prior approval of an
application to the board of architectural review ("board") hereinafter created,
and (ii) the board's issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. Neither shall
any building or structure hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, restored, moved or demolished within the old and historic district
without the same prior approval and issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness.
(b) Routine maintenance and minor action exclusion. Upon written application,
the zoning administrator of the Town of Abingdon (the "administrator") may
determine that certain minor actions involving buildings and structures within
the old and historic district will have no permanent effect on the character of
the district, and, by written waivers issued to the parties wishing to take the
minor actions, exempt them from review by the board. Such minor actions
shall be limited to those listed in the design review guidelines described in
Section 8-9-1 below under the topic heading "routine maintenance and repair
§ 8-2A ABINGDON CODE § 8-4
B:26
§ 8-5. Application for certificate of appropriateness. [Ord. of 6-2-2003]
of buildings and other minor actions." Each application for waiver must be
on the form provided by the office of the administrator and documented by
appropriate samples of the materials and colors to be used in taking the minor
actions. With respect to each waiver issued hereunder, the administrator shall
see to it through the Town's inspection department that the work performed
and materials employed comply with the terms of the particular waiver.
Provided, however:
(1) If the administrator is uncertain about his authority to grant a waiver or if
the administrator and the applicant cannot agree on changes in any
application for waiver, the application shall be referred to the board at its
next regularly scheduled meeting for a decision on the question, which
decision shall be final;
(2) If the administrator denies an application for a waiver, the applicant may
appeal the administrator's decision to the board, in which case the board's
decision shall be final; and
(3) If a waiver is issued and the work is commenced but in the opinion of the
administrator the work does not qualify for a waiver the administrator
shall order that the work be stopped until the applicant secures a
certificate of appropriateness pursuant to Section 8-5 below. In any such
case the applicant may appeal to the board, whose decision on the
question shall be final.
The administrator shall provide the board with a copy of each application
for a waiver at the board's regularly scheduled meeting next following the
date the application was received.
(c) Work undertaken without authorization. In addition to the sanctions provided
in Article 24, Section 24-2 of this ordinance and any other remedy available at
law or in equity, the administrator shall issue a stop work order if any work
subject to this Section 8-4 is started without authorization by either the board
or the administrator, as provided above in § 8-4-1(a) and (b), respectively. Any
such stop work order shall (i) remain in effect until the party proposing to do
the work secures appropriate authorization; and, (ii) be subject to the right of
such party to appeal the action of the administrator to the board. Such party
shall, by following the filing procedure specified in Section 8-12-1 below,
have a further right of appeal to the Town Council and from it to the circuit
court.
8-4-2. Penalty for violations. The violation of any provision of Section 8-4-1 after its
effective date shall be subject to the sanctions provided in Article 24, Section 24-2
of this ordinance.
8-5-1. Procedure for applying. Applications for such certificates of appropriateness shall
be made in writing upon the form provided by the office of the administrator. Each
application must be submitted to the administrator at least 10 calendar days in
advance of the date of the meeting at which the board is requested to issue a
§ 8-4 ZONING ORDINANCE § 8-5
B:27
§ 8-6. Historic Preservation Review Board — creation and membership. [Ord. of
6-2-2003; Ord. No. 2020.04.20.A, 4-20-2020]
certificate of appropriateness. Provided:
(a) If the applicant demonstrates unavoidable hardship because of either
availability or standby costs of materials, labor or other goods and services,
the board may in its sole discretion consider the particular application at either
a regular or special meeting;
(b) In no event shall the members of the board consider at any regular or special
meeting any matter with respect to which they have been provided with less
than 48 hours' advance notice exclusive of weekends and holidays, with full
documentation as required in this ordinance.
8-5-2. New construction, etc., documentation.
(a) In the case of new construction, extensive exterior alterations or building
additions in the old and historic district, the applicant shall, in addition to any
other documentation the board may request, provide at a minimum scale
drawings depicting the following:
(1) A design of the proposed improvements detailing distances from any new
building or improvement to lot lines, streets, alleys, and sidewalks; and
(2) A design of the proposed improvements in relation to existing structures
which are located within the same block.
(b) The drawings shall contain sufficient detail to depict the exterior architectural
design of the building or structure, list proposed materials, textures and colors
and include samples of such materials and colors. Additionally, the board may
request that the applicant provide photographs of the existing structures and
any building or structure to be altered, repaired or added to.
8-6-1. Creation and empowerment of the Board. For the purpose of making effective the
provisions of this article, a historic preservation review board ("board") is hereby
established and empowered to consider and review all alterations, additions and
changes within the boundaries of the old and historic district which fall within the
purview of Section 8-4-1 of this article, whether or not brought before it by an
application for a certificate of appropriateness or other permit.
8-6-2. Duty to enforce and sanctions. The board shall make its decision on each project
brought before it and see to the enforcement of its decisions through the
administrator and the Town's inspection department, to the end that buildings,
structures or other resources of historic, architectural, or cultural significance are
preserved insofar as they are appropriate and incongruous projects are prohibited.
The failure of an applicant or any other person to observe the board's decisions shall
be subject to the sanctions provided in Article 24, Section 24-2 of this ordinance.
8-6-3. Composition of the Board. The board shall consist of five members appointed by
the Town Council, one of whom shall be a resident of the old and historic district
and all of whom shall have a demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in
§ 8-5 ABINGDON CODE § 8-6
B:28
§ 8-7. Same — Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Secretary. [Ord. of 6-2-2003]
§ 8-8. Same — procedure for meetings. [Ord. of 6-2-2003]
historic preservation. All members must be residents and qualified voters of the
Town; provided, the Town Council may in its discretion appoint any non-resident
of the Town who is otherwise qualified under this Section 8-6 and holds or is
employed by a person or firm holding a current business license issued by the
Town.
8-6-4. Qualifications of the Board members. At least one board member shall be either a
registered architect with a demonstrated interest in historic preservation or an
architectural historian meeting the professional qualifications standards of
Appendix A of 36 CFR 61. Similarly, at least one additional board member shall
have professional training or equivalent experience in any one of the following
disciplines: architecture, history, architectural history, American studies,
archaeology, or planning. Each board member is required to attend at least one
informational or educational meeting per year which has been approved by the state
department of historic resources as pertaining to the work and functions of the
board or historic preservation. Provided, when adequate review of any proposed
action would normally involve a professional discipline not represented on the
board, the board must seek and secure appropriate professional advice before
rendering its decision on the particular action. The administrator shall serve as
advisor to the board.
8-6-5. Terms of office and vacancies. The board members shall be appointed for threeyear terms and serve until their respective successors are appointed. If at any time
hereafter all five positions on the board are vacant, the board members shall be
appointed for three-year staggered terms, one member to serve for one year, two
members to serve for two years, two members to serve for three years and all
members to serve three-year terms thereafter. Vacancies caused by death,
resignation or otherwise shall be filled (i) promptly and in any event not more than
90 days following the date on which the vacancy occurs; and (ii) for the unexpired
term in the same manner original appointments are made. The Town Council shall
have the discretion to appoint members to serve consecutive terms and also to
remove them for habitual failure to attend meetings. Members may serve any
number of terms but not more than two terms consecutively.
8-7-1. The board shall elect its chairman and vice-chairman from its membership and the
administrator shall serve as secretary to the board.
8-8-1. Procedure to be followed in meetings. The chairman shall conduct the meetings
of the board in accordance with its written bylaws and all applicable provisions of
the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. In the absence of the chairman the vice
chairman shall preside. The secretary shall keep and make available for public
inspection the minutes of the meetings and a permanent record of all resolutions,
motions, transactions and decisions, including exemptions from review by the
board. A quorum of three members present is required before the board may take
any official action. Each member of the board shall have the right to one vote on
each issue, to be exercised in person at a meeting and not by proxy, and the decision
§ 8-6 ZONING ORDINANCE § 8-8
B:29
§ 8-9. Same — matters to be considered in acting on the appropriateness of the
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving or
demolition of a building or structure. [Ord. of 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 1-2006,
1-3-2006]
of the majority shall be final, subject only to the rights of appeal set out below.
8-8-2. Notice of meetings. Prior public notice of all regular or special meetings of the
board must be given. In addition, the board's bylaws shall specify the means by
which written public notice of such meetings is to be provided. Each meeting of the
board shall be open to the public and an agenda shall be made available to the public
prior to the meeting. The board shall grant a full and impartial hearing on each
application and permit testimony from not only the applicants but interested
members of the public.
8-8-3. Frequency of meetings. The board shall meet not less than four times a year, in
regular and special meetings as provided in its bylaws but in the absence of a mutual
agreement between the board and the applicant all applications shall be heard
within 30 days after the application is filed. The board shall vote and announce its
decision on any matter properly before it not later than 14 days after the conclusion
of the hearing on the matter, unless the time is extended by mutual agreement
between the board and applicant.
8-8-4. Procedure on disapproval of application. If the board disapproves any application
it shall furnish the applicant with its written decision stating the reasons for
disapproval and make recommendations with respect to the appropriateness of
design, arrangement, texture, material, color, location, and any other factor on
which the disapproval was based. The board shall rehear the application if within
the ninety-day period following the date of disapproval the applicant submits an
amended application that complies with all recommendations of the board.
Provided, the board shall not otherwise re-hear the subject matter of any application
which has been denied for a period of one year after the date of the hearing, or if a
re-hearing was held, for a period of one year after the rehearing.
8-8-5. Requirement for bylaws. The board shall adopt and make available for public
inspection written bylaws for procedural matters, written notice of public meetings
and other matters not covered by this article that include at a minimum (i) provision
for regularly scheduled meetings at least four times a year; (ii) a requirement that a
quorum be present to conduct business; (iii) rules of procedure for considering
applications; (iv) a requirement for written minutes for all meetings; (v) minimum
attendance requirements for all board members; and (vi) requirements that board
members attend training sessions.
8-9-1. Role of design review guidelines. In reviewing each project the board must follow
the suggestions and requirements of the design review guidelines, as such document
now exists and may hereafter be revised and amended by the board. Provided, by
either a four-to-one or unanimous vote the board may elect to disregard any
guideline it considers unimportant or inappropriate to a particular project.
8-9-2. Review of design review guidelines. The board shall periodically review the
design review guidelines in the context of the experience gained since the last
§ 8-8 ABINGDON CODE § 8-9
B:30
§ 8-10. Same — issuance of certificate of appropriateness. [Ord. of 6-2-2003]
review of that kind and make all such revisions that seem, in their judgment, to be
necessary or advisable.
8-9-3. Matters the Board shall and shall not consider. The board shall not consider
interior arrangement of the building or structure or features not subject to view from
a public street, right of way or place. In addition to those specified in the design
review guidelines, the board shall consider the following matters in passing on the
appropriateness of a particular project:
(a) Exterior architectural features, including but not limited to the type and style
of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural features or
elements which are visible to public view from a public street, right-of-way or
place.
(b) The architectural style, general design and arrangement of the building or
structure.
(c) Texture, material and color of the building materials employed.
(d) The relationship of the factors in a., b. and c. above to similar features of
buildings and structures and uses in the immediate surroundings.
(e) The extent to which the building or structure or the use would be harmonious
with or obviously incongruous to the old and historic aspect of the
surroundings.
(f) In case of a building or structure to be demolished, a primary consideration
will be the extent to which its continued existence would tend to protect
irreplaceable historic places and preserve the general historic atmosphere of
the Town.
(g) The extent to which the building or structure or the use will promote the
general welfare of the Town and all citizens by the preservation and protection
of historic places and areas.
(h) The extent to which said preservation and protection will promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values; generating business;
creating new positions; attracting tourists, students, writers, historians, artists
and artisans and new residents; encouraging study and interest in American
history; stimulating interest and study in architecture and design; educating
citizens in American culture and heritage; and, making the Town a more
attractive and desirable place in which to live.
(i) The extent to which either existing or proposed landscaping, including but not
limited to trees, shrubbery or other vegetation associated with the building,
structure or use, are harmonious with or incongruous to the old and historic
aspects of the particular site.
8-10-1. Procedure following approval of certificate. Immediately upon approval by the
board of any application to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, restore, move or
demolish a building or structure, a certificate of appropriateness signed by the
§ 8-9 ZONING ORDINANCE § 8-10
B:31
§ 8-11. Maintenance of historic properties. [Ord. of 6-2-2003]
chairman of the board and valid for one year from the date of issuance shall be
issued to the applicant and made available to the Town inspection department.
(a) After issuing any building permit pertinent to the particular work the Town
inspection department shall see to it that the work performed and materials
employed comply with the terms of the certificate of appropriateness and
notify the administrator upon completion of the authorized work. Provided, (i)
no building permit may be issued in the case of any work covered by Article
8-4-1 a until a pertinent certificate of appropriateness is issued; but (ii) the
certificate of appropriateness will in no way affect the requirement to comply
with other provisions necessary to obtain a building permit.
(b) Unless work is commenced within the one-year period and thereafter
continuously prosecuted with no delay or suspension of more than 90 days
(subject to extension for good cause demonstrated to the administrator and
excluding any time the use of the certificate of appropriateness is stayed
pursuant to appeal or court action) a certificate of appropriateness shall
automatically terminate and be of no further force or effect.
8-10-2. Notification requirement. In the case of any application for a certificate of
appropriateness for moving or demolition, new construction, extensive exterior
renovations or building additions, adjacent property owners shall be notified in
writing and public notice given of the date and time of the meeting of the board to
consider such action and afforded an opportunity to be heard at such meeting. No
certificate of appropriateness may be issued until such notice is given and
opportunity provided.
8-11-1. Protective maintenance required. Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280, as
amended, all unoccupied buildings and structures subject to this article shall be
preserved against decay and deterioration, maintained free from structural defects
and repaired to the extent necessary to prevent irreparable damage. For purposes of
this article, a building or structure is unoccupied if in the preceding 12 calendar
months no person has inhabited the premises on a continuous basis as a residence,
place of work or place of carrying on official duties.
8-11-2. Standard of maintenance and repair required. The maintenance and repair
required by this Section 8-11 must be sufficient to (i) protect the structural
components of the building or structure and its exterior from damage by reason of
either collapse or deterioration to such an extent that repair and preservation are not
economically feasible; and (ii) maintain the character of the district in which the
building or structure is located. Specific items of maintenance and repair include
but are not limited to correction of any of the following defects:
(a) Deterioration of exterior walls, chimneys, foundations or other vertical
support.
(b) Deterioration of flooring or floor supports, roofs or other horizontal members.
(c) Leaning, sagging, splitting, listing or buckling caused by deterioration under
items a. and b.
§ 8-10 ABINGDON CODE § 8-11
B:32
(d) Deterioration or crumbling of exterior plasters or mortars.
(e) Defective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs and foundations including
windows and doors.
(f) Inadequate weather protection for exterior wall and roof coverings, including
lack of paint.
(g) Insect infestation, rotting, holes and other forms of decay.
(h) Deterioration of exterior stairs, porches, handrails, window and door frames.
(i) Deterioration of architectural details, including cornices, entablatures and wall
facings.
(j) Delamination, instability, crumbling or loss of shape from deterioration under
items h. and i.
(k) Deterioration of fences, gates and accessory structures.
8-11-3. Enforcement. When it is brought to the attention of the board that a property may
have deteriorated to the point that it cannot meet the standards specified in Section
8-11-2 above, the board shall first request a meeting with the property's owner or
authorized representative (including without limitation executor, administrator or
trustee) and endeavor to discuss with such person ways to improve the condition of
the building or structure in accordance with a mutually agreeable time schedule. If
such procedure leads to correction of the violation to the board's satisfaction, no
further action will be taken.
(a) If the informal procedure does not lead to correction of the condition, the board
shall request that the administrator cause the condition of the building or
structure to be investigated further through the Town's inspection department
acting as an agent for the board, and, within 14 days thereafter, make a
determination whether it is in violation of this Section 8-11. If such
investigation leads to a determination there is no violation, no further action
will be taken.
(b) If the investigation leads to a determination that there is a violation or probable
violation, the administrator shall give the owner or authorized representative
as described above written notice in which the repairs and work necessary to
comply with the provisions of this Section 8-11 are specifically described and
ordered to be performed. The repairs and work shall be completed within 90
days from receipt of notice or such longer period of time the administrator may
specify consistent with the extent of the repairs and work, subject to extension
for good cause demonstrated to the administrator.
(c) Failure to complete the necessary repairs and work within the period allowed
for completion under the preceding Section 8-11-3(b) shall constitute a
violation of this article punishable as specified in Article 24, Section 24-2 of
this ordinance. In addition, the board may, after due notice to the owner or
authorized representative as described above, direct the administrator to enter
the property and make or cause to be made such repairs as are necessary to
preserve the integrity and safety of the building or structure and charge the
§ 8-11 ZONING ORDINANCE § 8-11
B:33
reasonable cost thereof to the owner, which charge shall, so long as it remains
unpaid, constitute a lien against the real property upon which the building or
structure is situated.
(d) In addition to any other available ground for relief, any owner aggrieved by an
order issued under the preceding Section 8-11-3(b) may file a written petition
with the board for relief on the ground that the performance of the repairs and
work would cause undue economic hardship. To perfect such remedy the
petition must (i) be filed with the board within 10 days after receipt of such
notice and order; and, (ii) include evidence bearing on the claim for relief and
circumstances of hardship including at a minimum the following items:
(1) Nature of ownership, whether business or individual.
(2) Financial resources of the owner claiming economic hardship.
(3) Cost of repairs and work provided in the notice and order.
(4) Assessed value of the pertinent land and improvements.
(5) Real estates taxes and annual debt service for the previous two years.
(6) Any listing of the property for sale or rent and offers received, if any.
(7) Annual gross income and cash flow received from leasing or other use of
the property for the previous two years.
(8) Itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years.
If the remedy is so perfected, the notice and order shall be stayed, and within
30 days after any such petition is filed the board shall schedule a public
hearing on the claim of undue economic hardship. Following a full hearing on
the merits, the board shall, within 30 days thereafter, make a finding whether
or not the notice and order would entail undue economic hardship and enter
the reasons for such finding into the record.
If the finding is that undue economic hardship would result, it shall be
accompanied by a recommended plan to relieve the hardship which has
included in its consideration (i) any available property tax relief; (ii) loans or
grants from the Town, county or other public, private or non-profit sources;
(iii) acquisition of the property by purchase or eminent domain; (iv)
modification of the building code or changes in applicable zoning regulations;
(v) relaxation of this article sufficient to mitigate the economic hardship;
and (vi) any other available means of relief known to the board. The board
shall report its finding to the administrator, who shall issue an order for the
property to be repaired within the time specified in § 8-11-3(a) in the case of
a finding of no undue economic hardship and an order for the property to be
repaired or otherwise handled according to the recommended plan in the case
of a finding of economic hardship.
(e) Any person aggrieved by the action of either the board or the administrator
under this Section 8-11 shall, by following the filing procedure specified in
Section 8-12-1 below, have a right of appeal to the Town Council and from the
§ 8-11 ABINGDON CODE § 8-11
B:34
§ 8-12. Right of appeal. [Ord. of 2-5-1990; Ord. of 6-2-2003]
§ 8-13. Demolition and moving of historic landmarks, buildings or structures.
[Ord. of 6-2-2003]
Town Council to the circuit court.
8-12-1. Right to appeal on disapproval of application. Whenever the board shall
disapprove an application for a certificate of appropriateness any person shall have
the right to appeal and be heard before the Town Council, which may affirm,
reverse or modify the decision of the board, in whole or in part. Provided, any
person wishing to appeal must file with the Town Manager on or before 14 days
after the decision of the board a written notice of intention to appeal which states
the reasons for appeal in full and factual form. Upon receipt of such notice the
Town Manager shall schedule a public hearing before the Town Council at a time
not less than 30 days after the receipt of the notice. Such hearing shall be advertised
at the expense of the appellant and notice given once a week for two successive
weeks in some newspaper published or having general circulation in the Town,
specifying the time and place of hearing at which persons affected may appear and
present their views, not less than five days nor more than 21 days after the second
advertisement appears in such newspaper.
8-12-2. Right to appeal on approval of application. Opponents to the granting of an
application for certificate of appropriateness shall likewise have the right to appeal
and be heard by the Town Council, which may affirm, reverse or modify the
decision of the board, in whole or in part. Provided, within five working days after
the decision of the board the persons wishing to appeal must file with the Town
Manager a petition signed by not less than 10 individuals registered to vote in the
Town, indicating their intention to appeal. Upon receipt of such petition the Town
Manager shall schedule a public hearing before the Town Council within the time
period and with the same provision for notice specified in Section 8-12-1. Any
person to whom a certificate of appropriateness has been issued may commence
work within the five-day period provided for notice of appeal, but at that person's
sole risk.
8-12-3. Right of appeal to Circuit Court. Any person whose appeal has been denied by
the Town Council shall have the right to further appeal the decision of the Town
Council within 30 days of the rendering of such decision by filing a petition at law
with the Circuit Court of Washington County, Virginia, setting forth the alleged
illegality of the action of the Town Council. The filing of said petition shall stay the
decision of the Town Council pending the outcome of the appeal to the court,
except that the filing of such petition shall not stay the decision of the Town Council
if such decision denies the right to demolish an historic landmark, building or
structure. The court may reverse or modify the decision of the Town Council, in
whole or in part, if it finds upon review that the decision is arbitrary and constitutes
an abuse of discretion, or it may affirm the decision of the Town Council in whole
or part.
8-13-1. Requirement for Board approval. In accordance with Code of Virginia,
§ 15.2-2306, as amended, no historic landmark, building or structure within the old
§ 8-11 ZONING ORDINANCE § 8-13
B:35
and historic district shall be razed, demolished or moved until the razing,
demolition or moving thereof is either (i) approved by the board, or (ii) approved on
appeal by the Town Council after consultation with the board; provided, the owner
shall have the rights specified in Section 8-13-3 in addition to the right to appeal.
8-13-2. Permissible action by the Board. Pursuant to Section 8-4-1, the owner of a
landmark, building or structure within the old and historic district who wishes to
demolish or move the same must first apply to the board for a certificate of
appropriateness permitting demolition or moving, as to which the board may
approve, modify or deny the application. In reaching its decision on that or any
other application to demolish or move, the board may require the applicant to
provide post-demolition or moving plans for the affected site and consider whether
such plans would be appropriate to the historic and architectural character of the
adjoining properties and the district as a whole. The board shall also consider the
criteria listed in the design review guidelines described in Section 8-9-1 of this
ordinance, the criteria listed in Section 8-9-3 and any other available information
pertinent to its deliberations.
8-13-3. Procedure to demolish or move by following sale procedure. If the board
disapproves any application to demolish or move as provided in Section 8-13-2, the
owner may appeal the board's decision as specified above in Section 8-12.
However, in addition to such right of appeal, the owner of an historic landmark,
building or structure, the razing or demolition of which is subject to the provisions
of Section 8-4 of this Article 8, shall, as a matter of right, be entitled to raze or
demolish such landmark, building or structure, provided (i) the owner has applied
to the Town Council for such right; and (ii) the owner has, for the period of time set
forth below, made and continuously maintained in effect at a price reasonably
related to its fair market value, a bona fide offer to sell the landmark, building or
structure and the land pertaining thereto to the Town or to any person, firm,
corporation, government or agency thereof, or political subdivision or agency
thereof, which gives reasonable assurance that it is willing to preserve and restore
the landmark, building or structure and the land pertaining thereto; and (iii) no bona
fide contract, binding upon all parties thereto, shall have been executed for the sale
of such landmark, building or structure and the land pertaining thereto prior to the
expiration of the applicable time period set forth in item c., below. Provided:
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8-12-3 that stay decisions of the
Town Council pending appeal, no appeal to the Circuit Court of Washington
County, Virginia, by the owner or any other proper party shall affect the
owner's right to make a bona fide offer under Section 8-13-3.
(b) Any offer to sell must be made within one year after the date the Town Council
renders its final decision as provided in Section 8-13-4 below, but thereafter
the owner may renew his request to such governing body to approve the razing
or demolition of the historic landmark, building or structure.
(c) The time schedule for offers to sell shall be as set forth in Code of Virginia,
§ 15.2-2306, as such provision may from time to time be amended.
8-13-4. Action required by the Town Council on application to sell under § 8-13-3.
Before making a bona fide effort to sell as provided in Section 8-13-3, the owner
§ 8-13 ABINGDON CODE § 8-13
B:36
shall first file an application with the Town Council that contains a statement
identifying the property and stating (i) the source and amount of the proposed
offering price; (ii) the date the offer of sale is proposed to begin; (iii) the name
and address of any real estate agents or brokers listing or to list the property; (iv)
the exact terms and provisions of the deed to be used in the sale, including a
legally sufficient description of the land to be offered and the covenants relating
to renovation and restoration of the building or structure situated on the property;
and (v) the proposed advertising measures and measures to assure preservation and
renovation by a buyer. Provided:
(a) The proposed offering price shall be established by an appraisal prepared at
the owner's expense by a licensed real estate appraiser. If the Town Council is
uncertain that such price accurately reflects fair market value of the property,
the Town may, at its sole expense, hire another licensed real estate appraiser
within five working days after receipt of the owner's statement. Within the
thirty-day period commencing on the date the Town hires the second
appraiser, (i) the appraiser selected by the owner and the appraiser selected by
the Town shall select a third licensed real estate appraiser, whose services shall
be paid in equal shares by the owner and the Town; and (ii) a majority of two
of the three appraisers shall establish a price to be recommended to the owner.
(b) If in the Town Council's judgment the advertising measures proposed by the
owner are inadequate to assure that the offering will reach the maximum
possible number of qualified buyers and provide them with a reasonable
opportunity to examine the property, the Town Council shall provide the
owner with a written response that specifically describes the deficiencies and
suggests means whereby they may be corrected. Similarly, if in its judgment
the proposed deed fails to comply with the requirements of Section 8-13-3, the
Town Council may provide the owner with a written response which
specifically describes the deficiencies and suggests means whereby they can
be corrected.
Upon receipt of the owner's application the Town Council shall place the matter
on the agenda for its next regularly scheduled meeting, at which it will conduct a
full and impartial hearing and permit testimony from not only the owner-applicant
but interested members of the public. The Town Council may, in its discretion,
continue the matter from time to time pending a showing to the satisfaction of
the Town Council that the application complies with the requirements of Section
8-13-3 for a bona fide offer to sell, at which time the application shall be approved.
Upon such approval the time period specified in Section 8-13-3(c) as applicable to
the particular offering price shall commence.
8-13-5. Action required of the owner and Town Council after approval of application to
sell under § 8-13-3. Within one year following the date the Town Council approves
the application to sell under Section 8-13-3, the owner shall cause the property
concerned to be advertised for sale in accordance with the plans, specifications and
procedures specified in the application (as it may have been revised by reason of
suggestions under § 8-13-4(b) above) and thereafter continue the advertising in the
same manner and to the same extent, with no interruption, until the sooner
occurring of the signing of a bona fide contract binding on all parties thereto or
§ 8-13 ZONING ORDINANCE § 8-13
B:37
§ 8-14. Designation of historic districts and landmarks. [Ord. of 6-2-2003]
Upon recommendation of the board and adoption by the Town Council, the old and
historic district may be enlarged or contracted, new historic districts may be established,
and individual historic landmarks may be established or recognized to the full extent of
the powers granted the Town in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2306, as amended.
expiration of the appropriate time period. If a bona fide contract binding on all
parties is signed and closed in accordance with the original application as approved
by the Town Council, no further action under this Section 8-13 will be required.
(a) If the appropriate time period expires without the signing of a binding contract,
the owner shall file with the board an application for certificate of
appropriateness which includes full and complete documentation of the
unsuccessful sales effort, including but not limited to (i) formats of all
advertisements, (ii) schedules showing when, where and how the
advertisements were employed; (iii) any listings with real estate agents or
brokers and offers received; and (iv) any fliers or other descriptions of the
property prepared pursuant to such listings.
(b) Upon receipt of the owner's application the board shall place the matter on the
agenda for its next regularly scheduled meeting and thereafter approve the
application if in its judgment the requirements of Section 8-13-3 for a bona
fide offer and sale have been met. Otherwise, the board shall follow the
procedure for a rehearing set out in Section 8-8-4 of this ordinance pending
such approval. In any event, the owner shall, by following the filing procedure
specified in Section 8-12-1, have a right of appeal to the Town Council and
from the Town Council to the circuit court.
8-14-1. Preliminary research. The board shall undertake to establish and maintain a list
of structures, sites and areas having a special historical, architectural or aesthetic
interest or value.
8-14-2. Recommendation of historic districts and landmarks. The board may recommend
to the Town Council the initiation of an amendment to this article to designate
landmarks and historic districts from the list established under Section 8-14-1
above, giving the reasons for its recommendation. Any such amendment shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280 et seq., as
amended.
8-14-3. Criteria for selection. A building, structure, group of structures, area, site or
district may be recommended for designation as a landmark or historic district if it
or they are significant by reason of (i) association with historic events or activities;
or (ii) association with important persons; or (iii) distinctive design or physical
characteristics; or (iv) potential to provide important information about prehistory
or history.
8-14-4. Boundaries. In the board's recommendation to the Town Council, historic
districts or individual landmarks must be precisely designated by a legally sufficient
description.
8-14-5. Other parties who may apply for designation. Designations may also be initiated
§ 8-13 ABINGDON CODE § 8-14
B:38
§ 8-15. Severability. [Ord. of 6-2-2003]
Should any provision or part thereof of this Article 8 be declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the provision or part thereof shall not affect the validity of Article
8 as a whole or any part thereof other than the specific part held to be invalid.
upon the written application to the board of one or more owners of property within
any area thought to qualify for selection under Section 8-14-3, giving the basis
or reason for its qualification and a legally sufficient description of the property
concerned. The board shall, at its next regular meeting, schedule a hearing on the
application at a time which gives at least 30 days' written notice to any owner who
has not joined in or ratified the application. Similarly, either the Town Council or
the Planning Commission may, on its own volition, initiate designations under this
Section 8-14.
8-14-6. Moratorium on alteration or demolition while designation pending. So long as
any proceedings have been filed and are pending under Section 8-14, the board shall
not approve any subsequently filed application for a certificate of appropriateness
or other permit to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, restore, move or demolish any
building, structure or other feature on a site or area included in or encompassed by
the proceedings. Provided, if final action on the proceedings has not been
completed within the ninety-day period following initiation of the proceedings, the
certificate of appropriateness or other permit may be approved.
§ 8-14 ZONING ORDINANCE § 8-15
B:39

ARTICLE 8A
Downtown Abingdon Arts and Cultural District
§ 8A-1. Purpose. [Ord. of 10-5-2009]
The Town of Abingdon finds that the continued development and success of its
downtown commercial district requires incentives, and determines that the most
appropriate method of offering incentives for the area described is to create an Arts and
Cultural District in that area, as authorized by the Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1129.1. The
Town believes that the establishment of an Arts and Cultural District will improve the
economic conditions of this geographic area located in the central portion of the Town
which could, in turn, benefit the welfare of the citizens of Abingdon.
§ 8A-2. Administration. [Ord. of 10-5-2009]
§ 8A-3. Definitions. [Ord. of 10-5-2009]
(a) The Administrator of the Town of Abingdon Arts and Cultural District shall be the
Town Manager or designee. The administrator, in consultation with the Town
Manager and the treasurer, shall determine and publish the procedures for obtaining
the benefits created by this chapter and for the administration of this chapter.
(b) The administrator shall be the single point-of-contact for qualified business owners
and organizations to take advantage of the Arts and Cultural District incentives
described in this article, and shall provide recommendations as necessary to
streamline the processes for a business or organization to qualify and obtain the
incentive.
(a) For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings, unless clearly indicated to the contrary:
QUALIFIED ARTS BUSINESS OR ORGANIZATION — A business or notfor-profit organization physically located within the Town of Abingdon Arts and
Cultural District which, by the determination of the administrator, positively
contributes to the spectrum of arts and cultural activities and venues available to
the public. Examples may include, but are not limited to, theatres, art galleries,
museums, music clubs, dance studios, etc.
QUALIFIED CULTURAL BUSINESS OR ORGANIZATION — A business or
not-for-profit organization physically located within the Town of Abingdon Arts
and Cultural District, which by the determination of the administrator, positively
provides goods or services or activity for visitors. Examples may include, but
are not limited to hotels; restaurants, music clubs, retail and/or businesses that
advance the Town's strategic goals identified in the most recently adopted Town
comprehensive plan.
(b) In no case shall a primary office use such as a bank, real estate office, attorney's
office, etc. qualify as an arts business or organization or cultural business or
organization.
(c) This creation of an Arts and Cultural District does not effect any other existing
requirements for businesses, such as zoning regulations, including the Historic
§ 8A-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 8A-3
B:41
§ 8A-4. Boundaries. [Ord. of 10-5-2009]
The Arts and Cultural District shall be the area defined in the Town of Abingdon Zoning
Ordinance and on the official zoning map, attached hereto.
§ 8A-5. Eligibility requirements. [Ord. of 10-5-2009]
Economic incentives and regulatory flexibility may be made available to any new
or expanded business listed by the Town as an arts or cultural related business or
organization. The business or organization must advance the Town's strategic goals
identified in the Town's comprehensive plan. The business or organization must commit
to a performance agreement based upon a three year business plan, sales revenues, or
other significant criteria.
§ 8A-6. Taxes eligible for exemption. [Ord. of 10-5-2009]
Qualified businesses or organizations shall be eligible for exemption or rebate from the
following local taxes:
§ 8A-7. Amount of exemption. [Ord. of 10-5-2009]
Qualified businesses and organizations shall be exempt for a period up to five
consecutive years from the Town's business, professional and occupational license taxes
and fees identified in Section 18-28(c), above. Year one is the calendar year in which
the business or organization becomes a qualified arts or cultural related business if it
is qualified prior to June 30 of the first year. Otherwise, year one shall be the year
following the year in which the business becomes qualified. If a business or organization
ceases to be a qualified business or organization during a year in which rebates or
exemptions apply, they shall be prorated for the months the business was a qualified
business. In the case of multi-year incentives, the business shall establish its qualification
for the incentives on an annual basis.
§ 8A-8. Procedure for tax exemption. [Ord. of 10-5-2009]
The procedures shall be determined by the administrator and approved by the Town
Manager. No incentive application shall be approved until the treasurer makes a
determination that no other unpaid taxes are outstanding. Once an incentive application
has been approved and the business certified by the administrator as a qualified business,
a performance agreement shall be written and the business shall be entitled to the
exception created by this article.
§ 8A-9. Compliance. [Ord. of 10-5-2009]
Overlay District.
(d) Existing companies within the boundaries of the Town which qualify under any of
the criteria set forth above shall be qualified. A company meeting the criteria which
moves into the Town shall also qualify.
(a) The business, professional and occupational license taxes and fees imposed by
Chapter 18, Article II, of the Code of the Town of Abingdon.
§ 8A-3 ABINGDON CODE § 8A-9
B:42
(a) Failure of the business to pay in full by the due date any taxes imposed by the Town
shall result in the loss of the exemption for the remainder of the current year upon
a finding by the administrator that such delinquency is significant. The Town of
Abingdon reserves the right to withdraw qualified business status for any business
that is not compliant with any Town ordinance, regulation, or other legal
requirement.
(b) Failure of the business to meet the minimum criteria established in sections 8A-5
and 8A-6 regarding eligibility shall result in the loss of the exemption for the
remainder of the current year and may result in a requirement to reimburse the
Town of Abingdon the full amount of revenue that would have been generated
through the full tax rate as specified in the performance agreement.
(c) Non-profit organizations already receiving monetary support or contributions from
the Town will not be eligible to receive additional funding sources.
§ 8A-9 ZONING ORDINANCE § 8A-9
B:43

ARTICLE 9
OI Office and Institutional District
§ 9-1. Permitted uses by right. [Ord. of 8-5-1996]
The following uses shall be permitted by right in the OI office and institutional district:
9-1-1. Professional offices.
9-1-2. Public offices.
9-1-3. General business offices.
9-1-4. Hospitals, including special care hospitals and medically-related businesses.
[Amd. of 2-2-2004]
9-1-5. Diagnostic laboratories serving the medical profession.
9-1-6. Dental laboratories.
9-1-7. Apothecaries and pharmacies. [Amd. of 2-2-2004]
9-1-8. Churches and other places of religious assembly.
9-1-9. Schools.
9-1-10. Libraries.
9-1-11. Funeral homes.
9-1-12. Clubs and lodges.
9-1-13. Schools of special instruction.
9-1-14. Dormitory buildings.
9-1-15. Nursing homes.
9-1-16. Parks.
9-1-17. Rooming and boarding houses.
9-1-18. Bed and board homes.
9-1-19. Residential care facilities.
9-1-20. Single-family dwellings.
9-1-21. Home occupations, category B. [See also sections 17-16 and 26-40.]
9-1-22. Public utilities.
9-1-23. Accessory uses.
9-1-24. Signs as permitted by Article 21 of this ordinance.
9-1-25. Off-street parking as required by Section 17-6 of this ordinance.
§ 9-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 9-1
B:45
§ 9-2. Special uses. [Amd. of 2-2-2004; Ord. of 12-1-2008, eff. 1-1-2009; Ord. No.
2020.11-2.A, 11-2-2020]
The following uses may be permitted in the OI office and institutional district with a
special use permit in accordance with regulations in 17-3 of this ordinance:
§ 9-3. Area regulations.
§ 9-4. Setback regulations.
§ 9-5. Frontage regulations.
The minimum lot width at the setback line shall be 70 feet for single-family dwellings
and 80 feet for all other permitted uses.
§ 9-6. Yard regulations.
9-1-26. Museums and related structures.
9-1-27. Banks and other financial institutions. [Amd. of 2-2-2004]
9-1-28. Restaurants. [Amd. of 2-2-2004]
9-2-1. Personal service businesses.
9-2-2. Retirement homes.
9-2-3. Hotels and motels.
9-2-4. Light industry.
9-2-5. Two-family dwellings with area, setback, frontage, yard and height regulations as
required in Article 7 of this ordinance.
9-2-6. Multi-family dwellings with area, setback, frontage, yard and height regulations
as required in Article 7 of this ordinance.
9-3-1. All lots shall be served by public water and sewer. The minimum lot area shall be:
(a) Eight thousand five hundred square feet for single-family dwellings.
(b) None for all other permitted uses.
9-3-2. Buildings served by individual water and/or sewer systems shall be required to
connect to the public systems.
9-4-1. Structures shall be located 30 feet or more from any street right-of-way which is
50 feet or greater in width, or 55 feet or more from the centerline of any street rightof-way less than 50 feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line."
9-4-2. Structures shall be located 15 feet or more from the property line along any
existing alley.
9-6-1. Side. The minimum side yard for each main structure shall be 10 feet, and the
§ 9-1 ABINGDON CODE § 9-6
B:46
§ 9-7. Height regulations.
Structures may be erected up to 35 feet in height except that:
minimum total width of the two side yards shall be 20 feet. Note: see Article 17,
Section 17-12, for corner lot provisions.
9-6-2. Rear. Each main structure shall have a minimum rear yard of 25 feet.
9-6-3. Accessory building. No accessory building shall be closer than five feet to any
property line.
9-7-1. The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to 45 feet and up to three
stories; provided that each side yard, as required by Section 9-6-1, above, shall be
increased one foot or more for each additional foot of building height over 35 feet.
9-7-2. The height limit for buildings, except single-family dwellings, may be to a height
of 60 feet; provided that required front, side, and rear yards shall be increased one
foot for each foot in height over 30 feet.
9-7-3. Spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles,
television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four
feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest.
9-7-4. No accessory building which is within 10 feet of any party lot line shall be more
than one story high. All accessory buildings shall be no greater than the main
building in height.
§ 9-6 ZONING ORDINANCE § 9-7
B:47

ARTICLE 10
B-1 Limited Business District
§ 10-1. Permitted uses by right. [Ord. of 4-6-2009, eff. 5-6-2009]
The following uses shall be permitted by right in the B-1 limited business district:
§ 10-2. Special uses. [Amended 1-4-2021 by Ord. No. 2021.01.04.A]
The following uses may be permitted in the B-1 Limited Business District with a special
use permit in accordance with regulations in Section 17-3 of this ordinance:
10-1-1. Single-family and two-family dwellings with area regulations, setback
regulations, frontage regulations, yard regulations and height regulations as
required in Article 6 of this ordinance.
10-1-2. Multiple-family dwellings in existing buildings or portions of existing buildings.
10-1-3. Neighborhood grocery stores.
10-1-4. Bake shops.
10-1-5. Drugstores.
10-1-6. Pick-up laundry and dry cleaning stations, laundromat.
10-1-7. Restaurant.
10-1-8. Barber and beauty shops.
10-1-9. Gift shops.
10-1-10. Clothing shops.
10-1-11. Garden shops, limited to 2,500 square feet of floor space.
10-1-12. Florist shops.
10-1-13. Shoe stores and shoe repair shops.
10-1-14. Professional, general business and public offices.
10-1-15. Home occupations, category B. [See also sections 17-16 and 26-40].
10-1-16. Public utilities.
10-1-17. Accessory uses.
10-1-18. Signs as permitted by Article 21 of this ordinance.
10-1-19. Off-street parking as required by Article 17 of this ordinance and non
commercial parking lots.
10-1-20. Distributor.
10-1-21. Microbrewery.
§ 10-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 10-2
B:49
§ 10-3. Area regulations.
§ 10-4. Setback regulations.
§ 10-5. Frontage regulations.
None.
§ 10-6. Yard regulations.
§ 10-7. Height regulations.
Structures may be erected up to 35 feet in height except that:
10-2-1. Short-term rentals.
10-3-1. None for uses served by public water and sewer, except as required in Section
10-1-1, above.
10-3-2. For lots served by individual sewage disposal systems, the minimum lot area
shall be 15,000 square feet.
10-3-3. Lots, regardless of area, served by public sewer and/or public water shall be
required to connect to the public systems. Buildings served by individual water and/
or sewer systems shall be connected to the public systems when the public systems
become available to the lot.
10-3-4. For permitted uses utilizing individual sewage disposal systems, the required
area for any such use shall be approved by the health official. The administrator
shall require a greater area if considered necessary by the health official.
10-4-1. Structures shall be located 10 feet or more from any street right-of-way which is
50 feet or greater in width, or 35 feet or more from the centerline of any street rightof-way less than 50 feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line."
10-4-2. Structures shall be located 15 feet or more from the property line along any
existing alley.
10-6-1. Side. None; except the minimum side yard for each main structure adjoining or
adjacent to a residential or open space district shall be 10 feet. Note: see Article 17,
Section 17-12 for corner lot provisions.
10-6-2. Rear. Each main structure shall have a minimum rear yard of 35 feet.
10-6-3. Accessory building. No accessory building shall be closer than five feet to any
property line.
10-7-1. Spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles,
television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four
feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest.
10-7-2. No accessory building which is within 10 feet of any party lot line shall be more
than one story high. All accessory buildings shall be no greater than the main
§ 10-2 ABINGDON CODE § 10-7
B:50
building in height.
§ 10-7 ZONING ORDINANCE § 10-7
B:51

ARTICLE 11
B-2 General Business District
§ 11-1. Permitted uses by right. [Amd. of 5-5-2003; Ord. of 4-6-2009, eff. 5-6-2009;
Ord. of 5-5-2014]
The following uses shall be permitted by right in the B-2 general business district:
11-1-1. Single family dwelling and loft apartments in existing buildings or portions of
existing buildings.
11-1-2. Vehicle sales and/or service garages (including autos, motorcycles, trucks, etc.)
with major repair under cover.
11-1-3. Mobile home sales.
11-1-4. Farm machinery sales and service (with major repair under cover).
11-1-5. Service stations (with major repair under cover).
11-1-6. Hotels and motels.
11-1-7. Restaurants and taverns.
11-1-8. Lumber and building supply sales.
11-1-9. Plumbing and electrical supply sales.
11-1-10. Outdoor amusement facilities, miniature golf, driving ranges, etc.
11-1-11. Bowling alleys, video game rooms, skating rink.
11-1-12. Discount retail stores.
11-1-13. Grocery stores.
11-1-14. Professional, public and general offices.
11-1-15. Equipment rental stores.
11-1-16. Hardware stores.
11-1-17. Banks and other financial institutions.
11-1-18. Undertaking establishments and funeral homes.
11-1-19. Garden shops and nursery sales.
11-1-20. Car wash.
11-1-21. Laundry and dry cleaning establishments, including pickup stations.
11-1-22. Bakeries and retail stores.
11-1-23. Home appliance sales and service.
11-1-24. Vehicle parts sales.
§ 11-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 11-1
B:53
§ 11-2. Special uses. [Ord. of 7-1-2014]
The following uses may be permitted in the B-2 General Business District with a special
use permit in accordance with regulations in Section 17-3 of this ordinance:
11-1-25. Theatres and assembly halls.
11-1-26. Newspaper offices and printing presses.
11-1-27. Clubs and lodges.
11-1-28. Above ground bulk petroleum storage limited to 20,000 gallons per tank.
11-1-29. Shopping centers, including the following uses contained within the building
complex:
(a) Restaurants.
(b) Offices.
(c) Personal service establishments.
(d) Video game rooms and similar public amusements.
(e) Food specialty shops.
(f) Retail stores and shops.
11-1-30. Parking lots.
11-1-31. Public utilities.
11-1-32. Accessory uses.
11-1-33. Signs as permitted by Article 21 of this ordinance.
11-1-34. Off-street parking as required by Section 17-6 of this ordinance.
11-1-35. Schools and churches. [Ord. of 4-4-1988]
11-1-36. Storage facilities developed in connection with and clearly dependent to any of
the permitted uses by right in this district, and limited to 5,000 square feet or less in
total floor area. Such storage facility need not be located upon the same property as
the main use. [Ord. of 10-4-1991]
11-1-37. Distributor.
11-1-38. Microbrewery.
11-2-1. Public billiard parlors and poolrooms, dance halls, and similar forms of public
amusement.
11-2-2. Wholesale and processing not objectionable because of dust, noise or odors.
11-2-3. Kennels, animal boarding and grooming.
11-2-4. Short-term rentals. [Added 1-4-2021 by Ord. No. 2021.01.04.B]
§ 11-1 ABINGDON CODE § 11-3
B:54
§ 11-3. Area regulations.
§ 11-4. Setback regulations.
§ 11-5. Frontage regulations.
None.
§ 11-6. Yard regulations.
§ 11-7. Height regulations.
11-3-1. None for uses served by public water and sewer.
11-3-2. For lots served by individual sewage disposal systems, the required area for any
such use shall be approved by the health official. The administrator shall require the
area determined necessary by the health official.
11-3-3. Lots, regardless of area, served by public sewer and/or public water shall be
required to connect to the public systems when the public systems become available
to the lot.
11-4-1. Structures shall be located 25 feet or more from any street right-of-way which is
50 feet or greater in width, or 35 feet or more from the centerline of any street rightof-way less than 50 feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line."
11-4-2. Structures shall be located 15 feet or more from the property line along any
existing alley.
11-6-1. Side. None, except that the minimum side yard for each main structure adjoining
or adjacent to a residential or open space district shall be 10 feet. Note: see Article
17, Section 17-12 for corner lot provisions.
11-6-2. Rear. None, except that the minimum rear yard for each main structure adjoining
or adjacent to a residential or open space district shall be 25 feet.
11-6-3. Accessory building. No accessory building shall be closer than five feet to any
property line.
11-7-1. None, except that no accessory structure which is within 10 feet of any party lot
line shall be more than one story high. All accessory structures shall be no greater
than the main structure in height.
§ 11-3 ZONING ORDINANCE § 11-7
B:55

ARTICLE 12
B-3 Central Business District
§ 12-1. Permitted uses by right. [Ord. of 4-6-2009, eff. 5-6-2009]
The following uses shall be permitted by right in the B-3 central business district:
12-1-1. Multiple-family dwellings in existing buildings or portions of existing buildings.
12-1-2. Banks and other financial institutions.
12-1-3. Barbershops, beauty parlors and similar personal service establishments.
12-1-4. Bus and railroad stations.
12-1-5. Clubs and lodges.
12-1-6. Churches and other places of religious assembly.
12-1-7. Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or similar retail trades employing not
more than five persons.
12-1-8. Cabinet and woodworking shops employing not more than five persons on the
premises.
12-1-9. Drugstores, with or without soda fountains.
12-1-10. Restaurants and taverns.
12-1-11. Hotels and motels.
12-1-12. Gift and antique shops.
12-1-13. Public buildings.
12-1-14. Professional, public and general offices.
12-1-15. Parking lots.
12-1-16. Taxi stands.
12-1-17. Manufacturing of articles to be sold exclusively on the premises, provided such
manufacturing is incidental to the retail business and employs not more than five
operators engaged in the production of such items.
12-1-18. Newspaper offices and printing presses.
12-1-19. Theatres and assembly halls.
12-1-20. Food specialty shops.
12-1-21. Video game rooms.
12-1-22. Bakeries and retail stores.
12-1-23. Retail stores and shops not otherwise listed.
§ 12-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 12-1
B:57
§ 12-2. Special uses.
The following uses may be permitted in the B-3 Central Business District with a special
use permit in accordance with regulations in Section 17-3 of this ordinance:
§ 12-3. Area regulations.
None.
§ 12-4. Setback regulations.
§ 12-5. Frontage regulations.
None.
§ 12-6. Yard regulations.
§ 12-7. Height regulations.
12-1-24. Public utilities.
12-1-25. Accessory uses clearly incidental to a permitted use and which will not create a
nuisance or hazard.
12-1-26. Signs as permitted by Article 21 of this ordinance.
12-1-27. Distributor.
12-1-28. Microbrewery.
12-2-1. Public billiard parlors and pool rooms, dance halls and similar forms of public
amusement.
12-2-2. Service stations (with major repair under cover).
12-2-3. Short-term rentals. [Added 1-4-2021 by Ord. No. 2021.01.04.C]
12-4-1. None required from street right-of-way.
12-4-2. None required from alley.
12-6-1. Side. None except that the minimum side yard for each main structure adjoining
or adjacent to a residential or open space district shall be 10 feet.
12-6-2. Rear. None except that the minimum rear yard for each main structure adjoining
or adjacent to a residential or open space district shall be 25 feet.
12-6-3. Accessory building. No accessory building shall be closer than five feet to any
property line.
12-7-1. None except that no accessory structure which is within 10 feet of any party lot
line shall be more than one story high. All accessory buildings shall be no greater
than the main building in height.
§ 12-1 ABINGDON CODE § 12-8
B:58
§ 12-8. Off-street parking regulations.
12-8-1. None required. See Section 17-8-3.
§ 12-8 ZONING ORDINANCE § 12-8
B:59

ARTICLE 13
M-1 Limited Industrial District
§ 13-1. Permitted uses by right. [Ord. of 1-9-1989; Min. of 8-4-97; Ord. of
3-3-2014]
The following uses shall be permitted by right in the M-1 limited industrial district:
§ 13-2. Special uses. [Ord. of 9-4-2007; Ord. of 3-3-2014]
The following uses may be permitted in the M-1 limited industrial district with a special
use permit in accordance with regulations in Section 17-3 of this ordinance:
13-1-1. Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and
phonographs, including the manufacture of small parts.
13-1-2. Wholesale businesses, storage warehouses for non-hazardous materials only.
13-1-3. Veterinary hospitals and kennels.
13-1-4. Cabinet, furniture and upholstery shops.
13-1-5. Seed and feed stores.
13-1-6. General offices.
13-1-7. Professional offices.
13-1-8. Parking lots.
13-1-9. Public utilities.
13-1-10. Accessory uses.
13-1-11. Signs as permitted by Article 21 of this ordinance.
13-1-12. Off-street parking as required by Section 17-6 of this ordinance.
13-1-13. Mobile home parks.
13-1-14. Beauty salons.
13-1-15. Specialty retail.
13-2-1. Indoor flea markets and indoor auction sales.
13-2-2. Lofts.
13-2-3. Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or treating of such
products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes,
pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, food and tobacco products.
13-2-4. Manufacturing or assembling of products from the following materials:
cellophane, canvas, cloth, cord, fiber, glass, leather, paper, plastic, straw, textiles,
wood or yarn.
§ 13-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 13-2
B:61
§ 13-3. Area regulations.
§ 13-4. Setback regulations.
§ 13-5. Frontage regulations.
None.
§ 13-6. Yard regulations.
13-2-5. Manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using
only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by gas or electricity.
13-2-6. Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and rubber and metal
stamps.
13-2-7. Laundry and dry cleaning plants.
13-2-8. Laboratories, pharmaceutical and/or medical.
13-2-9. Automobile painting, upholstering, repairing, rebuilding, reconditioning, body
and fender work. This shall include other vehicles and mobile homes.
13-2-10. Restaurants.
13-3-1. None for uses served by public water and sewer.
13-3-2. For uses utilizing individual sewage disposal systems, the required area for any
such use shall be approved by the health official. The administrator may require a
greater area than that considered necessary by the health official.
13-3-3. Lots, regardless of area, served by public sewer and/or public water shall be
required to connect to the public systems. Buildings served by individual water and/
or sewer systems shall be connected to the public systems when the public systems
become available to the lot.
13-3-4. Buildings or groups of buildings with their accessory buildings may cover up to
70% of the lot.
13-4-1. Structures shall be located 10 feet or more from any street right-of-way which is
50 feet or greater in width, or 35 feet or more from the centerline of any street rightof-way less than 50 feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line."
13-4-2. Structures shall be located 15 feet or more from the property line along any
existing alley.
13-6-1. Side. None, except that the minimum side yard for each main structure adjoining
or adjacent to a residential or open space district shall be 10 feet. Note: see Article
17, Section 17-12, for corner lot provisions.
13-6-2. Rear. None, except that the minimum rear yard for each main structure adjoining
or adjacent to a residential or open space district shall be 25 feet.
13-6-3. Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall be 20 feet or more from any lot line
§ 13-2 ABINGDON CODE § 13-6
B:62
§ 13-7. Height regulations.
None.
§ 13-8. General requirements.
adjoining or adjacent to a residential or open space district.
13-6-4. Accessory structures. No accessory structures shall be located within the
minimum side or rear yard area of any use adjoining or adjacent to a residential or
open space district.
13-8-1. Before a building permit shall be issued or construction commenced on any
permitted use in this district, or a permit issued for a new use, a site plan, as required
in Article 18 of this ordinance, containing sufficient detail to show the operations
and processes, shall be submitted. The administrator may refer these plans to the
Planning Commission for recommendation. Modifications of the plans may be
required.
13-8-2. Landscaping and screening as provided in Section 18-5-2 and Section 18-5-3
shall be required for all permitted uses.
13-8-3. Sufficient area shall be provided to adequately screen permitted uses from
adjacent business, residential and open space districts and for off-street parking of
vehicles incidental to the use, its employees and clients.
13-8-4. Automobile graveyards and junkyards in existence at the time of the adoption of
this ordinance are considered nonconforming uses. They shall be allowed up to two
years after written notification in which to completely screen, on any side open to
view from a public road, the operation or use by a masonry wall, a uniformly
painted solid board fence or an evergreen hedge six feet in height.
§ 13-6 ZONING ORDINANCE § 13-8
B:63

ARTICLE 14
PTD Planned Technology Development District
§ 14-1. General statement of purpose. [Ord. of 9-10-2001]
§ 14-2. Permitted uses by right. [Ord. of 9-10-2001]
§ 14-3. Special uses. [Ord. of 9-10-2001]
None.
(a) The planned technology development (PTD) district is established primarily for
high technology manufacturing and industrial uses. Supporting accessory uses and
facilities, including offices, commercial establishments, and residential areas are
also permitted. The PTD district is intended to be designed with a park-like setting
that complements surrounding land uses by means of appropriate siting of
buildings, controlled access points, attractive and harmonious architecture,
effective landscape buffering and common open space with scenic view easements.
The district is intended to provide flexibility in design and site layout, allow latitude
in combining different types of uses within a single development, and provide the
developer with incentives to create an aesthetically pleasing, functional and
environmentally friendly planned development.
(b) In addition, the intent of the planned technology development (PTD) district is to
provide certain industries that are clean and environmentally efficient the
opportunity to locate in an area of similar technologies in what is generally known
as a mixed use park, developed under a complete, comprehensive master plan.
Standards are provided for landscaping, buffering and open space to encourage high
technology industries and to ensure a park-like atmosphere. Important in
determining the location and size of a PTD are the accessibility of the location, the
availability of public utilities, public safety services and the suitability of the
topography for site and building development purposes.
14-2-1. Enterprises engaged in the processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly,
packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and products, from processed or
previously manufactured materials. Included would be assembly of electronic
devices and the manufacturing of medical appliances.
14-2-2. (Reserved)
14-2-3. Residential uses including single-family, two-family, multiple-family and
townhouses with area regulations, setback regulations, frontage regulations, yard
regulations and height regulations as required in Article 6 of this ordinance.
14-2-4. Civic uses including schools, clubs and lodges, parks, playgrounds, places of
religious assembly and auditoriums.
14-2-5. Office uses including professional, public and general business offices.
14-2-6. Commercial uses including hotels, restaurants, offices, personal service
establishments, food specialty shops, other retail stores and shops.
§ 14-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 14-4
B:65
§ 14-4. Site development regulations. [Ord. of 9-10-2001]
Each planned technological development shall be subject to the following site
development standards:
(a) Minimum district size: five acres of contiguous land.
(b) Minimum required setbacks:
(1) All structures proposed to front on existing public streets external to the PTD
shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from the existing public right-of-way.
(2) Minimum setbacks from internal PTD streets shall be 10 feet for public streets
and 30 feet from any private streets.
(3) Side yards for any main structure which adjoins a residential or open space
zone or use shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
(4) Rear yards for any main structure which adjoins a residential or open space
zone or use shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
(c) The zoning administrator shall require buffer screening areas based on Section
18-5-3 of this ordinance and the existing or proposed use in the PTD. In no case
shall a buffer screening area adjoining any residential district or use be less than 10
feet in width.
(d) Lot coverage: Maximum lot coverage for main and accessory structures shall be
determined through the preliminary master plan process and shall not exceed 75%.
(e) Public streets in the PTD district shall be built in accordance with Town of
Abingdon minimum standards. In reviewing the PTD preliminary master plan, the
Planning Commission may recommend and the Town Council may approve, one or
mere private streets within the proposed district. Private street standards,
specifications and a proposed maintenance agreement shall be submitted with the
preliminary master plan.
(f) The applicant may propose a reduction in the number of parking spaces required by
Section 17-6 of this ordinance for each use type, if justified. This proposal will be
reviewed with consideration given to potential future uses of the site, parking
demand and expansion potential.
(g) Maximum height of structures: When any adjoining property is residential in
zoning or use, a height limit of 45 feet will be observed, including rooftop
mechanical equipment. The maximum height may be increased provided each
required yard (side, rear, or buffer) adjoining a residential district or use is increased
by two feet above the minimum for each foot in height over 45 feet. This distance
shall be measured from the portion of the structure that exceeds 45 feet. In all other
locations the height is unlimited.
(h) Arrangement of areas:
(1) The location and arrangement of structures, parking, access drives, outdoor
lighting, signs and other uses and developments within the PTD, in addition to
achieving these development standards, shall be accomplished in accordance
§ 14-4 ABINGDON CODE § 14-4
B:66
§ 14-5. Site development requirements. [Ord. of 9-10-2001]
The planned technology development district should be designed and developed as
a manufacturing, industrial and technology park with high standards for landscaping,
buffering and open space. To ensure a park-like atmosphere the following site
development requirements are made.
§ 14-6. Relationship to existing development regulations. [Ord. of 9-10-2001]
All zoning and subdivision ordinances and regulations shall apply to any proposed
development within the PTD district, unless modified by the Planning Commission and
Town Council in the approval of the final master plan.
§ 14-7. Application process. [Ord. of 9-10-2001]
with an approved final master plan to assure compatibility with the existing
and future land use in the vicinity.
(2) All areas designed for future expansion or not intended for immediate
improvement or development shall be specified as reserve areas in the
preliminary master plan. The future use and the limitations on future use of
such reserve areas shall be specified. Reserve areas included in the PTD shall
be landscaped or otherwise maintained in a neat and orderly manner.
(i) Accessory structures shall not exceed 40% of the gross floor area of the principal
structure.
(j) Every structure in the PTD shall be a fully enclosed building of permanent
construction. Any outside storage area shall be fully screened so that no materials
so stored are visible at any lot line or public right-of-way.
(k) Outdoor lighting: Lighting shall comply with Section 18-5-4 of this ordinance.
(l) Utilities: Utilities shall be underground unless the type of service necessary for
normal activities of the industry or business shall prohibit underground installation.
Public water and sewer services are required in the PTD district.
(a) The principal entrance into the PTD district should be sufficiently landscaped to
comply with the purposes of this district. In addition, the first 100 linear feet of
street, leading through this principal entrance into the PTD, should have a
landscaped median of sufficient width and planting density to meet the purposes of
this district.
(b) Parking within the PTD should be located to the side or rear of the principal
structures on the lot, wherever feasible. During review, consideration will be given
to topographical constraints, innovative site design, buffering and landscaping
factors.
(c) Loading areas should be screened from public view and should not be placed in
front yards.
(d) Fences should not be placed in front yards except as necessary for security
purposes. Fencing should be uniform and well kept.
§ 14-4 ZONING ORDINANCE § 14-7
B:67
(a) The process for approval shall be the same as the process outlined for amendments
in Article 25 of this ordinance. The Town of Abingdon will make every reasonable
effort to complete the application process within this established time frame. Any
application to rezone land to the PTD designation shall constitute an amendment to
the Zoning Ordinance pursuant to Article 25.
(b) Prior to submitting a formal application for review and approval under these
provisions, the applicant and Town staff shall meet to discuss the requirements of
this section. The purpose of the meeting is to obtain a mutual understanding of the
application requirements and process. The applicant is encouraged to submit
information on the scope and nature of the proposal to allow staff to become
familiar with the proposal in advance of this meeting.
(c) To initiate an amendment, the applicant shall complete a rezoning application. This
information shall be accompanied by graphic and written information, which shall
constitute a preliminary master plan. All information submitted shall be of
sufficient clarity and scale to clearly and accurately identify the location, nature,
and character of the proposed district. At a minimum this information shall include:
(1) A legal description and plat showing the site boundaries, and existing street
lines, lot lines, and easements.
(2) Existing zoning, land use and ownership of each parcel proposed for the
district.
(3) A general statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the PTD district,
including a description of the character of the proposed development, the
existing and proposed ownership of the site, the market for which the
development is oriented and intentions with regards to any specific humanmade and natural characteristics located on the site.
(4) A description and analysis of existing site conditions, including information
on topography, historic resources, natural water courses, floodplains, unique
natural features, existing tree cover areas, known archeological resources, etc.
(5) The proposed conceptual location and number of structures within each land
use of the proposed development.
(6) The approximate gross square footage for each use type proposed in the PTD.
(7) The proposed size, location and use of other portions of the tract, including
landscaping and parking.
(8) General information on the trip generation, ownership, maintenance and
construction standards for proposed streets should be included. The
administrator or the director of public works may require a traffic impact
analysis.
(9) Proposed deed covenants, restrictions or other constraints to be imposed upon
the purchasers of such properties.
(10) The proposed schedule of site development. At a minimum, the schedule
should include an approximate commencement date for construction and a
§ 14-7 ABINGDON CODE § 14-7
B:68
§ 14-8. Revisions to final master plan. [Ord. of 9-10-2001]
proposed build-out period.
(11) Generalized statements pertaining to architectural design principles and
guidelines shall be submitted in sufficient detail to provide information on
building designs, orientations, styles, lighting plans, signage plans,
landscaping, etc.
(d) The completed rezoning application and supporting preliminary master plan
materials shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and analysis.
The commission shall review this information and make a report of its findings to
the Town Council.
(e) The Planning Commission shall make a report of its findings to the Town Council
within 90 days of the receipt of the materials, unless the applicant requests, or
agrees to an extension of this time frame. The commission's report shall recommend
approval, approval with modifications, or disapproval of the preliminary master
plan. Failure of the commission to make a report of its findings to the Town Council
within this period shall constitute a commission recommendation of approval.
(f) If the Planning Commission recommends denial of the preliminary master plan, or
approval with modification, the applicant shall, if requested, have 60 days to make
any modifications. If the applicant desires to make any modifications to the
preliminary master plan, the Town Council's review and action shall be delayed
until such changes are made and submitted for review.
(g) The Town Council shall review the preliminary master plan, and after holding a
public hearing act to approve or deny the plan within 90 days. Approval of the
preliminary master plan shall constitute acceptance of the plan's provisions and
concepts as proffers pursuant to Section 30-15 of this ordinance. The plan approved
by the Town Council shall constitute the final master plan for the PTD. Once
approved by the Town Council, the administrator shall authorize the revisions to
the official zoning map to indicate the establishment of the PTD district.
(a) Major revisions to the final master plan shall be reviewed and approved following
the procedures and requirements of Section 14-6. Major revisions include, but are
not limited to changes such as:
(1) Any significant increase in the density of the development;
(2) Substantial change in circulation or access;
(3) Substantial change in grading or utility provisions;
(4) Substantial changes in the mixture of land uses;
(5) Substantial change in architectural or site design features of the development;
(6) Any other change that the administrator finds is a major divergence from the
approved final master plan.
(b) All other changes in the final master plan shall be considered minor amendments.
§ 14-7 ZONING ORDINANCE § 14-8
B:69
§ 14-9. Approval of preliminary and final site plans. [Ord. of 9-10-2001]
§ 14-10. Failure to begin development. [Ord. of 9-10-2001]
Unless an extension is granted by the administrator, failure of the applicant to submit
a preliminary site development plan for at least one portion of the planned residential
development within 36 months of the approval of the final master plan, shall constitute
an application on the part of applicant to rezone the PTD to the district designations in
effect prior to the approval of the final master plan.
§ 14-11. Control following approval of final development plans. [Ord. of
9-10-2001]
The zoning administrator shall periodically inspect the site and review all building
permits issued for the development to ensure that the development is in general
compliance with the submitted schedule.
The administrator, upon receipt of a written request of the owner, may approve such
minor amendments.
(1) If the administrator fails to act on a request for a minor amendment to the
master plan within 15 calendar days, it shall be considered approved.
(2) A request which is disapproved by the administrator shall be considered a
major amendment and shall be subject to the approval process outlined above
for such amendments.
(a) Following the approval of the final master plan, the applicant or its authorized
agent, shall be required to submit preliminary and final site plans for approval as
required by Article 18. Final site plans for any phase or component of the PTD that
involves the construction of structures or facilities, shall be approved prior to the
issuance of a building and zoning permit, and the commencement of construction.
(b) It is the intent of this section that subdivision review under the subdivision
regulations be carried out simultaneously with the review of a PTD under this
section. The plans required under this section shall be submitted in a form that will
satisfy the requirements of the subdivision regulations, as determined by the
administrator.
(c) Preliminary and final site development plans submitted for review shall be in
compliance with the final master plan approved by the Town Council. The Town of
Abingdon shall review and approve or disapprove any final site plan within 60 days
of its submittal.
(d) No planned technology development shall be approved and no work shall be
authorized on construction until all property designated as common open space in
the final master plan is in common ownership.
§ 14-8 ABINGDON CODE § 14-11
B:70
ARTICLE 15
FH Flood Hazard District
§ 15-1. Purpose. [Ord. of 8-2-201022]
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to localities by Code of Virginia,
§ 15.2-2280.
The purpose of this article is to establish and identify those areas which should be
subject to special regulations on account of a greater probability of flooding thereon.
The purposes of establishing such areas are to protect life and property; to reduce
public costs for flood control, rescue and relief efforts; to protect recognizable ecological
values; to prevent: the creation of health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds
for flood protection and relief, the impairment of the tax base and to support and conform
to the National Flood Insurance Program, by:
§ 15-2. Applicability. [Ord. of 8-2-2010]
These provisions shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the Town of Abingdon
and identified as being flood-prone as stipulated in this article.
§ 15-3. Compliance and liability. [Ord. of 8-2-2010]
15-1-1. Regulating uses, activities, and developments which, acting alone or in
combination with other existing or future uses, activities and developments, will
cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities and frequencies.
15-1-2. Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and developments from locating
within areas subject to flooding.
15-1-3. Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur in flood prone
areas to be protected and/or flood-proofed against flooding and flood damage.
15-1-4. Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for
intended purposes because of flood hazards.
15-3-1. No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated,
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full
compliance with the terms and provisions of this article and any other applicable
ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this article.
15-3-2. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable
engineering methods of study, but does not imply total flood protection. Larger
floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made
or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This
article does not imply that districts outside the floodplain district or land uses
permitted within such district will be free from flooding or flood damages.
22. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. 15, which derived from an ordinance adopted 6-7-1993, as
amended.
§ 15-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 15-3
B:71
§ 15-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions. [Ord. of 8-2-2010]
This article supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in flood-prone districts. Any
ordinance, however, shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions
are more restrictive.
§ 15-5. Severability. [Ord. of 8-2-2010]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article shall be
declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining
portions of this article. The remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect; and
for this purpose, the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 15-6. Penalty for violations. [Ord. of 8-2-2010]
Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this
article or directions of the director of planning or any authorized employee of the
Town of Abingdon shall be guilty of the provisions of the violation and penalty article
as set forth in the Town of Abingdon Zoning Ordinance. In addition to the above
penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the
proper enforcement of this article. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation
of, or noncompliance with, this article shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance
or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
such violations or noncompliance's within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance with this article may be
declared by the Town of Abingdon to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Flood
insurance may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this article.
§ 15-7. Definitions. [Ord. of 8-2-2010]
100-YEAR FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. It does not imply that no greater flood is likely to occur, nor that such a
flood will not happen more often than once every 100 years.
BASE FLOOD — For the purposes of this article the 100-year flood. The flood having
a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The Federal Emergency Management Agency
designated 100-year water surface elevation. The water surface elevation of the base
flood in relation to the datum specified on the community's flood insurance rate map.
For the purposes of this article, the 100-year flood or 1% annual chance flood.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor surface sub-grade (below
ground level) on any side.
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS — A quasi-judicial board appointed to review appeals
15-3-3. Records of actions associated with administering this article shall be kept on file
and maintained by the administrator or his/her designee.
15-3-4. This article shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Abingdon or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
article or any administrative decision lawfully made there under.
§ 15-3 ABINGDON CODE § 15-7
B:72
and requests for variances made by individuals with regard to decisions of the zoning
administrator in the interpretation of this article.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls,
pilings, or columns (post and piers).
ENCROACHMENT — For the purposes of this article the advance or infringement of
uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into
a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — An independent
agency of the United States government that provides a single point of accountability for
all federal emergency preparedness and mitigation and response activities.
FILL — The placing of any material which results in increasing the natural ground
surface elevation.
FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT — The land located within the base flood area which
includes the floodway, the special floodplain district, the approximated floodplain
district, and the other flood districts (designated as Zone X in the Town of Abingdon on
Flood Insurance Rate Map, Washington County, Virginia and incorporated areas).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community, on
which the FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available
digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — An examination, evaluation and determination
of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mudflow and/or flood-related erosion
hazards.
FLOOD or FLOODING —
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
(2)
Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph
a.2. of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the
surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of
water and deposited along the path of the current.
(3)
(a)
The collapse or subsistence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
(b)
§ 15-7 ZONING ORDINANCE § 15-7
B:73
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — A term applied to full range of public policy and
action for ensuring wise use of the floodplains. It includes everything from collection
and dissemination of flood control information to actual acquisition of floodplain lands,
including the enactment and administration of floodplain regulations, including building
codes and the building of flood-modifying structures.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — A combination of design modifications that results in a building
or structure that is subject to flooding, including the attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, being watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. The area identified as
"Floodway" in the FIS prepared by FEMA. The term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in the FIS prepared by the FEMA.
FLOODWAY FRINGE — The floodway fringe encompasses the portion of the
floodplain that could be completely obstructed without increasing the base flood
elevation by more than 1.0 foot at any point.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, but
excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for vehicle parking,
building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render
the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal
unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as
defined in paragraph a.1. of this definition.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained
by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(a)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing
to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(b)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
or,
(c)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior;
or,
(1)
(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
(d)
§ 15-7 ABINGDON CODE § 15-7
B:74
Code 44 CFR § 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain
management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel
trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days,
but does not include a recreational vehicle.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after September 29, 2010 or
after March 16, 1988, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For floodplain management or development purposes, new construction
means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective
date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the Town of Abingdon and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
SHALLOW FLOODING AREA — A special flood hazard area with base flood depths
from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or
greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in Section 15-8-4 of this
article.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement,
substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — For flood plain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
(a) Built on a single chassis;
(b) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(c) Designed to be self-propelled or towable; and
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(d)
§ 15-7 ZONING ORDINANCE § 15-7
B:75
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed
50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This
term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant
with the Town of Abingdon's flood plain management regulations in this article. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in § 60.3(d)(3) of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation
is provided.
WATERCOURSE — A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic
feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes
specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
§ 15-8. Establishment of flood hazard districts. [Ord. of 8-2-2010]
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure
safe living conditions, or
(a)
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
(b)
15-8-1. Basis of districts. The various flood hazard districts shall include special flood
hazard areas. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the FIS and the
FIRM for Washington County, Virginia and incorporated areas prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, dated
September 29, 2010, and any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto. The
boundaries of the special flood hazard area and flood hazard districts are established
as shown on the FIRM which is declared to be a part of this article and which shall
be kept on file at the Abingdon Planning Department offices.
(a) The Floodway District is delineated for purposes of this article using the
criteria that a certain area within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the
water of the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that
flood more than one foot at any point. These areas included in this district are
specifically defined in Table 3 of the above-referenced FIS and shown on the
accompanying FIRM (FIRM) on file with the Abingdon Planning Department.
(b) The Floodway Fringe District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the maps accompanying the FIS for which the base flood elevations have been
provided.
(c) The Approximated Floodplain District shall be those areas identified as an A
Zone on the maps accompanying the Flood Insurance Study. In these zones,
§ 15-7 ABINGDON CODE § 15-8
B:76
no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but the base flood
floodplain boundary has been approximated. For these areas, the base flood
elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable
sources shall be used, when available. Where the specific base flood elevation
cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such as the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers Flood Plain Information Reports, U.S. Geological
Survey Flood-prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use,
development and/or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance with
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses,
computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough
review by the Town of Abingdon.
(d) Other flood districts shall be those areas identified as Zone X on the maps
accompanying the flood insurance study. This zone includes areas of 0.2%
annual chance flood; areas of 1% annual chance flood with average depths of
less than one foot or with drainage areas less than one square mile.
15-8-2. Overlay concept.
(a) The flood hazard districts described above shall be overlays to the existing
underlying zoning districts as shown on the official zoning ordinance map, and
as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement
to the underlying district provisions.
(b) If there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the flood
hazard districts and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive
provisions and/or those pertaining to the flood hazard districts shall apply.
(c) In the event any provisions concerning a flood hazard district is declared
inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative action or judicial
discretion, the underlying district provisions shall remain applicable.
15-8-3. Official flood hazard districts map. The boundaries of the flood hazard districts
are established as shown on the flood insurance rate map which is declared to be a
part of this article and which shall be kept on file by the Town of Abingdon
Planning Department.
15-8-4. District boundary changes. The delineation of any of the flood hazard districts
may be revised by the Town of Abingdon where natural or man-made changes have
occurred and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, or an individual
documents the need for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval
must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration.
15-8-5. Interpretation of district boundaries. Initial interpretations of the boundaries of
the flood hazard district shall be made by the administrator. Should a dispute arise
concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the
location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present
§ 15-8 ZONING ORDINANCE § 15-8
B:77
§ 15-9. Utilization of the flood hazard district. [Ord. of 8-2-2010]
All uses, activities and development occurring within any flood hazard district shall be
undertaken only upon the issuance of a special use permit. Such development shall be
undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this article and with all other
applicable codes and ordinances, as amended, such as the Virginia Uniform Statewide
Building Code (VA USBC) and the Town of Abingdon Subdivision Regulations (VA
USBC is available online, public libraries and at the office of the building official at the
Abingdon Town Hall). Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the administrator shall
require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws
and shall review all sites to assure they are reasonably safe from flooding. Under no
circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development adversely affect the capacity
of the channels or floodways or any watercourse, drainage ditch or any other drainage
facility or system.
his case to the board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires.
15-8-6. Submitting technical data. The Town of Abingdon's base flood elevations may
increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions.
As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, the administrator shall notify the Federal Insurance
Administrator of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. Such a
submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes
affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and flood plain management
requirements will be based upon current data.
15-9-1. The placement of any manufactured home (mobile home) within any Flood
Hazard District is specifically prohibited, except as a replacement for a
manufactured home on an individual lot or parcel or in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed
provided all the requirements specified in Section 15-12-5(d) are met.
15-9-2. Any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the administrator or
designee in the administration or enforcement of this article or of any ordinance
adopted pursuant thereto shall follow the process of appeal as set forth in the
provisions for appeal in the Town of Abingdon Zoning Ordinance, herein.
15-9-3. Site plans and permit applications. All applications for development within any
floodplain district and all building permits issued for the floodplain shall
incorporate the following information:
(a) The elevation of the base flood at the site.
(b) The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement).
(c) For structures to be flood-proofed (non-residential only), the elevation to
which the structure will be flood-proofed.
(d) Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations.
15-9-4. The following uses shall be permissible in the floodway district provided that
they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and provided
§ 15-8 ABINGDON CODE § 15-9
B:78
that the development will not increase base flood elevations:
(a) Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop
harvesting.
(b) Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks, day camps,
picnic grounds, golf courses, swimming areas, hiking and horseback trails,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries and fishing areas.
(c) Open accessory residential uses such as yard areas, gardens, play areas and
previous loading areas, but not storage or other structures.
(d) Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements
and other developments are prohibited unless certification such as hydrologic
and hydraulic analyses (with supporting technical data) is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during occurrence of the base flood. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly
reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations,
etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the
administrator. Development activities which increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood may be allowed, provided that the developer or
applicant first applies — with the Town of Abingdon's endorsement — for a
conditional flood insurance rate map and floodway revision, and receives the
approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(e) If Section 15-9-5(d) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of Section 15-12.
15-9-5. The following uses may be permitted in the floodway fringe district provided
that they are in compliance with the provision of the underlying district:
(a) Structures, except for mobile homes, accessory to the uses and activities in
Section 15-9-4, above.
(b) Utilities and public facilities and improvements such as railroads, streets,
bridges, transmission lines, pipe lines, water and sewage treatment plants and
other similar, related uses.
(c) Temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals and similar activities.
(d) Other similar uses and activities provided that they cause no increase in flood
heights and/or velocities. All uses, activities and structural developments shall
be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing provisions
contained in this and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
(e) Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
the areas of special flood hazard, designated as Zone AE on the FIRM, unless
it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
§ 15-9 ZONING ORDINANCE § 15-9
B:79
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will
not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one
foot at any point within the Town of Abingdon. Development activities in
Zone AE, on the Washington County, Virginia and Incorporated Areas Flood
Insurance Rate Map which increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood by more than one foot may be allowed, provided that the developer
or applicant first applies — with the Town of Abingdon's endorsement —
for a conditional FIRM revision, and receives the approval of the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
15-9-6. Approximated floodplain districts.
(a) In flood fringe or approximated flood plain district, the development and/or
use of land shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of underlying
district provided that all such uses, activities and/or developments shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the elevation, flood-proofing and related
provisions contained in the VA USBC and all other applicable portions of the
Town Code and ordinances. For development proposed in the approximate
floodplain the applicant must use technical methods that correctly reflect
currently accepted technical concepts, such as point on boundary, high water
marks, or hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. Studies, analyses, computations,
etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the
administrator.
(b) The administrator reserves the right to require a hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses for any development. When base flood elevation data is utilized, the
lowest floor shall be elevated a minimum of one foot or above the base flood
elevation. During the permitting process, the administrator shall obtain:
(1) The elevation of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures; and,
(2) If the structure has been flood-proofed in accordance with the
requirements of this article, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which the structure has been flood-proofed.
15-9-7. In other flood districts, the development and/or use of land shall be permitted in
accordance with the regulations of underlying district provided that all such uses,
activities and/or developments shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the
elevation, floodproofing and related provisions contained in the VA USBC and all
other applicable portions of the Town Code.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures
shall have the lowest floor, elevated to or above the flood depth specified on
the FIRM, above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no flood depth number is specified,
the lowest floor shall be elevated no less than one foot above the highest
adjacent grade.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential
structures shall
§ 15-9 ABINGDON CODE § 15-9
B:80
§ 15-10. Procedures for considering variances in the flood hazard districts.
(1) Have the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood depth specified on
the FIRM, above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the FIRM. If no flood depth number is
specified, the lowest floor, shall be elevated at least one foot above the
highest adjacent grade; or,
(2) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely
flood-proofed to the specified flood level so that any space below that
level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(c) Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be provided to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
15-10-1. Variances shall be authorized only upon notice and hearing as required by the
Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431, as amended, and in accordance with the sections set
forth in Article 22 of the Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Abingdon, Virginia.
Variances shall be issued only upon a finding by the Board of Zoning Appeals that:
(a) The strict application of the ordinance would produce undue hardship to the
applicant; and
(b) After the Board of Zoning Appeals has determined that the granting of such
variance will not result in:
(1) Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood height; or
(2) Additional threats to public safety, or otherwise strictly against public
policy; or
(3) Extraordinary public expense; or
(4) The authorization of said variance shall not:
a. Create nuisances; or
b. Cause fraud or victimization of the public; or
c. Conflict with local laws or ordinances.
15-10-2. All actions by any agent, commission or board of the Town including but not
limited to variances, shall consider all pertinent facts found in other sections of the
Zoning Ordinance and especially:
(a) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities
caused by encroachments. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use,
development, or activity within any floodway district that will cause any
increase in the base flood elevation.
(b) The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream or
the injury of others.
§ 15-9 ZONING ORDINANCE § 15-10
B:81
(c) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these
systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions.
(d) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and
the effect of such damage on the individual owners.
(e) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community.
(f) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
(g) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
(h) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
(i) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain
management program for the Town and surrounding area.
(j) The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in
time of flood.
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of
the flood waters expected at the site.
(l) The historic nature of a structure. Variances for repair or rehabilitation of
historic structures may be granted upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
(m) Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this article.
15-10-3. When considering variances, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall ensure that the
granting of same will comply with the requirements of the VA USBC. In addition,
no variance within the floodway will be granted if it will cause an increase in the
base flood elevation.
15-10-4. The Board of Zoning Appeals may refer any application and accompanying
documentation pertaining to any request for a variance to a registered design
professional or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in
evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the
adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters.
15-10-5. Variances shall be issued only after the Board of Zoning Appeals has made its
determination in accordance with 15-10-1(a — b) above, and as set forth in the
provisions for appeal article of the Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Abingdon,
Virginia.
15-10-6. Variances shall be issued only after the Board of Zoning Appeals has
determined that the variance will be the minimum required to provide relief.
15-10-7. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall notify the applicant for a variance, in
§ 15-10 ABINGDON CODE § 15-10
B:82
§ 15-11. Existing structures in the floodplain. [Ord. of 8-2-2010]
§ 15-12. Site design regulations. [Ord. of 8-2-2010]
writing and signed by the administrator with regard to applicant's petition. If the
requested variance is authorized and the applicant is, thereby, allowed to construct
a structure below the base flood elevation, said Board of Zoning Appeals shall
include in such written communication official notification that such construction
below the base flood elevation:
(a) Increases the risks to life and property; and
(b) Will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
15-10-8. Should the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals uphold the prior decision
of the administrator, the above mentioned written communication notice shall
include instructions as to appeal procedure from the board's decision, as found in
Article 22, sections 22-5 — 22-7 of the Zoning Ordinance for the Town of
Abingdon, Virginia.
15-10-9. A record shall be maintained of the above referenced notification as well as all
variance actions, including justification for the issuance of the variances. Any
variances that are issued shall be noted in the annual or biennial report submitted to
the Federal Insurance Administrator.
15-11-1. A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the
enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions
may be continued subject to the following conditions:
(a) Existing structures and/or uses in the floodway district shall not be expanded
or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the
proposed expansion would not result in any increase in the base flood
elevation.
(b) Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to a structure and/or use located in any flood plain districts to an extent or
amount of less than 50% of its market value (determined by an independent
licensed appraiser and as based upon percentage determination of a registered
design professional, at the burden of the applicant) shall conform to the VA
USBC.
(c) The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its location in a floodplain districts
to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value (determined by an
independent licensed appraiser and as based upon percentage determination of
a registered design professional, at the burden of the applicant) shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with this article and shall require the entire
structure to conform to the VA USBC.
15-12-1. All subdivision proposals and other proposed developments, including utilities
and drainage, shall be located and designed to be consistent with the need to
§ 15-10 ZONING ORDINANCE § 15-12
B:83
minimize flood damage as stated in the VA USBC. Base flood elevation data shall
be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development.
15-12-2. Site plan criteria. The owner or developer of any proposed subdivision and/or
other proposed development shall submit a site plan to the administrator which
includes the following information in addition to that required in site plan review
regulations, as set forth in the Town of Abingdon Zoning Ordinance.
(a) All requirements stated heretofore in this article.
(b) Name of engineer, surveyor or other qualified person responsible for providing
the information required in this section.
(c) A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and other new
development with respect to the Town and adjacent county flood prone areas,
proposed lots and sites, fills, flood or erosion protection facilities and areas
subject to special deed restriction. In addition, it is required that all subdivision
proposals greater than 25 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall
include base flood elevation data.
(d) Where the subdivision and other new development lies partially or completely
in the flood prone areas, the plan map shall include detailed information giving
the location and elevation of proposed roads, public utilities and building sites.
All such maps shall also show contours at intervals of two or five feet,
depending upon the slope of the land, and shall identify accurately the
boundaries of the flood prone areas. Property with slopes less than 20% shall
show contours at intervals of two feet.
15-12-3. Design criteria. Additional information required for purposes of flood hazards
mitigation in proposed subdivisions or other developments which are within the
floodplain district as delineated. The following additional provisions shall be met:
(a) New construction and substantial improvements shall be according to the VA
USBC, and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
(b) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(c) New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(d) Sanitary sewer facilities. All new or replacement sanitary sewer facilities
(including all pumping stations and collector systems) shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into the flood waters. In addition, they should be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and
impairment.
(e) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(f) Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities and/or supply systems
§ 15-12 ABINGDON CODE § 15-12
B:84
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system, and shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
(g) Drainage facilities. All storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey
the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The system
shall ensure drainage away from buildings and on-site waste disposal sites.
Drainage plans shall be consistent with facilities discharge of excess runoff
into adjacent properties.
(h) Utilities. All utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems being
placed in floodprone areas should be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flooding
occurrence.
(i) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities, including duct work, shall be designed and/or located
so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding.
(j) Water supply systems, sanitary sewage systems and gas and oil supply systems
shall be designed to preclude infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
(k) Adequate drainage shall be provided to minimize exposure to flood heights.
(l) The preliminary plat requirements shall include a map showing the location of
the proposed subdivision and/or land development with respect to any zoning
classifications, utility easements, designated flood district including
information on, but not limited to, the base flood elevations, boundaries of the
floodplain district, proposed lots and sites, fills, flood or erosion protective
facilities and areas subject to special deed restrictions in addition to the
requirements of the Town of Abingdon Subdivision Ordinance.
15-12-4. In addition to the provisions of Section 15-12-3, in all special flood hazard
areas, the additional provisions shall apply:
(a) Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any
watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction a permit shall be obtained
from the U.S. Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental
Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission (a joint permit
application is available from any of these organizations). Furthermore, in
riverine areas, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all
affected adjacent jurisdictions, the Department of Conservation and
Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and the
Federal Insurance Administrator.
(b) The flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse shall be maintained.
15-12-5. In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations have been provided
in the FIS or generated according Section 15-9-6, the following provisions shall
§ 15-12 ZONING ORDINANCE § 15-12
B:85
apply:
(a) Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, elevated to at least one foot
above the base flood elevation.
(b) Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of
any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood
elevation. Buildings located in Zone AE may be floodproofed in lieu of being
elevated provided that all areas of the building components below the
elevation corresponding to the base flood elevation plus one foot are water
tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered design
professional shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied.
Such certification, including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which such structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by
administrator.
(c) Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed areas, of proposed new construction or
substantially improved structures, which are below the regulatory flood
protection elevation shall:
(1) Not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for
parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises.
(2) Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the regulatory
flood protection elevation;
(3) Include, in Zone AE, measures to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a
registered design professional or meet the following minimum design
criteria:
a. Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding.
b. The total net area of all openings must be at least one square inch for
each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.
c. If a building has more than one enclosed area, each area must have
openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit.
d. The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one foot
above the adjacent grade.
e. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions.
§ 15-12 ABINGDON CODE § 15-12
B:86
§ 15-13. Regulation of real estate sales in flood hazard areas. [Ord. of 8-2-2010]
f. Foundation enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural
status, is considered an enclosure and requires openings as outlined
above.
(d) Manufactured homes. All manufactured homes replaced, or substantially
improved, on individual lots or parcels or in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage as the result of a flood, must meet all the requirements for new
construction, including:
(1) The elevation and anchoring requirements of the VA USBC; and
(2) Shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of
the structure. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall
be in addition to and consistent with applicable state anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces; and
(3) Shall have the lowest floor elevated to one foot above the base flood
elevation.
(e) Recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and
has no permanently attached additions); or,
(3) Meet all the requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15-12-5(d).
15-13-1. Any owner or partial owner of real estate or his agent and any real estate broker
or his agent who contracts to sell or sells real estate without first notifying in writing
the buyer or his agent that such real estate is subject to floodplain regulations shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in Section 15-13-3 below. Real estate
professionals within the Commonwealth of Virginia are subject to any/all
applicable sections thereunder, including but not limited to Title 55, Code of
Virginia, 1950, as amended.
15-13-2. Floodplain regulations referred to in Section 15-13-1 include zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations and building codes which impose restrictions
specifically relating to flooding on the whole or a portion of the lands.
15-13-3. The penalties for violation of Section 15-13-1 above may, at the discretion of
the court, include any or all of the following:
(a) Rescission of the contract at the option of the buyer.
§ 15-12 ZONING ORDINANCE § 15-13
B:87
(b) Payment to the buyer for damages he may have suffered whether the buyer
rescinds the contract or not.
(c) A fine of not more than $1,000.
§ 15-13 ABINGDON CODE § 15-13
B:88
ARTICLE 16
Nonconforming Uses
§ 16-1. Continuation.
§ 16-2. Permits.
§ 16-3. Repairs and maintenance.
On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may
be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on repair or
replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding
10% of the current replacement value of the structure; provided that the cubic content of
the structure as it existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance shall
not be increased. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by
any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
16-1-1. If, at the time of enactment of this ordinance, any legal activity which is being
pursued or any lot or structure legally utilized in a manner or purpose which does
not conform to the provisions of this ordinance, such manner of use or purpose may
be continued as herein provided; except that general advertising signs that become
nonconforming because of a rezoning have 24 months within which to relocate in a
permitted area.
16-1-2. If any change in title possession, or renewal of a lease of any such lot or structure
occurs, the use existing may be continued.
16-1-3. If any nonconforming use, structure or activity is discontinued for a period
exceeding two years, after the adoption of this ordinance, it shall be deemed
abandoned and any subsequent use shall conform to the requirements of this
ordinance.
16-1-4. Whenever a nonconforming structure, lot or activity has been changed to a more
limited nonconforming use, such existing use may only be changed to an even more
limited use.
16-1-5. Temporary seasonal nonconforming uses that have been in continual operation
for a period of two years or more prior to the adoption of this ordinance are
excluded.
16-2-1. All nonconforming uses shall obtain a zoning permit and a certificate of
occupancy within 60 days after the adoption of this ordinance. Such permits shall
be issued promptly upon the written request of the owner or operator of a
nonconforming use.
16-2-2. The construction or use of a nonconforming building or land area for which a
permit was issued legally prior to the adoption of this ordinance may proceed
provided such building is completed within one year or such use of land established
within 30 days after the adoption of this ordinance.
§ 16-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 16-4
B:89
§ 16-4. Changes in district boundaries.
Whenever the boundaries of a district are changed, any uses of land or buildings which
become nonconforming as a result of such change shall become subject to the provisions
of this article.
§ 16-5. Expansion or enlargement.
A nonconforming structure to be extended or enlarged shall conform with the provisions
of this ordinance.
§ 16-6. Nonconforming lots.
Any lot of record at the time of the adoption of this ordinance which is less in area or
width than the minimum required by this ordinance may be used when the requirements
of the Board of Zoning Appeals regarding setbacks, side and rear yards are met.
§ 16-7. Restoration or replacement.
16-7-1. If a nonconforming activity is destroyed or damaged in any manner, to the extent
that the cost of restoration to its condition before the occurrence shall exceed 50%
of the cost of reconstructing the entire structure, it shall be restored only if such use
complies with the requirements of this ordinance.
16-7-2. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged in any manner to the extent
that the cost of restoration to its condition before the occurrence shall exceed 50%
of the cost of reconstructing the entire structure, it shall be restored only if it
complies with the requirements of this ordinance.
16-7-3. Where a nonconforming structure devoted to a nonconforming activity is
damaged less than 50% of the cost of reconstructing the entire structure, or where a
nonconforming structure is damaged less than 50% of the cost of reconstructing the
entire structure, either may be repaired or restored provided that any such repair or
restoration is started within six months and completed within 18 months from the
date of partial destruction.
16-7-4. The cost of land or any other factors other than the cost of the structure are
excluded in the determination of cost of restoration for any structure or activity
devoted to a nonconforming use.
§ 16-4 ABINGDON CODE § 16-7
B:90
ARTICLE 17
General Provisions
§ 17-1. Zoning permits.
§ 17-2. Certificate of occupancy; surety.
17-1-1. Buildings or structures shall be constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or altered
only after a zoning permit has been obtained from the administrator.
17-1-2. The Planning Commission may request a review of the zoning permit approved
by the administrator in order to determine if the contemplated use is in accordance
with the district in which the construction lies.
17-1-3. Each application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by two copies of a
scale drawing. The drawing shall show the size and shape of the parcel of land on
which the proposed building is to be constructed, the nature of the proposed use of
the building or land and the location of such building or use with respect to the
property lines of said parcel of land and to the right-of-way of any street or highway
adjoining said parcel of land. Any other information which the administrator may
deem necessary for consideration of the application may be required. If the
proposed building or use is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, a
permit shall be issued to the applicant by the administrator. One copy of the
drawing shall be returned to the applicant with the permit.
17-2-1. No person shall use or permit the use of any building or premises, or part thereof,
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered or enlarged, wholly or partly,
in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
administrator. A change of use of any building shall also require a certificate of
occupancy. The conduct of a home occupation, the office of a resident member of a
recognized profession and the office of a resident, all of which may be allowed in
the various residential districts shall all require certificates of occupancy and shall
be subject to all licensing requirements as set forth in the Town Code.
17-2-2. Such certificates shall show that such building or premises, or part thereof, and
the proposed use thereof, are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
17-2-3. Where structures are completed and ready for occupancy prior to the completion
of all improvements required by the site plan, the owner may provide bond with
surety adequate to guarantee the completion of site plan by a time certain of such
site plan improvements as related to the building for which the permit is sought, and
upon providing of such bond with surety a permit may be issued for the occupancy
of those structures already completed. The Town Manager is authorized to accept,
instead of corporate surety, letter of credit, joint savings account or other like
surety. In any case in which any other escrow agent (such as an attorney for a
mortgage lender) is holding funds to ensure compliance with the terms or other
regulations or agreements and such funds are in an amount sufficient to ensure
compliance with the terms of other regulations and agreements, the Town Manager
shall become a party to such other escrow agreement as escrow agent for the Town;
provided that such other escrow agreement contains provisions satisfactory to the
Town Manager to ensure compliance with the requirements of such site plan and
§ 17-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 17-2
B:91
§ 17-3. Special use permits.
The regulations set forth in this section shall apply only to uses specifically indicated in
this ordinance as requiring special use permits.
this ordinance.
17-2-4. Such certificates shall show that such building or premises, or part thereof, and
the proposed use thereof are in conformity with this ordinance.
17-3-1. General standards. No special use permit shall be issued except upon a finding
that in addition to conformity with any standards set forth in this section for special
permit uses, the following general standards will be met either by the proposal made
in the application or by the proposal as modified and amended and made part of the
special permit:
(a) Conformity with comprehensive plan and policies. The proposal as submitted
or as modified shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the Town or to
specific elements of such plan and to official policies adopted in relation
thereto, including the purposes of this section.
(b) Impact on neighborhood. The proposal as submitted or as modified shall not
have undue adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood. Among matters
to be considered in this connection are traffic congestion, noise, lights, dust,
odor, fumes and vibration with due regard for timing of operation, screening
or other matters which might be regulated to mitigate adverse impact.
(c) Fee established. A filing fee of $75 shall be paid upon application.
17-3-2. Contents of the application. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
provide information and data to:
(a) Demonstrate that the proposed use, when complemented with additional
measures, if any, will be in harmony with the purposes of the specific district
in which it will be placed.
(b) Demonstrate that there will be no undue adverse impact on the surrounding
neighborhood in terms of public health, safety or general welfare and show
measures to be taken to achieve such goals.
(c) Show the nature and extent of existing and proposed use and development.
(d) Show that the proposal meets the applicable specific and general standards
required by this section.
(e) Provide a site plan prepared and submitted in accordance with the
requirements of Article 18.
17-3-3. Review and action.
(a) Planning Department. The planning department of the Town shall review any
application requesting a special use permit in the light of the standards set forth
in this section and shall make a report of its findings and recommendations to
the Planning Commission.
§ 17-2 ABINGDON CODE § 17-3
B:92
§ 17-4. (Reserved)23
§ 17-5. Widening of highways and streets.
Whenever there shall be plans in existence, approved by either the Virginia Department
of Transportation or by the Town Council for the widening of any street or highway,
the Planning Commission may recommend additional front yard setbacks for any new
construction or for any structure altered or remodeled adjacent to the future planned
right-of-way in order to preserve and protect the right-of-way for such proposed street or
highway widening.
§ 17-6. Minimum off-street parking.
There shall be provided at the time of erection of any main building, at the time any main
building is enlarged or at such time as the use of any main building is changed minimum
off-street parking space with adequate provision for entrance and exit by standard size
automobiles as follows:
(b) Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review and make
recommendations to the Town Council concerning approval or disapproval of
the application of a special use permit based upon the review of the site plan
for the proposed development and upon the criteria set forth in this section.
The Planning Commission may concurrently approve the site plan subject to
the Town Council's approval of a special use permit and subject to the
necessary amendments to the site plan as a result of the Town Council action.
All special use permits shall be referred to the Planning Commission for study
and recommendations. The Planning Commission will determine whether all
conditions necessary to meet the requirements of such special use exist and
state these conditions in its recommendations.
(c) Town Council. The Town Council may grant an applicant a special use permit
after notice is given and a public hearing is held in accordance with Code of
Virginia, § 15.1-431, as amended, and after receiving the recommendations of
the Planning Commission; provided that the applicant's request is in harmony
with the purposes and standards stated in this section. The Council may attach
such conditions to its approval as it deems necessary to bring the plan of
development into conformance with the purposes and standards thereof.
17-3-4. Special use permits. Special use permits granted by the Town Council pursuant
to the terms of this section shall expire 18 months from the date of permit approval
in the event the construction of improvements necessary to the use for which the
permit was granted has not commenced to a degree that, in the opinion of the
administrator, clearly establishes the intent to utilize the granted special use permit
in a period of time deemed reasonable for the type and scope of improvements
involved.
17-6-1. Automobile service station. One space per each employee plus two spaces per
each service stall.
23. Editor's Note: Former § 17-4, which pertained to uses not provided for, was repealed 10-1-2019.
§ 17-3 ZONING ORDINANCE § 17-6
B:93
17-6-2. Billiard parlors, video game rooms and similar places of public amusement. One
space per 75 square feet of area open to the public.
17-6-3. Bowling alleys. Four spaces per each alley.
17-6-4. Building materials sales. One space per 500 square feet of sales display area.
17-6-5. Child-care facility or nursery school. One space per ten children enrolled plus
one space per employee.
17-6-6. Church, high school, and college auditoriums, gymnasiums, and theatres, general
auditoriums and stadiums and other similar places of public assembly. At least one
parking space per every four seats as provided in said building or facility.
17-6-7. Club, lodge. One space per 75 square feet of building area.
17-6-8. Dance hall or night club. One space per 75 square feet of gross floor area
(including dance area in restaurant, hotel, etc.).
17-6-9. Dormitory. One space for each two sleeping accommodations.
17-6-10. Feed and seed store. One space per 500 square feet of sales and display area.
17-6-11. Financial institution. One space per 150 square feet of gross floor area.
17-6-12. Funeral home. One space per 75 square feet of assembly area.
17-6-13. Furniture store. One space per 400 square feet of retail sales and display area.
17-6-14. Golf driving range. One space per two tees.
17-6-15. Greenhouse and nursery:
(a) Greenhouse sales area. One space per 100 square feet for the first 1,000 square
feet and one space for each 500 square feet of greenhouse sales area above
1,000 square feet.
(b) Nursery sales area. One space per each 5,000 square feet of exterior nursery
sales area.
17-6-16. Museums, art galleries and similar establishments. One space per 100 square
feet open to the public.
17-6-17. Hardware, paint store. One space per each 400 square feet of retail sales and
display area.
17-6-18. Hospital for general human care. One parking space for each bed including
infants' cribs and children's beds.
17-6-19. Hospital for special care, nursing homes and retirement homes. One parking
space for each four beds.
17-6-20. Hotel, motel. One space for each bedroom or sleeping unit.
17-6-21. Industrial uses (including warehouses, laundries, dairies, laboratories, factories
and similar establishments). One space per two employees on the maximum
§ 17-6 ABINGDON CODE § 17-6
B:94
working shift and one space for each owned or leased vehicle used in the operation
of the business, plus one space per each 500 square feet of floor area open to the
public for customer parking, but in all cases a minimum of two customer parking
spaces.
17-6-22. Kennel, commercial. One space per 400 square feet of gross floor area,
including runs, plus one space per employee.
17-6-23. Laundromat. One space per two washing machines.
17-6-24. Libraries. One space per six seats in the main public rooms plus one space per
employee.
17-6-25. Machinery equipment sales and service. One space per 500 square feet of sales,
display, repair area plus one space per employee.
17-6-26. Mobile home, modular home, travel trailer sales. One space per 3,000 square
feet of display area.
17-6-27. Motor vehicle sales, including automobile, farm equipment and trucks. One
space per 1,500 square feet of display area.
17-6-28. Offices including business, administrative, professional and personal service
businesses such as beauty and barber shops. One space per 200 square feet of area
plus one space per employee.
17-6-29. Party house. One space per 75 square feet of public assembly area.
17-6-30. Recreation uses:
(a) Indoor: swimming pools, skating rinks, recreation centers and similar
establishments. One space for each 125 square feet of usable recreational or
social floor area.
(b) Outdoor: swimming pools, skating rinks, miniature golf and similar
establishments. One space for each 200 square feet of usable and improved
recreational area.
(c) Tennis courts. Two spaces per court.
(d) Golf course. Two spaces per hole.
17-6-31. Residential. Two spaces for each dwelling unit in a new building, or each
dwelling unit added in the case of the enlargement of an existing building.
17-6-32. Residential care facility. One space per 10 persons enrolled plus one space per
employee.
17-6-33. Restaurants. One parking space for each 75 square feet of public floor area
including outdoor dining areas.
17-6-34. Retail stores not listed elsewhere in this section. One parking space for each
200 square feet of retail floor space.
17-6-35. School. Two spaces per classroom plus one space per employee. For schools of
§ 17-6 ZONING ORDINANCE § 17-6
B:95
§ 17-7. Off-street parking: location, improvements and exemption.
§ 17-8. Mobile home park.
An area designated for mobile home occupancy shall be operated under a single
management with occupied or unoccupied spaces for rent or lease. The location of
mobile home parks shall require, in addition to the zoning permit and certificate of
occupancy, a special use permit in accordance with regulations in Section 17-3.
special instruction, adult education or for schools in which pupils drive to school,
one space per two pupils plus one space per employee.
17-6-36. Shopping center. 5 1/2 spaces per each 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor
area.
17-6-37. Tourist home, rooming and boarding houses, bed and board homes. One space
per sleeping unit or accommodation in addition to the minimum number of spaces
required for the dwelling.
17-6-38. Veterinary offices and animal hospitals. One space per 100 square feet of gross
floor area exclusive of that area to house animals.
17-6-39. Wholesale businesses. One space for each 500 square feet of floor area open to
the public plus one space for each two employees.
17-7-1. Location. Required parking space shall be on the same lot with the main
building, except that in the case of buildings other than dwellings, spaces may be
located as far away as 600 feet on another parcel; provided that said parcel is
located in a district permitting parking lots.
17-7-2. Improvements. Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public parking area shall
have an approved surface such as asphalt or concrete. It shall have appropriate
safeguards where needed. Any lights used to illuminate said parking areas shall be
so arranged as to reflect light away from adjoining premises in a residential district.
17-7-3. Exemption. All permitted uses in B-3 central business district shall be exempt
from off-street parking as required by Section 17-6.
17-8-1. A special use permit for a mobile home park may be issued by Town Council
provided that the requirements of this section are satisfactorily complied with and
approved by the Planning Commission.
17-8-2. Prior to issuance of a special use permit, the developer of a mobile home park
shall submit a site plan for review in accordance with Article 18.
17-8-3. Mobile home parks shall be developed in accordance with the following
regulations:
(a) Minimum size. A mobile home park shall consist of three or more contiguous
acres designed to accommodate 10 or more mobile home spaces.
(b) Minimum space area. Each mobile home space shall consist of 4,500 square
feet or more and shall have a width of 45 feet or more which shall front on a
§ 17-6 ABINGDON CODE § 17-8
B:96
§ 17-9. Temporary mobile home parks.
The zoning of temporary mobile home parks shall require, in addition to the zoning
permit and certificate of occupancy, a special use permit in accordance with regulations
in Section 17-3. Special use permits for temporary mobile home parks may be issued by
the Town Council subject to the following conditions:
public or private street.
(c) Minimum setback. Mobile homes and other structures above surface shall be
located 25 feet or more from any public street right-of-way which is 50 feet or
greater in width or 50 feet or more from the centerline of any street right-ofway less than 50 feet in width. Mobile homes and other structures above
surface shall be set back at least 15 feet from the right-of-way of internal
private streets.
(d) Yard regulations. Mobile home spaces shall have minimum side and rear yards
of 10 feet. No structures above surface shall be located within the minimum
yard area.
(e) Distance between mobile homes. The minimum distance between mobile
homes shall be 20 feet.
(f) Utilities. Each mobile home space shall be provided with an individual
connection to a public water and sewer system. Each mobile home space shall
be provided with electrical service installed in accordance with the National
Electrical Code.
(g) Public areas. A minimum of 200 square feet per mobile home space of
recreational area shall be provided in common area on the site, this
requirement not to exceed 5% of the gross site area. The size and shape of each
recreation area shall be adequate for the intended use and the slope in active
recreation areas shall not exceed 10%.
17-8-4. Service areas and accessory uses. Centrally located service buildings may
provide common laundry facilities, office space for management and accessory
uses customarily incidental to the operation and maintenance of a mobile home
park. Consolidation of the service building and indoor recreation facilities is
permitted.
17-9-1. That the location of a temporary mobile home park is necessary for the housing
of construction workers employed on an industrial or highway construction project.
17-9-2. That the request is filed by or certified to by the industry or state highway
department as being essential to the construction.
17-9-3. That a minimum area of 2,000 square feet be provided for each space.
17-9-4. That sanitary facilities conform to the state health department's trailer camp
sanitation requirements.
17-9-5. That the period for operating such temporary park shall concur with the
anticipated period of construction. Application for renewal may be submitted if
§ 17-8 ZONING ORDINANCE § 17-9
B:97
§ 17-10. Manufactured home subdivision.
This provision is designed to benefit those who wish to acquire ownership or equity in
a lot and occupy the premises themselves, but who may find it undesirable to construct
a conventional single-family dwelling. Manufactured homes and conventional singlefamily dwellings may be built in a manufactured home subdivision.
§ 17-11. Special provisions for properties adjoining the Virginia Creeper Trail.
[Min. of 9-10-2001]
On any property that adjoins the Virginia Creeper Trail, the front shall be determined by
the orientation of the structure thereon or structure proposed to be placed thereon. Such
structure shall be oriented so as to provide the minimum front, side or rear yards required
by the zoning district in which it is located, but in no case shall the distance from the
proposed structure to the Virginia Creeper Trail right-of-way to be less than 10 feet.
more time is required to complete the project. However, such renewal applications
must be filed at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the original temporary use
permit.
17-9-6. The Town Council, in granting such a special use permit, may require the posting
of a bond to ensure that the temporary mobile home park will be removed and the
site left in good order at the expiration of the permit.
17-9-7. The Town Council shall establish such additional requirements as are in the best
interest of the public.
17-10-1. A manufactured home subdivision is permitted by right in a R-4 residential
district and may be established with a special use permit in a R-3 residential district.
17-10-2. A manufactured home subdivision shall consist of 10 lots or more and may be
developed in the same manner as a single-family dwelling subdivision.
17-10-3. A manufactured home shall be located only in a manufactured home
subdivision or mobile home park. A manufactured home located in a mobile home
park is excepted from the following requirements and shall meet the regulations
contained in Section 17-8 for mobile homes.
17-10-4. A manufactured home shall meet the same area, setback, frontage, yard and
height regulations as a site-built, single-family dwelling in the same district.
17-10-5. In addition to the regulations for single-family dwellings of the district in which
a manufactured home is located, the following criteria shall apply:
(a) The manufactured home shall have the tow assembly and wheels removed and
shall be mounted on and anchored to a permanent foundation in accordance
with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as
amended.
(b) The manufactured home shall be declared a permanently affixed dwelling and
shall be taxed as real estate.
§ 17-9 ABINGDON CODE § 17-12
B:98
§ 17-12. Corner lots.
On the two sides of a corner lot, the front shall be determined by the orientation of the
structure thereon or structure proposed to be placed thereon. Such structures shall be
oriented so as to provide the minimum yards required by the zoning district in which it
is located, provided that the side yard on the side street shall be 20 feet or more for both
main and accessory buildings.
§ 17-13. Yard space requirements.
§ 17-14. Spacing between buildings.
Groups of multiple-family dwellings shall be considered as one building for the purpose
of determining front, side and rear yard requirements. The entire group as a unit shall
require one front yard, two side yards and one rear yard as specified in the appropriate
district. However, structures shall be located according to the following standards to
maximize efficient use of land and still provide adequate open space between them:
17-13-1. Yard space required. The yard space required for a use or building shall, during
its life, remain free of all uses or occupancies except as follows:
(a) Fences, walls or landscaping shall be permitted in any required yard, along any
edge of yard provided that no fence or wall between a street and a front
building line is more than four feet in height, except as required in specific
zoning district regulations of this ordinance.
(b) Eaves, cornices, window sills and belt courses may project into any required
yard a distance not to exceed two feet.
(c) Open and uncovered porches may project beyond the front building line or into
a required side or rear yard a distance not to exceed five feet.
(d) Driveways shall be permitted in required yards, but shall be three feet or more
from any property line except where such driveways are developed jointly as
a common drive to adjoining lots.
17-13-2. Yards not otherwise required. Yard space not otherwise required but provided
shall be five feet or more in width.
(a) In the layout of a development of multiple-family buildings on a lot or tract of land,
a horizontal distance of not less than 25 feet or two-thirds the height of the higher
building, whichever is greater, shall be maintained between all main buildings and
between main buildings and major detached accessory buildings, such as a garage
compound, having a ground coverage equal to that of a principal building except
that where buildings contain two facing walls which do not contain dwelling unit
windows, the minimum distance between such walls may be reduced to 15 feet. The
distance between buildings may also be reduced to 15 feet where a perpendicular
line drawn from any dwelling unit window shall be unobstructed for a minimum
distance of 25 feet or two-thirds the height of the higher building, whichever is
greater.
(b) The above requirement need not exceed 25 feet when the top of one building is less
§ 17-12 ZONING ORDINANCE § 17-14
B:99
§ 17-15. Number of single-family dwellings on each lot.
Where an existing lot is sufficient in size, width and right-of-way frontage to
accommodate more than one single-family dwelling, the location of the dwelling shall
be subject to the approval of the administrator. The dwelling shall be located so that the
construction of the initial dwelling unit shall not legally or physically prohibit the future
subdivision of the land in accordance with the terms of this ordinance and of the Town
of Abingdon subdivision ordinance.
§ 17-16. Home occupation.
Home occupations shall be permitted as specified in the district regulations and subject
to the standards and conditions of this section. Such use shall not involve the installation
or use of mechanical or electrical equipment which could cause safety problems or
which can be heard outside the dwelling unit. In determining dwelling area, only
finished, habitable rooms shall be measured.
§ 17-17. Adult uses. [Ord. of 6-6-2005]
than eight feet above the level of the first floor of the other building.
17-16-1. Category A home occupations shall meet the following standards:
(a) No more than 100 square feet or 10%, whichever is greater, of the dwelling
unit shall be used in connection with the occupation.
(b) There shall be no change in the exterior of the structure to indicate the use.
(c) No advertising of any type, including telephone book listing, shall use the
street address.
(d) No employees, other than members of the family, shall be allowed.
(e) No signs shall be erected except as specified in Section 21-5.
17-16-2. Category B home occupations shall meet the following standards:
(a) No more than 200 square feet or 20% of the dwelling shall be used in
connection with the operation of the home occupation.
(b) There shall be no change in the exterior of the structure to indicate the use.
(c) Only one employee, other than members of the immediate family, is allowed.
(d) Signs as specified in Article 21 are allowed.
(e) Such use is compatible with the neighborhood. Incompatible uses are those
which have characteristics such as, but not limited to, odor, dust, noise,
external storage of materials or equipment, the creation of traffic and/or
parking problems, and/or other qualities not compatible to the character of the
neighborhood.
17-17-1. Application. In any district in which a use is otherwise permitted, if such use
constitutes an "adult use," as defined herein, the minimum requirements and
§ 17-14 ABINGDON CODE § 17-17
B:100
standards set out in this division shall apply to such use.
17-17-2. Definitions. In this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
words or terms are defined as set out herein:
ADULT BOOKSTORE —
ADULT DRIVE-IN-THEATRE — An open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant
facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion pictures, films, theatrical
productions and other forms of visual productions, for any form of consideration, to
persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats, and presenting material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by
patrons.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATRE — An establishment, with a
capacity of more than five but less than 50 persons, where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation
time is devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons.
ADULT MODEL STUDIO — Any establishment open to the public where, for any
form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display "specified anatomical
areas" are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by persons, other than the proprietor, paying
such consideration or gratuity.
This provision shall not apply to any school of art which is operated by an
individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or institution which meets
the requirements established in the Code of Virginia, (1950), as amended, for the
issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer,
a diploma.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATRE — An establishment, with a capacity of
50 or more persons, where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures,
An establishment that devotes more than 15% of the total floor area utilized for
the display of books and periodicals to the display and sale of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other
forms of visual or audio representations which are characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas," or
(1)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities."
(2)
(a)
An adult bookstore does not include an establishment that sells books or
periodicals as an incidental or accessory part of its principal stock-in-trade and
does not devote more than 15% of the total floor area of the establishment to
the sale of books and periodicals.
(b)
§ 17-17 ZONING ORDINANCE § 17-17
B:101
video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown; and in
which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing
of material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the
depiction of description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" for observation by patrons.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE ARCADE — Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual
activities" or specified "anatomical areas."
ADULT USE — Any adult bookstore, adult motion picture theatre, adult minimotion picture theatre, adult motion picture arcade, adult model studio, adult drivein theatre, or massage parlor, as defined herein.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any establishment, whether private or public, operated
as a massage salon, bath parlor or similar type of business where any physical or
mechanical contact is made to a recipient's body by another person or mechanical
device for the purpose of massaging or stimulating the recipient's body.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals, pubic region,
(2) Buttock, and
(3) Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and
(a)
Human male genitals in discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
(b)
(a) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(b) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breast.
(c)
17-17-3. Requirements and standards.
(a) No adult use may be established within 1,000 feet of any other such adult use
in any zoning district.
(b) No adult use may be established within 750 feet of a residentially zoned
district, or a school, educational institution, church, public park, playground,
playfield, public library or day care center.
(c) The "establishment" of an adult use as referred to herein shall include the
opening of such business as a new business, the relocation of such business,
§ 17-17 ABINGDON CODE § 17-17
B:102
the enlargement of such business in either scope or area, or the conversion, in
whole or part, of an existing business to any adult use.
(d) In addition to the requirements set forth in this section, all adult uses shall be
required to comply with any other ordinances applicable to the same.
17-17-4. Measurements of distance. All distances specified in this section shall be
measured from the property line of one use to another. The distance between an
adult use and a residentially zoned district shall be measured from the property line
of the use to the nearest point of the boundary line of the residentially zoned district.
17-17-5. Exemptions. The following establishments within the Town are deemed not to
be establishments within the definition of adult uses, and as such are specifically
exempted from the requirements and standards set forth above:
(a) Museums and/or art centers who are members of or associated with the
Virginia Museum of Fine Arts.
(b) Theatres of live theatrical productions of stage plays.
(c) Schools of art and/or art educational classes and instruction that is overseen by
the Virginia Commission for the Arts.
(d) Any museum, art center, theatre or school which may be founded by the Town
of Abingdon.
§ 17-17 ZONING ORDINANCE § 17-17
B:103

ARTICLE 18
Site Plan Review
Site plan review shall be required in addition to the other applicable requirements of this
ordinance before building or occupancy permits may be issued.
Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to promote orderly development of certain
activities in the Town and to ensure that such activities are developed in a manner
harmonious with surrounding properties and consistent with the general public welfare.
Intent. The intent of these regulations is to provide for review of:
• The project's compatibility with its environment and with other land uses and
buildings existing in the surrounding area.
• The quantity, quality, utility, size and type of the project's required recreational
space, impact upon existing natural environment and proposed landscape
improvements.
• The ability of the project's traffic circulation system to provide for the convenient
and safe internal and external movement of vehicles and pedestrians.
• The quantity, quality, utility and type of the project's required community facilities.
• The location and adequacy of the project's provision for drainage and utilities.
§ 18-1. Site plan required.
A site plan is required and shall be submitted for the following:
§ 18-2. Waiver of requirements.
The director of planning or the Town Manager may waive the requirements for the site
plan review for additions to existing buildings, structures or uses, if, in his opinion, such
addition does not substantially affect the requirements of this ordinance.
§ 18-3. Fees.
Each site plan shall be accompanied by a fee as authorized by the Town Council from
time to time to defray the expense of reviewing such site plan. Such fee shall be paid to
the Town Treasurer at the time for site plan submission. For site plans where the director
or planning or the Town Manager waives the requirements of the site plan review in
accordance with Section 18-2, there shall be no fee charged.
18-1-1. The provisions of this article shall apply to any use or development in all zoning
districts except individually developed single-family detached dwellings, singlefamily attached dwellings not to exceed two units and two-family dwellings.
18-1-2. When a change of use is proposed that requires additional off-street parking or
other requirements applicable to the new use, a site plan shall be submitted for
review to ensure that the change of use can be accomplished within the regulations
of this ordinance, except when such requirement is waived as provided in Section
18-2.
§ 18-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 18-4
B:105
§ 18-4. Site plan contents.
The site plan shall include the following:
18-4-1. The proposed title of the project, the names of the engineer, architect, landscape
architect or surveyor, and the name of the developer; and a signature panel for the
director of planning, the Town Manager and the chairman of the Planning
Commission.
18-4-2. The north point, scale, date and vicinity map.
18-4-3. Existing zoning and zoning district boundaries on the property to be developed
and on immediately adjacent properties.
18-4-4. The boundaries of the property involved, all existing property lines, setback
lines, existing streets, buildings, watercourses, waterways or lakes, and other
existing physical features in or adjoining the project. Those physical features such
as watercourses, waterways or lakes on adjoining properties need only be shown in
approximate scale and proportion.
18-4-5. Topography of the project area with contour intervals of five feet or less.
18-4-6. The location and size of sanitary and storm sewers, water, gas, telephone, electric
and other utility lines, culverts and other underground structures in or affecting the
project, including existing and proposed facilities and easements for these facilities.
In the case of Town-owned utilities, such information shall be provided to the
applicant by the Town director of public works.
18-4-7. The location, dimensions and character of construction of proposed streets,
alleys, loading area (including numbers of parking and loading spaces), outdoor
lighting systems, storm drainage and sanitary facilities, sidewalks, curbs and
gutters, and all curb cuts. Where necessary to meet the purposes and intent of this
article, such information shall be provided for the site itself and for an area within
50 feet of any property line of the site, except that additional area may be required
to be shown to indicate connections or proposed connections to major utilities.
18-4-8. The location of all proposed buildings and structures, accessory and main,
showing the number of stories and height, dwelling type, major excavations, and
the total square footage of the floor area by proposed use.
18-4-9. The location, height, type and material of all fences, walls, screen planting and
landscape details of all buildings and grounds.
18-4-10. The location of all trees existing on the site prior to construction with a caliper
of eight inches or greater. The site plan shall show wooded areas which shall be
designated by symbols coincident with the area of trees and an indication of which
trees are to be retained and which are to be removed.
18-4-11. The proposed location and character of nonresidential uses, commercial and
industrial uses, accessory and main.
18-4-12. The location, character, size, height and orientation of proposed signs as
proposed to be erected in accordance with Article 21 of this ordinance; and
§ 18-4 ABINGDON CODE § 18-4
B:106
§ 18-5. General standards.
In addition to other requirements of this ordinance and other ordinances and regulations
of the Town, the applicant shall conform to the standards set forth in this section.
elevations of buildings showing signs to be placed on exterior walls. Signs which
are approved in accordance with this section shall be considered a part of the
approved site plan. Thereafter, signs shall not be erected, painted, constructed,
structurally altered, hung, rehung or replaced except in conformity with the
approved site plan. Any changes in signs from the approved site plan, or any
additions to the number of signs as shown on the site plan, shall be allowed only
after amendment of the site plan by the director of planning and/or the Planning
Commission.
18-4-13. The proposed nature and manner of grading the site, including proposed
treatment of slopes in excess of 10% to prevent soil erosion and excessive runoff.
In cases where an erosion and sedimentation control permit is required, the
necessary plans and data shall be submitted as required in the Town of Abingdon
erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. In all other cases, soil erosion control
measures shall be shown on the site plan.
18-4-14. The location and screening materials for dumpsters or other outdoor trash
receptacles.
18-4-15. The location and dimensions of proposed recreation areas, open spaces and
other required amenities and improvements.
18-4-16. A tabulation of the total number of acres in the project and the percentage and
acreage thereof proposed to be allocated to the several dwelling types, any
nonresidential uses, off-street parking, green areas, streets, parks, schools and other
reservations.
18-4-17. A tabulation of the total number of dwelling, commercial or industrial units of
various types in the project and the overall project density in dwelling, commercial
or industrial units per gross acre.
18-4-18. The proposed and required off-street parking and loading areas, including
parking and access for the handicapped as specified in the Virginia Uniform
Statewide Building Code, as amended.
18-5-1. Erosion and sedimentation control. Slopes in excess of 10% shall be treated in a
manner acceptable to the director of planning or the Planning Commission to
prevent soil erosion and excessive runoff; provided that measures taken for erosion
and sedimentation control shall conform to the standards and procedures set forth
in the Town of Abingdon erosion and sedimentation control ordinance; and
provided that, in cases where an erosion and sedimentation control permit is
required, the necessary plans and data shall be submitted, reviewed and approved
concurrently with the site plan, as set forth in such chapter.
18-5-2. Landscaping. All nonresidential uses, including parking lots and vehicular
display areas, where front yard is required shall have at least 50% of the street
frontage landscaped with plant material. Such planting area shall have a minimum
§ 18-4 ZONING ORDINANCE § 18-5
B:107
§ 18-6. Additional specific standards.
width of five feet. The Planning Commission may allow a deviation from these
requirements if, in its judgment, such deviation is consistent with the intent of this
article and beneficial to the proposed development.
18-5-3. Screening. All required screening shall be sufficiently dense or opaque to screen
the development effectively from the adjacent properties. The following uses shall
be adequately screened from the public right-of-way:
(a) Storage lots for automobile repair shops.
(b) Storage of inoperable automobiles, or automobile accessory parts such as tires,
motors, body parts, etc.
(c) All permitted uses in the M-1 and M-2 industrial districts.
(d) Storage of construction materials, other than active construction sites.
(e) Junkyards.
18-5-4. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided for proposed developments used
at night. Lighting installations shall not have an adverse impact on traffic safety or
on the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
18-5-5. Standards for preservation of natural environment and energy conservation. In
order to preserve the character and natural environment of the area and to provide
visual and noise buffering, the Planning Commission shall refuse to approve any
site plan which proposes unnecessary destruction of trees and other natural features.
The Planning Commission shall require assurances that the developer has made
reasonable effort, in light of the proposed development, to preserve, replenish,
protect and utilize:
(a) Trees of ten-inch caliper or larger.
(b) Ornamental trees of any size.
(c) Trees within required setbacks or along boundaries unless necessary to remove
for access, grading, circulation, utilities or drainage.
(d) Streams in their natural condition.
(e) Ground area from soil erosion and excessive water runoff.
(f) Natural features of the site which promote energy conservation.
18-5-6. Locations of driveways. Driveways shall be located as required by the standards
referenced in sections 62-76 — 62-79 of the Code of Ordinances, Town of
Abingdon, Virginia. Note: the section referenced here is not a part of this Zoning
Ordinance, but is found in the Town Code.
18-6-1. Automatic car washes. The following standard shall be followed in development
of site plans for automatic car washes or buildings using production line methods
with a chain conveyor, or blower, steam cleaning device or other mechanical
§ 18-5 ABINGDON CODE § 18-6
B:108
device:
(a) Minimum size of the lot shall be 10,000 square feet, with a minimum width of
50 feet.
(b) A hard-surfaced driveway of either one or more lanes shall be constructed on
the site in such a manner as to provide for a continuous movement of cars into
the wash rack. The driveways so provided shall be not less than 10 feet in
width for each additional lane. Where access to the wash rack is restricted to a
single lane, such lane shall be used only for such purposes as are a part of the
washing operation. The total length of the required lane or lanes so provided
shall be determined by the overall length of the building, including areas
having side walls but no roof. In any building where the washing operation
moves in other than a straight line, the length of the building for the purposes
of this section shall be the distance measured along the centerline of the
conveyor or wash line from the point of entry to the point of exit from the
building. The overall length of the required lane or lanes as measured along
the center shall be determined in accordance with the following formula:
(1) Where the building is 80 feet or less in overall length, the total required
lane or lanes shall be not less than 200 feet in length.
(2) Where the building exceeds 80 feet in length, the length of the required
lane or lanes shall be increased 20 feet for each 10 or fraction thereof by
which the building exceeds 80 feet in overall length.
(c) Gasoline pumps may be permitted on the site, provided, however, that the area
occupied by such pumps shall be in addition to the area required under
Subsection (b), above.
(d) The building exit for automobiles that have completed the washing process
shall be at least 25 feet distant from the nearest point of the public sidewalk of
the adjacent street.
(e) A sand trap for waste water with a minimum capacity of 120 cubic feet shall
be provided within the building for the protection of the sewers.
(f) Vacuuming facilities may be outside the car wash building but shall be located
as far as possible from any residence.
(g) The building of vacuuming facilities shall not be less than 100 feet from any
residential district or use.
(h) Any light used to illuminate the area shall be in conformance with the
regulations set forth in Section 18-5-4.
(i) The site shall be screened in conformance with the regulations set forth in
Section 18-5-3.
18-6-2. Self-service car washes. The following standards shall be followed in
development of site plans for coin-operated self-service car washes not necessarily
requiring an attendant:
§ 18-6 ZONING ORDINANCE § 18-6
B:109
(a) A hard-surfaced, paved area at least 20 feet wide and 50 feet deep shall be
provided in front of each stall. In addition, a like area for the purpose of drying
and vacuuming a vehicle shall be provided at the rear of each stall.
(b) A sand trap for waste water with a minimum capacity of 120 cubic feet shall
be provided for the area under the stalls for the protection of the sewers.
(c) The vacuuming facilities shall be located in the drying space behind the
washing stalls in such a manner as to make them as remote as possible from
any nearby residential area.
(d) The stalls or vacuuming facilities shall not be less than 100 feet from any
residential district or use.
(e) Any lights used to illuminate the area shall be in conformance with the
regulations set forth in Section 18-5-4.
(f) The site shall be screened in conformance with the regulations set forth in
Section 18-5-3.
(g) The interior of the wash stalls shall remain illuminated during hours of
darkness, but the operation of other lighting shall be limited to the hours
between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., with an automatic timer switch to
accomplish such illumination.
18-6-3. Drive-in restaurant facilities. The following standards shall be followed in
developing site plans for drive-in restaurant facilities:
(a) Access to public streets or other public ways shall be provided from at least
two points at all times. Such means of access shall be kept clear at all times.
The Planning Commission may modify the number of required accesses, if, in
its opinion such decision will improve the development.
(b) The sale of food, frozen desserts, beverages, candy and other products from a
window or other exterior opening in a drive-in restaurant facility shall not be
permitted unless such window or opening is at least 20 feet from any property
line.
(c) All areas for eating in cars shall be paved so as to avoid creating dust and so
as to provide for adequate drainage of surface water. All spaces shall be clearly
marked.
(d) All drive-in restaurant facilities shall be screened in conformance with the
regulations set forth in Section 18-5-3.
(e) The parking area of any drive-in restaurant facility shall be adequately
illuminated by electric lights. Such illumination shall be in conformance with
the regulations set forth in Section 18-5-4.
(f) A hard-surfaced, paved area at least 10 feet wide and 100 feet long shall be
provided for each drive-in restaurant window.
(g) No car utilizing the services of a drive-in restaurant facility shall be allowed to
wait in the public right-of-way.
§ 18-6 ABINGDON CODE § 18-6
B:110
(h) The waiting space shall not include any part of this site which is to be used for
required off-street parking.
18-6-4. Parking lot. The following standards shall be followed in developing site plans
for motor vehicle parking lots and off-street parking areas required by Section 17-6:
(a) A rail, fence, wall or other continuous barricade of a height sufficient to retain
all cars completely within the property shall be provided except at exit or
access driveways; provided, however, that screening shall be provided on each
side of a parking area which abuts upon any residential district or use or faces
across a street, alley or place from any lot in a residential district or use.
Screening shall be in conformance with the regulations set forth in Section
18-5-3. If plants are used for screening, the depth of planting shall be not less
than five feet and of such material effectively to block from outside view all
cars parked therein.
(b) Each parking space within the parking lot shall be provided with a six-inch
high concrete wheel stop securely fastened in place, if deemed necessary by
the Planning Commission, and shall be required in all parking lots where slope
exceeds 5%.
(c) The Planning Commission shall approve all entrances and exits for parking
lots provided, however, that no entrance or exit shall be closer than five feet to
any lot located in a residential district or use. The Planning Commission,
through the process of site plan review, may require entrance and exit signs
and may designate any such entrance for use as an entrance only and may
designate any such entrance for use as an exit only.
(d) Off-street parking areas shall have surface-treated gravel surfaces or other
surface with a durable and dustless surface approved by the director of public
works, and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water. In
no case shall drainage be allowed across sidewalks, streets or alleys.
(e) Any lighting used to illuminate any required off-street parking areas shall be
in conformance with the regulations set forth in Section 18-5-4.
(f) For parking lots which are to exceed 5,000 square feet in area, a minimum of
5% of the parking lot area shall be developed in planted areas. Such planted
areas shall be in addition to the amount of space required under the off-street
parking provisions of Section 17-6. If the parking lot is to be screened from a
residential district or use in accordance with Subsection (a), and such
screening is in the form of a planted buffer at least six feet high and five feet
deep, such screening may count as a part of the 5% of the parking lot area to
be landscaped.
(g) Parking lots shall meet all the standards and regulations set forth in Section
17-6.
(h) Parking areas shall be constructed with a slope of 5% or less. The Planning
Commission or the director of planning may, however, permit slopes up to
10% where necessary for reasons of topography.
§ 18-6 ZONING ORDINANCE § 18-6
B:111
(i) All paved parking lots shall be planted with no less than one tree for every five
parking spaces or fraction thereof. Such trees shall be of a variety which
provide shade or are capable of providing shade at maturity [see Section 18-8
"Canopy trees"] and shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the parking lot.
18-6-5. Parking garage. The following standard shall be followed in developing site
plans for motor vehicle parking garages which contain more than 10 contiguous
spaces:
(a) Entrances and exits shall be as far as practicable from street intersections and
shall be located so as to result in the least possible interference with traffic
movement on abutting streets.
(b) Not less than one exit lane shall be provided for each 200 parking spaces, or
major fraction thereof.
(c) Driveway widths at the street line shall be not less than 18 feet for driveways
accommodating one lane of traffic and 24 feet for driveways accommodating
two lanes of traffic. In no case shall any driveway width at the street line be
greater than 35 feet.
(d) All portions of the structure used for parking of vehicles shall be illuminated
during the hours of use by natural or artificial lighting with an intensity of not
less than four footcandles measured at floor level.
(e) The parking garage shall be constructed in such a manner as to screen from
outside street level view any vehicles parked therein provided, however, that
entrances and exits shall be exempt from this requirement.
18-6-6. Service stations. The following standards shall be followed in developing site
plans for service stations:
(a) Specifications for driveway entrances:
Maximum width of driveways 50 feet
Minimum width of driveways 30 feet
Minimum distance between driveways 20 feet
Minimum distance from driveway to street
corner when radius is:
5 feet — 9 feet Distance 20 feet
10 feet — 14 feet Distance 15 feet
15 feet — 19 feet Distance 10 feet
20 feet — 24 feet Distance 5 feet
Over 25 feet Distance 0 feet
(b) The minimum distance between driveway and adjoining property line shall be
10 feet.
(c) The minimum distance between gasoline pump island and back of sidewalk
(right-of-way line) shall be 16 feet.
§ 18-6 ABINGDON CODE § 18-6
B:112
(d) A raised curb six inches high shall be constructed back of the sidewalk
separating the driveways and opposite pump island. The raised curb shall
extend to within two feet of each driveway.
(e) In cases where there is no existing curb, gutter or sidewalk along the street or
streets from which the service station shall take access, the developer
constructing the service station shall at his own expense construct the
necessary curb, gutter and sidewalk according to the specifications of the
Town.
(f) Maximum number of driveways permitted for each 100 feet is two. An
additional driveway may be permitted for each 50 feet of frontage owned
provided that the need can be established and the minimum requirements as
set out above can be complied with.
(g) Service station sites shall contain a minimum of 2,500 square feet for each
pump.
(h) Buildings shall be set back at least 40 feet from the street right-of-way line and
at least 10 feet from any other property line.
(i) The site shall be screened in accordance with the regulations set forth in
Section 18-5-3.
(j) No delivery tanker shall be allowed to park on public right-of-way during
gasoline delivery, nor shall any hose be permitted on the public right-of-way.
(k) At least 50% of the street frontage shall be landscaped with plant materials.
Such planting area shall have a minimum depth of five feet.
(l) In order to preserve the sight distance advantage offered by service stations
located on street corners, that area defined by a straight line drawn between
curb cuts shall be landscaped with low-profile plants having a height of not
more than three feet. Signs or light standards may be permitted within this
area, but the bottom of any sign or light fixture shall be above the sight line of
a large truck (approximately eight to 10 feet). No portable signs or automobiles
shall be placed between this area and the station building.
(m) All trash shall be stored within a building or within a fenced enclosure in the
rear (or, in the case of corner sites, rear quarter of the site).
(n) In cases where a hillside must be graded for construction, suitable protection
for the hillside must be provided for slopes in excess of 10%. Such protection
shall be in the form of terracing, retaining walls, planting of suitable vegetation
or a combination of the above to avoid excess runoff and soil erosion.
(o) All lighting of the service station shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations as set forth in Section 18-5-4.
(p) An attendant shall be responsible for overseeing the pumping of gasoline or
related fuels.
18-6-7. Animal shelters and animal hospitals. The following standards shall be followed
§ 18-6 ZONING ORDINANCE § 18-6
B:113
§ 18-7. Procedures.
in developing site plans for animal shelters and animal hospitals:
(a) The building shall be reasonably soundproofed from neighboring residential
and commercial uses.
(b) The site shall be screened or buffered to avoid sound and visual nuisance.
(c) Drainage from the building interior and exterior runs and pens shall go to a
sanitary sewer system. Exterior runs shall be laid out in such a way to prevent
storm drainage from surrounding areas from combining with the drainage from
the runs and pens.
18-7-1. Authority for review and approval. Site plans may be approved administratively
by the director of planning and/or the Town Manager after first circulating the plan
to the director of public works for written comments.
18-7-2. Preapplication conference:
(a) All applicants for site plan review shall first submit a preliminary plan and
request a preapplication review conference with the director of planning and
the director of public works.
(b) The purpose of the conference is to discuss the site plan, off-street parking,
signs, erosion and sedimentation control and other Town Code provisions or
other Town ordinance requirements, utilities, drainage and to consider
preliminary features of the proposed development as they relate to this article.
18-7-3. Submittal of final site plans; review and approval.
(a) Administrative review and action. Six copies of the final site plan shall be
submitted to the director of planning. The director of planning shall circulate
the plan to the relevant Town departments for written comments and notify the
applicant of the action taken with respect to the site plan, which may include
approval, approval subject to conditions or disapproval. All final site plans
requiring a special use permit shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
for review and approval and submitted to the board of architectural review if
the project is located in the old and historic district.
(b) Planning Commission approval and action:
(1) For those plans which are to go before the Planning Commission, four
additional copies shall be submitted to the director of planning prior to
the next regularly or specially scheduled Planning Commission meeting.
The director of planning shall prepare recommendations for the Planning
Commission which shall be based upon the purpose, intent and
regulations set forth in this article. The recommendations shall be sent to
the applicant prior to the Planning Commission meeting.
(2) The Planning Commission may approve, approve subject to specific
conditions or disapprove the site plan. The site plan shall be considered
approved unless the Planning Commission acts within 60 days from the
§ 18-6 ABINGDON CODE § 18-7
B:114
date of submission of the final site plan.
(3) The director of planning shall notify the applicant in writing of the action
taken by the Planning Commission. In case of conditional approval, the
applicant shall make the necessary changes and submit six copies of the
final site plan for the signature of the director of planning.
18-7-4. Site plan termination; extensions. An approved site plan shall expire and be null
and void unless a building permit for the construction of the same substantial
elements of the site plan has been issued within a period of one year. The director
of planning or the Planning Commission may grant an extension of one year.
18-7-5. Site plan completion in certain cases. Wherever a property has been wrongfully
occupied or used without approval of a required site plan and a site plan is thereafter
sought and approved to correct such violation, such applicant shall furnish a site
plan completion bond or other financial guaranty as provided in Section 17-2 in an
amount sufficient to ensure completion of all required features of the site plan. If
such improvements are not completed by the applicant within such reasonable time
as the Planning Commission or director of planning may impose at the time the site
plan is approved, the administrator may seek recourse for such guaranty to complete
the improvements.
18-7-6. Amendments to approved site plan. If it becomes necessary for an approved site
plan to be changed, the director of planning shall at the applicant's request either
administratively approve an amendment to the site plan, or, if the proposed change
will, in the director's opinion, substantially affect the terms of the original approval,
he may require a new site plan be drawn and submitted for review and action in
accordance with the provisions of this article and chapter.
18-7-7. Issuance of building permits, sign permits and certificates of occupancy.
(a) Building permits and sign permits may be issued by the building official in
accordance with the final approved site plan, signed by the director of
planning.
(b) The building official shall be responsible for enforcing the requirements as set
forth in the final approved site plan, before issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, and shall give written notice to the director of planning that the site
plan has been completed before issuing the certificate of occupancy.
18-7-8. Retention of site plans; conformity. Copies of the approved site plan shall be
retained in the records of the director of planning and the administrator. All building
and occupancy permits shall conform to the provisions of the approved site plan.
18-7-9. Utilities. Approval of a site plan does not imply availability of public utilities or
create any obligation on the part of the Town to provide same.
18-7-10. Appeals. Any applicant may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission
as provided in this ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken in writing within 30 days
of such decision and referred to the Town Council for study. Such decision of the
Town Council shall be final and binding upon all parties.
§ 18-7 ZONING ORDINANCE § 18-8
B:115
§ 18-8. Plant materials.
The following plant materials are referenced and/or considered suitable for landscaping
purposes as required in this article:
Canopy Trees
Common Name Botanical Name Function
Ginkgo (male only) Ginkgo biloba Parking, street, buffer
Thornless honey locust Gleditsia triacanthus
inermis
Parking, street
Green ash Fraxinus pennsylvania Parking, street, buffer
Sycamore Platanus occidentalis Parking, buffer
Red maple Acer rubrum Parking, street, buffer
Norway maple Acer platanoides Parking, street, buffer
Sugar maple Acer saccharum Parking, street, buffer
Pin oak Quercus palustris Parking, street, buffer
Red oak Quercus borealis Parking, street, buffer
Willow oak Quercus phellos Parking, street, buffer
Sweet gum Liquidambar styraciflua Parking, street, buffer
London plane tree Platanus acerifolia Parking, street, buffer
Japanese pagoda tree Sophora japonica Parking, street, buffer
Littleleaf linden Tilea cordata Parking, street, buffer
Silver linden Tilea tomentosa Parking, street, buffer
Village green Zelkova serrata Parking, street, buffer
Yellowwood Cladrastis lutea Parking, street, buffer
Evergreen Trees
Common Name Botanical Name Function
Eastern red cedar Juniperus virginiana Buffer
White pine Pinus strobus Buffer
Austrian pine Pinus nigra Buffer
Norway spruce Picea ables Buffer
American holly Ilex opaca Buffer
Dark american arborvitae Thyla occidentalis nigra Buffer
§ 18-8 ABINGDON CODE § 18-8
B:116
Ornamental Trees
Common Name Botanical Name Function
Amur maple Acer griseum Buffer
Dogwood Cornus florida Street, buffer
Washington hawthorn Crataegus plaeno-pyrum Street, buffer
American plum Prunus americana Street, buffer
Bradford pear Pyrus calleryana bradford Street, buffer
Flowering crabapple Malus (various species) Street, buffer
Flowering cherry Prunus (various species) Street, buffer
Downy serviceberry Amelanchier arborea Buffer
Shadblow Amelanchier canadensis Buffer
Evergreen Shrubs
Common Name Botanical Name Function
English yew Taxus baccata Buffer
Japanese yew Taxus cuspidata Buffer
Azalea (various species) Buffer
Chinese holly Ilex cornuta Buffer
Japanese holly Ilex crenata Buffer
Rhododendron (various species) Buffer
Euonymous (various species) Buffer
Deciduous and Flowering Shrubs
Common Name Botanical Name Function
Azalea (various species) Buffer
Cottoneaster (various species) Buffer
Forsythia (various species) Buffer
Viburnum (various species) Buffer
Winged euonymous (various species) Buffer
Ground Cover
Common Name Botanical Name Function
Ajuga Ajuga repandens Buffer
English ivy Hedera helix Buffer
Pachysandra Pachysandra terminalis Buffer
Ground juniper (various species) Buffer
Dwarf cottoneaster (various species) Buffer
§ 18-8 ZONING ORDINANCE § 18-8
B:117
Ground Cover
Common Name Botanical Name Function
Periwinkle Vinca minor Buffer
§ 18-9. Historic District Entrance Corridor Overlay District. [Ord. No. 1-2003,
4-7-2003; Amd. of 7-7-2003; Ord. No. 2004-65, 9-7-2004; Ord. of 9-4-2007; Ord. of
10-1-2019]
18-9-1. Intent. In accordance with the Town of Abingdon Virginia Comprehensive Plan
adopted in December 2000, the Abingdon Historic District Entrance Corridor
Overlay District is hereby created. The purpose of this district is: to achieve a
balanced land use pattern that retains Abingdon's small Town character while
accommodating quality growth in a planned manner; insure that future business and
employment centers do not adversely affect or overburden the public facilities,
environment or existing Town character of Abingdon; to protect and enhance
Abingdon's attractiveness; protect Abingdon's scenic, historic, architectural and
cultural resources; support and stimulate development which is appropriate and
complimentary to the numerous properties of historic, architectural and cultural
significance throughout the Town; protect and enhance the architectural and scenic
character of significant access routes to the Town's historic areas, promote orderly
and attractive development along these significant access routes and ensure that
development within this district is compatible with these resources through
architectural control of development.
18-9-2. Area created, boundaries. In order to execute the intent of this article, there is
hereby created an entrance corridor overlay district:
(a) The boundaries of the entrance corridor overlay district shall be the boundaries
of the office and business zoning districts and limited industrial districts (B-1,
B-2, B-3, M-1 and O&I), as they are found on the following streets of the
Town:
East Main Street, from historic district to Thompson Drive.
West Main Street, from historic district to Porterfield Highway.
Cummings Street, from Interstate 81 to historic district.
Russell Road [full length].
18-9-3. Permitted uses. A building and/or land shall be used for the following purposes:
(a) Unless otherwise specified herein, uses which are permitted in the underlying
districts shall be permitted in the EC district.
18-9-4. Special uses. A building and/or land may be used for the purposes, subject to the
issuance of a special use permit, as authorized in Section 17-3.
(a) Uses permitted with a special use permit in the underlying districts, shall be
permitted with a special use permit in the EC district.
(b) When otherwise permitted in the underlying district, any newly constructed
building intended to be occupied with greater than 50,000 square feet of floor
§ 18-8 ABINGDON CODE § 18-9
B:118
area devoted to retail use shall require a special use permit in the EC district.
[Amd. of 7-7-2003]
18-9-5. Area and bulk regulations. Uses, buildings and structures shall be subject to
regulations for lot area, lot width, street frontage, setback, height, yards, parking
and signs applicable in the underlying districts in which they are located.
18-9-6. Certificate of appropriateness required to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter,
restore, move or demolish a building.
(a) Certificates of appropriateness. No building or structure within the Historic
District Entrance Corridor Overlay District may be demolished or moved in
whole or in part, nor may any architectural features of said building or
structure which are subject to public view from any public street, right-of-way
or place be altered in any way that affects the external appearance of the
building or structure without (i) prior approval of an application to the
Planning Commission ("commission") hereinafter created, and (ii) the
commission's issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. Neither shall any
building or structure hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
restored, moved or demolished within the Historic District Entrance Corridor
Overlay District without the same prior approval and issuance of a certificate
of appropriateness.
(b) Routine maintenance and minor action exclusion.
(1) Upon written application, the zoning administrator of the Town of
Abingdon (the "administrator") may determine that certain minor actions
involving buildings and structures within the Historic District Entrance
Corridor Overlay District will have no permanent effect on the character
of the district, and, by written waivers issued to the parties wishing to take
the minor actions, exempt them from review by the commission. Such
minor actions shall be limited to those listed in the design review
guidelines described in Section 18-9-11 below under the topic heading
"routine maintenance and repair of buildings and other minor actions."
Each application for waiver must be on the form provided by the office
of the administrator and documented by appropriate samples of the
materials and colors to be used in taking the minor actions. With respect
to each waiver issued hereunder, the administrator shall see to it through
the Town's inspection department that the work performed and materials
employed comply with the terms of the particular waiver. Provided,
however:
a. If the administrator is uncertain about his authority to grant a waiver
or if the administrator and the applicant cannot agree on changes in
any application for waiver, the application shall be referred to the
commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting for a decision on
the question, which decision shall be final;
b. If the administrator denies an application for a waiver, the applicant
may appeal the administrator's decision to the commission, in which
case the commission's decision shall be final; and
§ 18-9 ZONING ORDINANCE § 18-9
B:119
c. If a waiver is issued and the work is commenced but in the opinion
of the administrator the work does not qualify for a waiver the
administrator shall order that the work be stopped until the applicant
secures a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to Section 18-9-6
(a). In any such case the applicant may appeal to the commission,
whose decision on the question shall be final.
(2) The administrator shall provide the commission with a copy of each
application for a waiver at the commission's regularly scheduled meeting
next following the date the application was received.
(c) Work undertaken without authorization. In addition to the sanctions provided
in Article 24, Section 24-2 of this ordinance and any other remedy available at
law or in equity, the administrator shall issue a stop work order if any work
subject to this section is started without authorization by either the commission
or the administrator, as provided above. Any such stop work order shall (i)
remain in effect until the party proposing to do the work secures appropriate
authorization; and, (ii) be subject to the right of such party to appeal the action
of the administrator to the commission.
(d) No building permit shall be issued involving construction or exterior
modifications to a building until a certificate of appropriateness or waiver has
been issued in accordance with Section 18-9-6 for improvements subject to
such building permit.
(e) No site plan shall be approved until a certificate of appropriateness or waiver
has been issued in accordance with Section 18-9-6 for all buildings and
improvements shown thereon.
(f) No changes shall be made to the exterior color or colors of a building or sign
until a certificate of appropriateness or waiver has been issued in accordance
with Section 18-9-6 for such color changes.
18-9-7. Administration.
(a) The Planning Commission shall be responsible for the issuance of certificates
of appropriateness as required by this article. Application for a certificate of
appropriateness shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Materials
submitted shall include a preliminary site plan, landscaping plan, elevations of
all buildings, facades visible from public streets, samples of proposed building
materials, lighting plan and details and scale drawings of proposed signage to
include materials, colors and proposed lighting. Architectural and landscaping
plans should include elevations and renderings that depict colors, materials
and designs. The Planning Commission shall review the application and, if
approved, shall issue a certificate of appropriateness, with or without
conditions, together with any modifications deemed necessary to ensure
compliance with this section. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within
60 days from the date of application shall constitute approval of the
application.
(b) In making its determinations, the Planning Commission may consider any
architectural feature which influences appearance, such as, but not limited to
§ 18-9 ABINGDON CODE § 18-9
B:120
motif and style, color, texture and materials, configuration, orientation, mass,
shape, height and location of buildings, location and configuration of parking
areas, landscaping and buffering. The zoning administrator and/or the Town
Manager or their designees shall approve signs.
(c) In case of a building or use for which a special use permit is required, issuance
of a certificate of appropriateness by the Planning Commission shall be
required as set forth in this article. Such certificate of appropriateness shall be
advisory to the Town Council, and shall be construed to be a part of the
Planning Commission's recommendation to the Council on the special use
permit. The Town Council may attach such conditions or modify the
certificate of appropriateness, as it deems necessary in conjunction with its
action on the special use permit.
18-9-8. Matters to be considered in acting on the appropriateness of the erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving or demolition of a
building or structure.
18-9-9. Role of design review guidelines. In reviewing each project the Planning
Commission must follow the suggestions and requirements of the design review
guidelines, as such document now exists and may hereafter be revised and amended
by the commission. Provided, by either a six-to-one or unanimous vote the
commission may elect to disregard any guideline it considers unimportant or
inappropriate to a particular project.
18-9-10. Review of design review guidelines. The commission shall periodically review
the design review guidelines in the context of the experience gained since the last
review of that kind and make all such revisions that seem, in their judgment, to be
necessary or advisable.
18-9-11. Matters the Commission shall and shall not consider. The commission shall not
consider interior arrangement of the building or structure or features not subject to
view from a public street, right of way or place. In addition to those specified in the
design review guidelines, the commission shall consider the following matters in
passing on the appropriateness of a particular project:
(a) Landscaping.
(1) Landscaping shall be used to soften the visual impact of development and
enhance the appearance of the area.
(2) Landscaping shall be sufficient to soften the visual effects of parking lots,
reduce the effective visual mass of large buildings, and provide screening
between the development, the street and surrounding lots.
(3) Landscape buffers, shall be provided adjacent to public streets of
sufficient size to permit street trees and plantings to be installed to reduce
the visibility into parking lots.
(4) Landscaping shall be compatible with landscaping on adjacent properties.
(5) Landscaping shall be of a high quality and designed in a professional
manner.
§ 18-9 ZONING ORDINANCE § 18-9
B:121
(b) Signage. In addition to the limitations on the numbers and sizes of signs
imposed under Article 21 of this ordinance are the following:
(1) Each parcel shall have an overall sign plan which reflects a consistent
style and specifies the size(s), and color scheme for proposed signage.
(2) Materials used in signs and their support structures should reflect the
building served by the sign.
(3) Sign colors should be harmonious with the building which they serve.
(c) Architecture and general building characteristics. The following
recommendations are provided for architectural styles and general building
characteristics:
(1) Materials, colors and general style of buildings within a development
should be coordinated.
(2) Heating and air conditioning units, ventilation units, and mechanical
equipment shall be screened from view from public streets.
(3) Loading docks, trash containers, mechanical equipment and any sites for
storage facilities shall be screened from view from public streets.
(4) The effective visual mass of large buildings should be reduced by
variations in roof line, building angles, dimension, relief, color,
architectural detailing and landscaping.
(d) Design review guidelines.
(1) New buildings or exterior alterations to existing structures should include
one or a combination of the following materials/methods of construction:
(2) Wood frame, (or fiber cement board), with brick, stone, or concrete
foundations; brick construction or brick facing; finished concrete block;
roof materials of standing seam metal, asphalt shingle, and rubber
membrane/parapet for flat roof forms.
(3) Windows should be used to provide interest and surface variations on
building elevations. Blank building walls are discouraged for most
commercial applications.
(4) The design of gas station canopies, building canopies and other accessory
structures should be compatible with the scale, color, materials, and detail
of the buildings they serve.
(5) Site walls and retaining walls should be comprised of brick, or concrete;
brick facing on a concrete or concrete masonry unit wall. The use of
segmental/modular concrete block is discouraged. Site walls should be
considered as part of site terracing in increments; site walls out of
proportion with building foundations or the human figure are
discouraged.
(6) Roof forms may be single gable, cross gable, gambrel, hip, parapet, or
§ 18-9 ABINGDON CODE § 18-9
B:122
flat forms. Mansard roof forms are not recommended on modern-styled
buildings.
(7) Site materials shall be limited to local stone, asphalt, concrete, and
exposed aggregate concrete.
(8) Facade colors preferably shall be of low reflectance white, earth tone,
muted, subtle, or neutral colors. Building trim may feature brighter colors
as an accent material. The use of high-intensity, metallic, fluorescent, day
glow, or neon colors are discouraged.
(9) Trademark buildings and related features including signs shall be
modified to meet these design standards.
(10) Routine maintenance and repair of buildings and other minor actions. The
following minor actions involving buildings and structures within the
Historic District Entrance Corridor Overlay District, which will have no
permanent effect on the character of the district, shall by written waiver
be exempt from review by the Commission.
a. Repainting in a paint scheme that duplicates the existing paint
colors.
b. Replacement of windows that duplicate the existing windows.
c. Relocation of heating and cooling systems on the property provided
they be screened per the Design Guidelines.
d. Addition or deletion of awnings, temporary canopies, window air
conditioners or similar appurtenances.
e. Exterior alterations to existing structures not visible from a public
street, right of way or determined by the administrator to have no
permanent effect on the character of the district.
f. Replacement of roof using materials that replicate existing materials.
(e) Site planning. In addition to the requirements of Section 18-2 et seq., the
following standards are required in the entrance corridor overlay district:
(1) Parking lot layouts shall respond to the topographic characteristics of the
site.
(2) The number of access points to parking lots from a street will be
minimized and shall relate to other existing curb cuts whenever possible.
(3) Parking lots will be interconnected on adjacent parcels whenever
possible.
(4) Small, landscaped and interconnected parking lots, rather than large,
central parking lots shall be encouraged.
(5) Parking lots shall not dominate the image of a site.
(6) Where sidewalks exist adjacent to individual project sites pedestrian
§ 18-9 ZONING ORDINANCE § 18-9
B:123
access from the sidewalk into individual project sites as well as within
sites and between sites shall be provided.
(7) The Planning Commission is permitted to reduce the parking space
requirement when the interests of the Town are better served.
(f) Lighting.
(1) Lighting should be in keeping with the design of the complex.
(2) Lighting should be of uniform style for each project site.
(3) Lighting should be contained within the site and designed to limit
spillover to streets and adjacent properties and to minimize the amount of
light that is directed to the sky.
(4) Light poles shall not exceed 24 feet in height.
(g) Temporary, mobile and modular structures. No temporary, mobile or modular
structure may be placed or used in this zoning district, with the exception that
temporary structures may be placed upon property within this district by
contractors for their use during development and construction upon property
within this district.
18-9-12. Appeals. Appeals may be taken from any action or decision of the zoning
administrator and Planning Commission granting or refusing to grant a certificate
of appropriateness, pursuant to the provisions of this article. Appeals shall be taken
to the Town Council within 30 days of the action taken by the Planning
Commission appeal shall be made by letter addressed to the Town Manager noting
the particular action being appealed. Any owner or other party aggrieved by the
decision of the Town Council shall have the right to appeal to the Circuit Court of
Washington County within 30 days of the action taken by the Town Council.
§ 18-9 ABINGDON CODE § 18-9
B:124
ARTICLE 19
Townhouse Regulations
Townhouse projects shall be developed in accordance with the following regulations:
§ 19-1. Townhouse project, structure and unit defined.
§ 19-2. Where permitted.
Townhouse structures shall be allowed in areas served by public water and sewage
disposal systems in accordance with district permitted use regulations.
§ 19-3. General requirements.
§ 19-4. Density.
Density of a Townhouse project shall be generally in compliance with the required
density of the district in which it is to be located.
19-1-1. For purposes of this article, a Townhouse project shall be defined as a land
development project consisting of at least one Townhouse structure as defined in
Section 19-1-2 and all open space and amenities thereon, if any.
19-1-2. A Townhouse structure shall be defined as a main structure consisting of at least
three vertically attached single-family dwelling units for the purpose of occupancy
and ownership, designed and constructed so as to allow for the sale of individual
dwellings including the lot and appurtenances thereon.
19-1-3. A Townhouse unit shall be defined as an individual attached single-family
residence within a Townhouse structure as defined in Section 19-1-2.
19-3-1. No building permit shall be issued to a developer of a Townhouse project unless
and until the requirements of this article, other applicable articles of this ordinance,
other applicable ordinances of the Town and applicable state statutes are complied
with.
19-3-2. A Townhouse structure shall consist of no more than eight Townhouse units.
19-3-3. Individual property lines shall run from the street through the center of the
common party walls of attached interior units and continue to the rear lot line. The
lots, utilities and other improvements for each Townhouse unit shall be designed to
permit separate ownership of each lot and dwelling unit thereon.
19-4-1. No townhouse project or portion thereof to be located in a R-2 district shall have
an overall site density greater than one townhouse unit per 6,000 square feet of
gross site area.
19-4-2. No townhouse project or portion thereof to be located in a R-3 or R-4 district
shall have an overall site density greater than one townhouse unit per 4,000 square
feet of gross site area.
§ 19-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 19-4
B:125
§ 19-5. Setback.
Setback requirements for townhouse structures shall conform to the established setback
regulations of the district in which the site is located.
§ 19-6. Lot size.
A lot occupied by a townhouse unit shall contain not less than 2,000 square feet.
§ 19-7. Frontage.
Lot frontage, measured at the setback line for individual townhouse units, shall have
an average minimum width of 20 feet for a townhouse structure, but in no case shall
the frontage for a townhouse unit be less than 16 feet. Lot width for end units shall be
adequate to provide side and rear yards as required by Section 19-8.
§ 19-8. Yard requirements.
§ 19-9. Architectural treatment of townhouses.
The facades of each unit of a townhouse structure shall be varied by changing front yard
depth and utilizing variations in materials or design, so that no more than three abutting
townhouse units have the same front yard depth or the same or essentially the same
architectural treatment of facades and roof lines. These requirements shall not apply in
the old and historic district.
§ 19-10. Access.
Each townhouse unit shall have unencumbered access from a dedicated public street.
A shared driveway may be allowed serving all townhouses in a development from one
entrance provided that the use and maintenance of such shared driveway by all owners is
required and that the use and maintenance of such shared driveway is protected by deed
covenants or restrictions.
§ 19-11. Parking.
Townhouse projects shall have provisions for at least two vehicular off-street parking
spaces for each townhouse unit.
§ 19-12. Common party walls and fire division.
Townhouse units shall be separated by a common party wall designed to meet the fire
19-4-3. For townhouse projects to be located in the old and historic district, density shall
follow the general established pattern in the district and shall be subject to the
additional review requirements for structures in that district.
19-8-1. Each townhouse unit shall have a rear yard of not less than 25 feet.
19-8-2. Each townhouse structure shall have two side yards of no less than 15 feet each.
In no case shall any two structures be closer than 30 feet, except in the old and
historic district.
§ 19-4 ABINGDON CODE § 19-12
B:126
protection requirements as set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code,
as amended.
§ 19-13. Open space and amenities.
§ 19-14. Site plan review.
A site plan in accordance with Article 18 shall be required for any proposed townhouse
development.
19-13-1. In any townhouse project resulting in the creation of any open space and
amenities thereon, broadly defined, the maintenance and upkeep of such areas and
elements shall be provided for by an arrangement acceptable to the Town and in
compliance with this article or applicable state statutes.
19-13-2. In any townhouse project consisting of open space and amenities related to the
project in such manner that the Condominium Act is applicable, the project shall
conform to the requirements of that act.
19-13-3. In any townhouse project consisting of open space and amenities related to the
project in such manner that the Condominium Act is not applicable, the developer
shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Establish a nonprofit entity according to the provisions of the Virginia
Nonstock Corporation Act, Code of Virginia, §§ 13.1-203 through 13.1-295,
as amended, whose membership shall be all the individuals or corporations
owning residential property within the townhouse project and whose purpose
shall be to hold title in fee simple to, and be responsible for maintenance and
upkeep of such open space; and
(b) Hold title to and be responsible for such open space until such time as
conveyance to such a nonprofit entity occurs. Such conveyance shall occur
when at least 75% of the townhouse units have been sold; and
(c) Provide proper agreements and covenants running with the land and in favor
of the citizens of Abingdon, requiring membership in such a nonprofit entity.
Such agreements and covenants shall include, among other things, that any
assessments, charges and cost of maintenance of the open space shall
constitute a pro rata lien upon the individual townhouse lots, inferior in lien
and dignity only to taxes and bona fide duly recorded first and second
mortgages or deeds of trust on the townhouse lot. Covenants shall also prohibit
the denuding, disturbing or defacing of said open space without prior approval
of the Town Council after recommendation of the Planning Commission.
19-13-4. All open space shown on the approved site plan is binding as to location and
use proposed.
§ 19-12 ZONING ORDINANCE § 19-14
B:127

ARTICLE 20
Planned Unit Development (PUD) District
§ 20-1. Applicability.
§ 20-2. Use regulations.
20-1-1. Regulations. The planned unit development is a concept which encourages and
permits variation in residential developments by allowing deviation in lot size, bulk
or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and open space from that required in any
one residential district.
20-1-2. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish procedures and standards for
planned unit developments within the corporate limits of the Town, in order that
one or more of the following objectives may be attained:
(a) Flexibility in design to take the greatest advantage of natural land, trees,
historic and other features.
(b) Accumulation of large areas of usable open space for recreation, preservation
of natural amenities and provision of community facilities.
(c) Creation of a variety of residential and compatible neighborhood arrangements
that give the home occupant greater choice in selecting types of environment
and living units.
(d) Clustering of one residential type for better use of land and open space, as long
as the resultant density does not exceed the allowed density in the existing
district.
(e) Allowance of sufficient freedom for the developer to take a creative approach
to the use of land and related physical development, as well as utilizing
innovative techniques to enhance the visual character of the Town.
(f) Efficient use of land which may result in reduction in development and
maintenance costs of street and utility systems.
(g) Establishment of criteria for the inclusion of compatible associated uses to
complement the residential areas within the planned unit development.
(h) Simplification of the procedure for obtaining approval of proposed
developments through simultaneous review by the Town of proposed land use,
site construction, lot and setback consideration, public needs and
requirements, and health and safety.
20-2-1. Primary residential uses. Single-family, two-family, and multiple-family
dwelling units in detached, semidetached, attached, and multi-storied structures
shall be permitted uses. No planned unit development shall be allowed which does
not incorporate a variety of dwelling types, except that one residential type planned
unit development may be allowed if it does not exceed the density allowed in the
district in which it lay immediately preceding its approval to planned unit
development application.
§ 20-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 20-2
B:129
§ 20-3. Density, area and minimum standards.
§ 20-4. Open space, community facilities, utilities and access.
20-2-2. Secondary nonresidential uses. Nonresidential uses of a religious, public,
semipublic, cultural, recreational or commercial character shall be permitted uses.
Such nonresidential uses shall be compatible with and secondary to the primary
residential use. No building devoted primarily to a commercial use shall be built or
established prior to the primary residential buildings or uses it is designed or
intended to serve. The total area of commercial development in the planned unit
development shall not exceed 5% of the gross area of the planned unit development.
Commercial uses shall include only uses permitted in the B-1 business district.
20-3-1. Gross density. The gross density within a planned unit development shall be
computed by dividing the total number of proposed dwelling units within the
development by the gross development area. The maximum gross density shall not
exceed 14 units per acre, unless higher density is allowed in the existing district.
Where one type of residential unit is involved, the density shall not exceed the
allowed density in the existing district.
20-3-2. Minimum area. A planned unit development shall contain a minimum of five
contiguous acres of land.
20-3-3. Minimum development standards. Minimum lot size, maximum lot coverage,
street width, setbacks, height and distance between buildings shall in general meet
health, safety and welfare requirements and shall be in harmony with good planning
practices.
20-4-1. Common open space and community facilities.
(a) The total usable open space within a planned unit development shall be at least
20% of the gross acreage of the planned unit development. No more than 25%
of the required percentage of usable open space shall be in the form of water
surfaces or wetlands. Recreation areas and facilities, such as playgrounds,
tennis courts, basketball courts, swimming pools and community buildings
should be provided which will meet the anticipated needs of the clientele the
planned unit development is designed to serve. Provision of separate adult and
juvenile recreation areas is encouraged. The following shall not be counted as
usable open space:
(1) Land that slopes greater than 15%.
(2) Streets, parking areas and other asphaltic or paved areas, except for
pedestrian and bicycle paths, swimming pools, tennis courts and other
similar recreational facilities.
(b) No parcel designated for recreational use shall contain less than 5,000 square
feet.
20-4-2. Utilities, services and easements. Structures within the planned unit development
shall be connected to public water and sewer lines and all utility lines shall be
placed underground, except for major electrical transmission lines. Adequate
§ 20-2 ABINGDON CODE § 20-4
B:130
§ 20-5. Open space and low-income housing incentives.
§ 20-6. Application, content and staged development.
provisions to take care of on- and off-site drainage shall be provided. Adequate
provisions for utility and drainage easements shall be provided.
20-4-3. Access and circulation. A circulation system shall be so designed so as to provide
for safe and convenient access to dwelling units, open space, community facilities
and other nonresidential areas in the planned unit development. Principal vehicular
access points shall be designed to permit smooth traffic flow and minimum hazards
to vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian traffic. The internal circulation system shall be
adequate for vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian movement and should discourage
through traffic. Adequate access and circulation for emergency and service vehicles
shall be provided.
20-5-1. Open space incentive. For each 5% increment of additional usable open common
space above 20% per gross area minimum, the developer will be allowed a
corresponding increase in density of one unit per acre above the density figure
computed in Section 20-3-1. The calculation and designation of usable open space
shall be acceptable to the Town.
20-5-2. Low-income housing incentive. For each low-income housing unit, as defined by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, as modified and adopted
by the Town Council, in a given planned unit development, the developer may have
one additional unit over and above the number of units allowed, as computed in
Section 20-3-1; except that the gross density shall not exceed more than 35% over
and above the maximum allowed density in the planned unit development.
20-6-1. Preapplication studies and conferences. Prior to the formal submission of a
proposed plan of development, the developer or his representative shall hold a
conference with the director of planning or his authorized agent, concerning the
proposed plan of development and submit unofficial preliminary studies of the
concept of the proposed development for preliminary review, comments and
recommendation.
20-6-2. Application. After preapplication review as set forth in Section 20-6-1 has been
completed, the developer may apply for a planned unit development. The official
plan of development shall be submitted to the Planning Commission only after the
completion of the tentative review of the unofficial preliminary studies. The
director of planning shall only accept the application if the applicant has provided
all the information as set forth in Section 20-6-3.
20-6-3. Contents of proposed plan of development. The following shall be the required
information to be included in a proposed plan of development:
(a) A proposed land-use plan showing the use of each lot or tract within the
development.
(b) A proposed circulation plan showing circulation patterns of vehicular,
pedestrian or other traffic.
§ 20-4 ZONING ORDINANCE § 20-6
B:131
(c) A plan showing community facilities and usable open space.
(d) A plat as required for preliminary plat approval by the Town of Abingdon
subdivision ordinance.
(e) A plan showing existing and proposed utilities and drainage.
(f) A proposed buildings and landscape plan, including the existing and proposed
structures, the existing trees with a caliper of eight inches or greater, proposed
trees and landscaping, trees to be removed, topography with contour intervals
of five feet or less and other significant natural features.
(g) Statistical or technical data as necessary to evaluate the total development,
including but not limited to, the following:
(1) Amount of land proposed to be used for public or semipublic uses such
as churches, schools, etc.
(2) Amount of land proposed to be set aside for recreational use.
(3) Amount of land proposed to be set aside for streets.
(4) Amount of land in the floodplain or unusable land within the project
boundary.
(5) Extent and nature of projected traffic.
(6) Proposed number of parking spaces for cars and recreational vehicles and
the number of parking spaces per unit.
(7) Gross density of the planned unit development to be computed by
dividing the total number of proposed dwelling units within the
development by the gross development area.
(h) The name, professional title and address of the planner, urban designer,
architect or engineer who prepared the proposed plan of development.
20-6-4. Procedure for staged development of planned unit development. Nothing in this
article shall prevent a developer from developing a planned unit development in
stages or sections provided that the following conditions are met and provided
further that any staged or sectional development is part of an overall approved
development plan:
(a) The proposed stages or sections shall be delineated on the plan of
development.
(b) All project data as required in Section 20-6-3 for the project as a whole shall
be given for each such section so established.
(c) When any section of a planned unit development is developed, it shall conform
to the plan of development as approved and amended.
(d) The gross densities of sections recorded shall not vary by more than 10% of
the gross density approved for the total development.
§ 20-6 ABINGDON CODE § 20-6
B:132
§ 20-7. Review, approval, amendment and fees for planned unit development.
(e) In a staged development, each section shall also provide a minimum of 20%
of the gross site area of that section as open space. The Planning Commission
may allow a 10% variance from the required percentage of the open space.
20-7-1. Preliminary review. No such planned unit development shall be approved unless
the plan of development shall have first been referred to:
(a) The director of planning or his designee who shall advise the Planning
Commission whether the design concept of the plan is in conformity with the
requirements of this article, and if the proposed land use, circulation and
community facilities plan is in harmony with all applicable elements of the
Town's comprehensive plan and if the development in general is based on
logical and sound principles of community planning and design.
(b) The director of public works or his designee who shall advise the Planning
Commission whether the utilities, drainage, and other engineering features of
the plan are in conformity with the relevant sections of the Town Code and in
conformity with sound principles of engineering.
(c) The Town Manager or his designee who shall advise the Planning Commission
whether the association or nonprofit corporation documents are in harmony
with the relevant sections of the state and Town Codes.
(d) The aforementioned director of public works or his designee who shall advise
the Planning Commission concerning the affect of the plan on surrounding
public streets and traffic patterns.
20-7-2. Action by the Planning Commission. No such planned unit development shall be
approved by the Town Council until it shall have been submitted to the Planning
Commission for review and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall
review the total plan of development and zoning application, if any, at a public
hearing advertised in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431, as amended,
and in relation to the purposes outlined in this article. The recommendation of the
Planning Commission shall then be referred to the Town Council.
20-7-3. Action by the Town Council. After the Town Council has received the
recommendation required in Section 20-7-2, the Town Council shall either approve
or disapprove the proposed planned unit development after holding a public hearing
advertised in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431, as amended. The
Council may hold a joint public hearing with the Planning Commission. After
approval of the planned unit development, no building or structure shall be erected
or building permit issued nor any lots sold from any such plat nor any final plan
recorded except in conformity with the approved plan of development. The area of
an approved planned unit development shall be noted on the zoning map until such
time as such approval may be revoked.
20-7-4. Amendment procedures. The owner of an approved planned unit development or
his representative may apply for an amendment of the plan of development in
concept or in minor details:
§ 20-6 ZONING ORDINANCE § 20-7
B:133
§ 20-8. Management, ownership and termination.
(a) In case of change in concept, the applicant shall have the approval of the
Planning Commission and Town Council and shall follow the same procedures
as authorized in Section 20-7-1 through Section 20-7-3. Changes of density,
land use, open space area, type of community facilities, type of housing,
method of management of common land and facilities and overall design
layout shall be considered to be changes of concept.
(b) In case of change of minor details, the director of planning may approve these
changes upon being presented with a written request along with necessary
graphical and statistical information. Changes of location and design structure,
streets, parking, community facilities, landscaping, open space and utilities
shall be considered changes of minor detail.
20-7-5. Fee. A fee of $150 shall be charged for processing a planned unit development
application. This fee shall be payable at the time of submittal of the application.
20-8-1. Management of common open space, properties and facilities:
(a) All common open space, properties and facilities shall be preserved for their
intended purposes as expressed in the approved plan. The developer shall
provide for the establishment of an association or nonprofit corporation of all
individuals or corporations owning property within the planned unit
development to ensure the maintenance of all common open space, properties
and facilities.
(b) All privately owned common open space shall continue to conform to its
intended use and remain as expressed in the site plan through the inclusion in
all deeds of appropriate restrictions to ensure that the common open space is
permanently preserved according to the site plan. The deed restrictions shall
run with the land and shall be for the benefit of present as well as future
property owners, and shall contain a prohibition against partition.
(c) All common open space as well as public and recreational facilities shall be
specifically included in the development schedule and shall be constructed and
fully improved by the developer at a proportionately equivalent or greater rate
than the construction of residential structures.
(d) The nonprofit corporation or association established to own and maintain
common open space properties and facilities shall conform to the following
requirements and the developer shall obtain the approval of the Town Attorney
as to acceptability of incorporation documents:
(1) The developer must establish the association or nonprofit corporation
prior to the final approval, recording and sale of any lot.
(2) Membership in the association or nonprofit corporation shall be
mandatory for all residents within the planned unit development and the
association or corporation shall not discriminate in its members or
shareholders.
§ 20-7 ABINGDON CODE § 20-8
B:134
(3) The association or nonprofit corporation documents shall set forth the
purposes of the permanent organization under which common ownership
is established including its purposes; how it shall be governed and
administered; the provisions made for permanent care and maintenance
of the common property, including necessary bonds when required by the
Town; and the method of assessing the individual property for its share
of the cost of administering and maintaining such common property.
(4) The incorporation document shall set forth the extent of common interest
held by the owner of each individual parcel in the tract held in common
with others.
20-8-2. Ownership of development. All property in a planned unit development shall
remain under primary control and ownership of a developer or group of developers
and shall not be leased or sold unless or until provision is made which ensures the
participation by the properties leased or sold in the retention and maintenance of
common open space and community facilities in accordance with Section 20-4-1.
Certificate of compliance indicating that such arrangements have been made shall
be issued by the director of planning prior to the sale or lease of the property by the
developer.
20-8-3. Termination of a planned unit development. If the present or future owner of a
planned unit development designated area does not follow the approved site plan,
the remaining undeveloped property shall automatically revert to the original
zoning.
§ 20-8 ZONING ORDINANCE § 20-8
B:135

ARTICLE 21
Signs
§ 21-1. Purpose and intent. [Ord. No. 2020.09.08.A24
, 9-8-2020]
§ 21-2. Administration. [Ord. No. 2020.09.08.A, 9-8-2020]
(a) These sign regulations are intended to define, permit, and control the size, material,
location, and condition of signs in a manner that as its first priority protects those
who travel in and through the Town. Town Council has adopted these regulations
in order to achieve the following community goals and objectives:
(1) Protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(2) Equitably distribute the privilege of using the public environs to communicate
private information.
(3) Safeguard the public use and nature of the streets and sidewalks.
(4) Protect and enhance the visual environment of the Town.
(5) Discourage the diminishing of property values in the Town.
(6) Minimize visual distractions to motorists using the public streets.
(7) Promote the economic growth of the Town by creating a community image
that is conducive to attracting new business and industrial development.
(8) Permit reasonable effectiveness of signs and to prevent their overconcentration, improper placement and excessive height, bulk, density, and
area.
(9) Promote the safety of persons and property by requiring that signs not create a
hazard due to collapse, fire, decay, or abandonment.
(10) Ensure that signs do not obstruct fire-fighting efforts or create traffic hazards
by confusing or distracting motorists or by impairing drivers' ability to see
pedestrians, obstacles, other vehicles, or traffic signs.
(11) Promote commerce and trade, with recognition of the effects of signage on the
character of the community.
(b) The Town Council finds that the regulations in this article advance the significant
government interests identified herein and are the minimum amount of regulation
necessary to achieve those interests.
21-2-1. Interpretation, conflict, and severability.
(a) The regulations set forth in this article shall apply to all new signs, replacement
signs, and their modification(s) established after the effective date of the
ordinance.
24. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Art. 21, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from
Ord. of 6-4-2007; Ord. of 9-4-07.
§ 21-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 21-2
B:137
(b) Signs not expressly permitted are prohibited.
(c) Signs containing noncommercial speech are permitted anywhere that
advertising or business signs are permitted, subject to the same regulations of
such signs.
(d) This article shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the First
Amendment guarantee of free speech.
(e) Where this article differs in any manner from the provisions of the Virginia
Uniform Statewide Building Code, the Town Code, or any other ordinance or
regulation of the Town, the ordinance, code, or regulation imposing the
greatest restriction upon the use of any sign shall control.
(f) Should any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
ordinance, for any reason, be held unconstitutional or invalid, such decision or
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. It being
the intent of the Town of Abingdon to enact each section and portion thereof,
individually, and each such section shall stand alone, if necessary, and be in
force regardless of the determined invalidity of any other section or provision.
21-2-2. Application and permit.
(a) Sign permit required.
(1) No sign shall be erected, installed, altered, modified, refaced, re-hung, or
replaced, without obtaining a permit pursuant to this article, except as
otherwise provided in this article.
(2) Signs within the Town's old and historic district shall conform to the
requirements of such district and require a certificate of appropriateness
issued by the board of architectural review.
(3) For signs within the Town's entrance corridor, such permit shall conform
to the requirements of such district and require a permit issued by the
zoning administrator and/or Town Manager.
(4) No permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator except upon a
determination that a proposed sign is in conformity with the requirements
of this article and, where applicable, in conformity with the requirements
of an approved site plan for the property upon which the sign is to be
placed. Appeals from decisions of the administrator shall be taken to the
Town's Board of Zoning Appeals.
(5) More than one sign on one building or group of buildings located on the
same parcel of land may be included on one application provided that all
such signs are applied for at one time.
(6) After the issuance of an approved sign permit, the applicant may install
and display the approved sign(s). Once installed, the administrator may
inspect the sign(s) for conformance with the approved sign permit and
this ordinance.
§ 21-2 ABINGDON CODE § 21-2
B:138
(b) An application for such a permit shall:
(1) Specify the type of sign to be constructed and the zoning district in which
this sign is to be located.
(2) Be accompanied with plans including a sketch of the property indicating
the lot frontage.
(3) Indicate the square footage and location of all existing signs on the
property.
(4) The area, size, structure, design, location, lighting, and materials for the
sign.
(5) Contain written consent of the owner or lessee of the land or building
upon which the sign is to be erected.
(c) Fee required.
(1) Applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the administrator, and
shall be accompanied by the required fee, as set forth within the
uncodified fee schedule adopted by Town Council.
(d) Duration and revocation of permit.
(1) Any sign permit shall be null and void if any sign for which the permit
was issued is not installed in accordance with the permit within six
months of the date of approval.
(2) A sign permit shall become null and void if the use to which it pertains is
not commenced within six months after the date the sign permit is issued.
Upon written request and for good cause shown, the zoning administrator
may grant one six-month extension.
(3) Whenever the use of a building or land is discontinued by the specific
business, the sign permit shall expire and all signs pertaining to that
business shall be removed by the property owner within 30 calendar days
of the discontinuance.
(4) The zoning administrator shall revoke a sign permit if the sign does not
comply with applicable regulations of this article, building code, or other
applicable law, regulation, or ordinance.
21-2-3. Special exceptions.
(a) Comprehensive sign plan.
(1) Special exceptions to this article may be granted in B, M, and PTD
districts as a comprehensive sign plan approved by special use permit.
Special exceptions to the maximum height requirements in this article
shall not be permitted.
(2) The comprehensive sign plan is intended to promote consistency among
signs within a development and enhance the compatibility of signs with
§ 21-2 ZONING ORDINANCE § 21-2
B:139
§ 21-3. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2020.09.08.A, 9-8-2020]
the architectural and site design features within a development.
(b) Contents of plan.
(1) A comprehensive sign plan, which may be a written document or
drawings adequate to depict the proposed signs, shall include:
a. The proposed general locations for freestanding signs on a lot as
well as the proposed location(s) for building signs on a building
facade.
b. Types of signs proposed.
c. A listing of materials proposed for all sign structures and sign
surfaces.
d. The maximum number and maximum size of proposed signs.
e. The type of illumination, if any, proposed for all signs, including
whether internally illuminated or external illuminated and
describing the type of light fixture proposed.
f. A description of any ornamental structure upon which a sign face is
proposed to be placed.
(c) Amendment of plan.
(1) A comprehensive sign plan may be amended by submitting a revised
comprehensive sign plan for consideration and determination through the
special use permit process. Upon approval, the amended plan shall have
the same force and effect as an approved comprehensive sign plan.
21-3-1. Signs not requiring permit.
(a) The following signs are allowed and do not require a permit:
(1) Signs erected by a governmental body or required by law, including
official traffic signs or sign structures and provisional warning signs or
sign structures, and temporary signs indicating danger.
(2) The changing of message content, including message content on a
changeable message sign if permitted in the district.
(3) The following small signs:
a. Portable signs subject to the dimension requirements in this article
and provided they in no way obstruct vehicular travel, public
parking and/or pedestrian movement along sidewalks and are
removed when the establishment is closed for business.
b. Two minor signs per street frontage, each minor sign not to exceed
three square feet in area.
§ 21-2 ABINGDON CODE § 21-3
B:140
§ 21-4. Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2020.09.08.A, 9-8-2020]
c. Temporary signs not exceeding three square feet in area and erected
for not more than 30 consecutive days.
d. Memorial plaques and building cornerstones not exceeding six
square feet in area and cut or carved into a masonry surface or other
noncombustible material and made an integral part of the building
or structure.
e. Pennants and streamers that are displayed no more than 14
consecutive days, not exceeding an aggregate 32 square feet of area,
and constructed and secured to prevent fly away.
(4) On a property under construction or renovation, for sale, or for rent,
temporary signs not exceeding four square feet for single-family detached
properties or 18 square feet for all other residential, nonresidential, or
mixed-use properties.
(5) Flag signs up to 16 square feet in size or up to 50 square feet in nonresidential districts, and up to three per parcel, provided that the minimum
setback for a flag pole is the longest dimension of the pole, in order to
prevent the flag or pole falling into the property of another or into a public
street, trail, or sidewalk.
(6) Window signs.
(7) Signs displayed on an operable truck, bus, or other vehicle while in use in
the normal conduct of business. This section shall not be interpreted to
permit the parking for display purposes a vehicle to which a sign is
attached or the use of such a vehicle as a portable sign.
(8) Noncommercial signs on private property, subject to dimension
requirements in this article.
(9) Signs affixed to the interior of a permanent fence of a recreational or
sports facility. Such signs shall be displayed only during the regular
season of the individual sport.
21-4-1. Prohibited signs.
(a) Any sign affixed to, hung, placed, or painted on any other sign, fence, cliff,
rock, tree, natural feature, public utility pole or structure supporting wire,
cable, or pipe, or radio, television, or similar tower provided that this
prohibition shall not affect official traffic, parking, or informational signs
placed on utility poles by the Town government.
(b) Any sign or banner within or across a public right-of-way, unless specifically
approved by the Town Manager, or his designee.
(c) Any sign that, due to its size, illumination, location, or height, obstructs the
vision of motorists or pedestrians at any intersection, or similarly obstructs the
vision of motorists entering a public right-of-way from private property.
§ 21-3 ZONING ORDINANCE § 21-4
B:141
§ 21-5. General. [Ord. No. 2020.09.08.A, 9-8-2020]
(d) Signs simulating, or which are likely to be confused with, a traffic control sign
or any other sign displayed by a public authority. Any such sign is subject to
immediate removal and disposal by an authorized Town official as a nuisance.
(e) Signs which obstructs any window or door opening used as a means of egress,
prevents free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof, or
interferes with an opening required for ventilation.
(f) Signs attached, painted, or mounted to unlicensed, inoperative, or generally
stationary vehicles. Vehicles and trailers shall not be used primarily as static
displays, advertising a business, product or service, nor utilized as storage,
shelter, or distribution points for commercial products or services for the
general public.
(g) Signs on the roof surface or extending above the roofline of a structure,
building, or parapet wall.
(h) Off-site signs, unless specifically permitted by this chapter.
(i) Any flashing sign, except those officially erected for safety purposes.
(j) Signs that emit sound, smoke, flame, scent, mist, aerosol, liquid, or gas.
(k) Signs that violate any provision of any federal or state law relative to outdoor
advertising.
(l) Any sign representing or depicting specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas or sexually oriented goods. Any sign containing obscene text
or pictures as defined by the Virginia Code.
21-5-1. Standards.
(a) Any sign displayed in the Town of Abingdon, shall comply with:
(1) All provisions of this article;
(2) All applicable provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and all
amendments thereto; and,
(3) All state and federal regulations pertaining to the display of signage.
21-5-2. Sign area calculations.
(a) The following method shall be utilized in the calculations of sign area:
(1) The sign area permitted under this article is determined by measuring the
entire face of the sign including any wall work incidental to its decoration
but excluding support elements for the sole purpose of supporting the
sign.
(2) For signs that are regular polygons or circles, the area shall be calculated
by the mathematical formula for that polygon or circle. For signs that are
not regular polygons or circles, the sign area shall be calculated using the
§ 21-4 ABINGDON CODE § 21-5
B:142
area within up to three rectangles that enclose the sign face.
(3) The surface area of any sign made up only of individual letters or figures
shall include the space between such letters or figures.
(4) Whenever one sign contains information on both sides, sign area shall be
calculated based on the largest sign face. Sides are not totaled.
21-5-3. Minimum setback. The minimum setback from any right-of-way, unless
otherwise specified, is half the height of the sign.
21-5-4. Illumination.
(a) All permitted signs may be indirectly lighted. Non-residential signs within a
residential district may be illuminated as outlined in Section 21-6. Signs within
a business or industrial district may be internally lighted, unless such lighting
is specifically prohibited in this article.
(b) No sign shall be illuminated in such a way that light may shine into on-coming
traffic, affect highway safety, or shine directly into a residential dwelling unit
zoned.
(c) Any electrical sign shall display the required UL, ETL, CSA, or ULC label.
(d) Illumination shall be no greater than 10,000 nits or foot candles from sunrise
to sunset or 700 nits or foot candles from sunset to sunrise and be equipped
with automatic brightness control which can dim the display brightness when
ambient conditions exist.
(e) Electronic service lines shall be underground.
21-5-5. Changeable signs.
(a) Within any B or M district, one freestanding or wall-mounted sign per lot may
be replaced with a changeable message sign subject to the following
requirements:
(1) Location, area, height, and illumination requirements shall be the same as
for freestanding or wall signs.
(2) The message shall not be changed more than once every 12 seconds,
move, flash, or display animation, as prohibited in this article.
(3) Any changeable message sign that malfunctions, fails, or ceases to
operate in its usual or normal programmed manner, thereby causing
motion, movement, flashing or any other similar effects, shall be repaired,
covered, or disconnected by the owner or operator of such sign within 24
hours of notice of violation.
21-5-6. Projecting signs.
(a) Signs projecting over public walkways shall be a minimum height of eight feet
from grade level to the bottom of the sign.
(b) Projecting signs shall not extend more than six feet beyond the face of the
§ 21-5 ZONING ORDINANCE § 21-5
B:143
§ 21-6. Districts. [Ord. No. 2020.09.08.A, 9-8-2020]
building or beyond a vertical plane two feet inside the curbline.
(c) Signs, architectural projections, or sign structures projecting over vehicular
access areas must conform to the minimum height clearance limitations
imposed by the Town for such areas.
21-5-7. Temporary signs.
(a) Each temporary sign shall be maintained in good, safe condition, securely
affixed to a building or the ground.
(b) Any temporary sign pertaining to an event must be removed within 10 days
after the event.
(c) A temporary sign shall not be illuminated.
21-6-1. District regulations.
(a) The following requirements shall apply in the designated district, as
appropriate, to permitted uses by right and special uses as may be permitted,
subject to all other requirements of this ordinance.
(b) Sign area square footage requirements are provided per sign unless specified
as a total. Total area is calculated as an aggregate of all signs of that type.
(1) AFOS Agricultural, Forested, and Open Space District.
Maximum Sign Dimensions: AFOS District
Sign Type Residential Uses Nonresidential Uses and Neighborhood Signs
Number Area Height Number Area Height
Freestanding 1 per street
frontage
12 square feet 6 feet 1 per street
frontage
25 square feet 15 feet
Wall 1 per street
frontage
12 square feet N/a 1 per street
frontage
25 square feet N/A
Minor Not limited 3 square feet N/A Not limited 3 square feet N/A
Portable Not permitted N/A N/A 1 per street
frontage
6 square feet 4 feet
Temporary Not limited 32 square feet
total
4 feet Not limited 32 square feet
total
4 feet
Internally
Illuminated
Not permitted N/A N/A Not permitted N/A N/A
(2) R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 Residential Districts.
§ 21-5 ABINGDON CODE § 21-6
B:144
Maximum Sign Dimensions: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 Residential Districts
Sign Type Residential Uses Non-Residential Uses and Neighborhood Signs
Number Area Height Number Area Height
Freestanding 1 per street 12 square feet 6 feet 1 per street
frontage, shall
be monument
only
16 square feet 6 feet
Wall 1 per street
frontage
12 square feet N/A 1 per street
frontage
16 square feet N/A
Minor Not limited 3 square feet N/A Not limited 3 square feet N/A
Portable Not permitted N/A N/A 1 per street
frontage
6 square feet 4 feet
Temporary Not limited 32 square feet
total
4 feet Not limited 32 square feet
total
4 feet
Internally
Illuminated
Not permitted N/A N/a Not permitted,
except for
Churches,
Residential Care
Facilities,
Apartment
Complexes, and
townhouses*
N/A N/A
(3) B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1, OI, and PTD Districts.
Maximum Sign Dimensions: B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1, OI, and PTD Districts
Sign Type Number Area Height
Freestanding 1 per street frontage 60 square feet, except 200 square
feet allowed within 660 feet of
I-81
15 feet, except 50 feet allowed
within 660 feet of I-81
Projecting 1 per business per street frontage 12 square feet See Section 21-5-7
Wall 1 per business per street frontage Front: 2 square feet for every 1 LF
of building face on which the sign
is located; Side and Rear: 1 square
feet for every 1 LF of building
face on which the sign is located
N/A
Canopy 1 per street frontage 0.5 square feet per LF of canopy
fascia on which the sign is
mounted
Sign shall not extend above or be
suspended below the horizontal
plane of the canopy fascia
Portable 1 per business 12 square feet 4 feet
Temporary Not limited 32 square feet total 4 feet
Minor Not limited 3 square feet 4 feet
§ 21-6 ZONING ORDINANCE § 21-6
B:145
§ 21-7. Nonconforming signs. [Ord. No. 2020.09.08.A, 9-8-2020]
§ 21-8. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2020.09.08.A, 9-8-2020]
(4) OH Old and Historic District.
a. Signs within the OH district shall be subject to the Town of
Abingdon Design Review Guidelines for the Old and Historic
District, as amended, and require a certificate of appropriateness by
the Board of Architectural Review board.
b. The board may approve the attachment or suspension of a sign from
an existing freestanding or projecting sign or, in the case of a
building on a site with more than one street frontage or more than
one principal entrance, one additional freestanding or projecting sign
per additional street frontage or principal entrance, if the board
determines that such an arrangement is in keeping with the
architectural character of the property.
21-7-1. Nonconforming signs.
(a) Any sign legally existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance that does
not conform in use, location, height, or size with the regulations of the zone in
which such sign is located, shall be considered legally nonconforming and
shall be permitted to continue in such status until such time as it is either
abandoned or removed by its owner, subject to the following limitations:
(1) A nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged nor shall any feature of a
nonconforming sign including, but not limited to, illumination, be
increased.
(2) A nonconforming sign shall not be moved for any distance on the same
lot or to any other lot unless such change in location will make the sign
meet all current requirements of this article.
(3) A nonconforming sign that is destroyed or damaged by any casualty to an
extent not exceeding 50% of its sign area may be restored within two
years after such destruction or damage but shall not be enlarged in any
manner. If such sign is destroyed or damaged to an extent exceeding 50%,
it shall not be reconstructed but may be replaced with a sign that meets
all current requirements of this article.
21-7-2. Exemption for certain existing signs. Notwithstanding any contrary provision in
this chapter, no nonconforming sign is required to be removed solely by the passage
of time if to do so require is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law.
21-8-1. Maintenance, repair, and removal.
(a) Every sign permitted by this ordinance shall be kept in good condition and
repair. When any sign becomes insecure, in danger of falling or is otherwise
deemed unsafe by the zoning administrator, or if any sign shall be unlawfully
installed, erected, or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this
§ 21-6 ABINGDON CODE § 21-8
B:146
§ 21-9. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2020.09.08.A, 9-8-2020]
ordinance, the owner thereof or the person or firm using same shall, upon
written notice by the zoning administrator forthwith in the case of immediate
danger, and in any case within not more than 10 days, make such sign conform
to the provisions of this ordinance, or shall remove it. If within 10 days the
order is not complied with, the zoning administrator shall be permitted to
remove or cause such sign to be removed at the expense of the owner and/or
the user of the sign.
(b) If a sign presents an imminent and immediate threat to life or property, then an
authorized Town official may abate, raze, or remove it, and the Town may
bring an action against the responsible party to recover the necessary costs
incurred for abating, razing, or removing the sign.
21-8-2. Removal of abandoned signs.
(a) A sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which
the sign is located when the business which it advertises is no longer
conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove such sign,
the Zoning Administrator shall give the owner 30 days' written notice to
remove it. Upon failure to comply with this notice, the Zoning Administrator
or his duly authorized representative may remove the sign at cost to the
property owner.
(a) The following words and terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter and as used
elsewhere in this ordinance, have the meanings shown herein.
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign structure that has ceased to be used, and the owner
intends no longer to have used, for the display of sign copy, or as otherwise defined
by state law.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion.
Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as defined and
regulated by this code, include the following types:
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs producing the illusion of
movement by means of electronic, electrical or electromechanical input and/
or illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the
characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below:
FLASHING — Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the period
of illumination is either the same as or less than the period of nonillumination. For the purposes of this ordinance, flashing will not be
defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off phases of
illumination exceeds four seconds.
a.
PATTERNED ILLUSIONARY MOVEMENT — Animated signs or
animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by
simulated movement through alternate or sequential activation of various
illuminated elements for the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns
designed to appear in some form of constant motion.
b.
(1)
§ 21-8 ZONING ORDINANCE § 21-9
B:147
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION — Any projection that is not intended for
occupancy and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building,
but that does not include signs as defined herein. See also "Awning," "Canopy
(attached)," and "Canopy (freestanding)."
AWNING — See "Canopy."
AWNING SIGN — See "Canopy Sign."
BANNER — A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be displayed.
BANNER SIGN — A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
BILLBOARD — An off-premises sign or sign structure with display space
available for lease and designed so that the copy or poster on the sign can be
changed frequently.
BUILDING ELEVATION — The entire side of a building, from ground level to
the roofline, as viewed perpendicular to the walls on that side of the building.
CANOPY (ATTACHED) — An architectural projection or shelter projecting from
and supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid
or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either
permanent or retractable.
CANOPY (FREESTANDING) — A freestanding structure composed of a covering
of rigid or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be
either permanent or retractable.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces of a canopy. Illuminated canopies, if translucent, are considered part of the
total canopy sign area.
CHANGEABLE SIGN — A sign that includes any changing of the message either
electronically or manually in which the message is stationary and does not fluctuate
in size or brightness.
COMBINATION SIGN — A sign that is supported by a pole and partly by a
building structure.
COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic elements
ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs or devices
motivated by wind, thermal changes or other natural environmental input.
Includes spinners, pinwheels, and/or other devices or displays that respond to
naturally occurring external motivation but excludes pennants and streamers.
(2)
MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs characterized by
repetitive motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered
by electric motors or other mechanically induced means.
(3)
§ 21-9 ABINGDON CODE § 21-9
B:148
comprising the content or message of a sign, excluding numerals identifying a street
address only.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with two faces, back to back.
EXTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed outside a building.
FASCIA SIGN — See "Wall Sign."
FLASHING SIGN — See "Animated sign, electrically activated."
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign principally supported by a structure affixed to
the ground, and not supported by a building, including signs supported by one or
more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground.
FRONTAGE, BUILDING — The length of an exterior building wall or structure
of a single premise orientated to the public way or other properties that it faces.
FRONTAGE, STREET — The length of the property line(s) of any single premise
along either a public way or other properties on which it borders.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign characterized by the use of artificial light,
either projecting through its surface(s) (internally illuminated); or reflecting off its
surface(s) (externally illuminated).
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed within a building, but not including "window
signs" as defined by this ordinance. Interior signs, with the exception of window
signs as defined, are not regulated by this chapter.
MANSARD — An inclined decorative roof-like projection that is attached to an
exterior building facade.
MARQUEE SIGN — See "Canopy Sign."
MINOR SIGN — A wall or freestanding sign not exceeding three square foot
in area, not exceeding four feet in height, and not illuminated. Examples include
not trespassing signs, displays of building address, security warning signs, parking
signs, entrance/exit signs, and on-site directional signs.
MONUMENT SIGN — A "Freestanding Sign" having the appearance of a solid,
rectangular or cylindrical base.
MULTIPLE-FACED SIGN — A sign containing three or more faces.
NEIGHBORHOOD SIGN — A sign located at the entrance to a residential
development.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign that was permitted under a previous
regulation that presently does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, activity, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered on a parcel of land
other than the one on which the sign is located.
ON-PREMISE SIGN — A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of messages appurtenant to the use of,
products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is displayed.
PARAPET — The extension of a building facade above the line of the structural
roof.
§ 21-9 ZONING ORDINANCE § 21-9
B:149
PENNANT — A sign made with flexible material, with or without lettering for
design, usually suspended from one or two corners, and manufactured and placed
for the purpose of attracting attention. Also referred to as a streamer.
POLE SIGN — See "Freestanding sign."
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to a
building or building surface. For example an A-frame sign.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to or projects
more than 15 inches from a building face or wall or from a structure whose primary
purpose is other than the support of a sign.
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign that revolves 360° about an axis. See also
"Animated sign, mechanically activated."
ROOF LINE — The top edge of a peaked roof, or in the case of an extended facade
or parapet, the uppermost point of said facade or parapet.
ROOF SIGN — A sign mounted on, and supported by, the main roof portion of a
building, or above the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and which
is wholly or partially supported by such a building. Signs mounted on mansard
facades, pent eaves and architectural projections such as canopies or marquees shall
not be considered to be roof signs.
SIGN — Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, visible from a
public place, a public right-of-way, any parking area or right-of-way open to use by
the general public, or any navigable body of water which is designed and used to
attract attention to an institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or
location by any means involving words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures,
logos, colors, illumination, or projected images.
SIGN AREA — The entire area enclosing the extreme limits of writing,
representation, pictorial elements, emblems, or a figure of similar character,
together with all material, color, or lighting forming an integral part of the display
or used to differentiate the Sign from the background against which it is placed.
SIGN COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, exclusive of numerals
identifying a street address only.
§ 21-9 ABINGDON CODE § 21-9
B:150
SIGN FACE — The particular area of the sign structure upon which a message,
copy, or advertisement is displayed for viewing.
SIGN MAINTENANCE — To prevent through preservation, repair, or restoration,
the development of any rust, corrosion, rot, chipping, peeling, or other deterioration
in either the physical appearance or the safety of every sign.
SIGN PLAN — A written document or drawing depicting proposed sign(s)
placement, design, and quantity for the purpose of determining consistency and
compatibility with the Town.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure supporting a sign.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign designed or intended, based on materials and
structural components, to be displayed for a specified or limited period of time,
regardless of type or style of sign. Examples include real estate signs, yard sale
signs, contractor's signs, and special or one-time event signs per year.
WALL SIGN — A sign that is in any manner affixed to any exterior wall of a
building or structure and that projects not more than 15 inches from the building or
structure wall, including signs affixed to architectural projections from a building
provided the copy area of such signs remains on a parallel plane to the face of the
building facade or to the face or faces of the architectural projection to which it is
affixed.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message
intended to be visible to and readable from the public way or from adjacent
property.
§ 21-9 ZONING ORDINANCE § 21-9
B:151

ARTICLE 22
Provisions for Appeal
§ 22-1. Board of Zoning Appeals.
§ 22-2. Powers of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
22-1-1. A board consisting of five members shall be appointed by the Town Council.
22-1-2. The term of office shall be for three years except that original appointments shall
be made for such terms that the term of one member shall expire each year.
Appointments for vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall in
all cases be for the unexpired term.
22-1-3. One of the five appointed members shall be an active member of the Planning
Commission.
22-1-4. Members may be removed for cause by Town Council upon written charges and
after a public hearing.
22-1-5. Any member of the board shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the
board with respect to property in which the member has an interest.
22-1-6. The board shall choose annually its own chairman and vice-chairman who shall
act in the absence of the chairman.
22-1-7. The board shall receive such compensation and traveling expenses as the Town
Council may establish.
22-2-1. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or
enforcement of this ordinance.
22-2-2. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the
ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, when, owing to special
conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in unnecessary
hardship provided that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial
justice done, as follows:
(a) When a property owner can show that his property was acquired in good faith
and where by reason of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, size or shape
of a specific piece of property at the time of the effective date of the ordinance,
or where by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other
extraordinary situation or condition of such piece of property, or of the
condition, situation, or development of property immediately adjacent thereto,
the strict application of the terms of the ordinance would effectively prohibit
or unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property or where the board is
satisfied, upon the evidence heard by it, that the granting of such variance will
alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship approaching confiscation, as
distinguished from a special privilege or convenience sought by the applicant,
provided that all variances shall be in harmony with the intended spirit and
§ 22-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 22-2
B:153
§ 22-3. Rules and regulations.
§ 22-4. Appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
An appeal to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer,
purpose of the ordinance.
(b) No such variance shall be authorized by the board unless it finds:
(1) That the strict application of the ordinance would produce undue
hardship.
(2) That such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same
zoning district and the same vicinity.
(3) That the authorization of such variance will not be of substantial
detriment to adjacent property and that the character of the district will
not be changed by the granting of the variance.
(c) No such variance shall be authorized except after notice and hearing as
required by Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431, as amended.
(d) No variance shall be authorized unless the board finds that the condition or
situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the property is not
of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the
formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the
ordinance.
(e) In authorizing a variance, the board may impose such conditions regarding the
location, character and other features of the proposed structure for use as it
may deem necessary in the public interest, and may require a guarantee or
bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be
complied with.
22-3-1. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may
consider necessary.
22-3-2. The meeting of the board shall be held at the call of its chairman or at such times
as a quorum of the board may determine.
22-3-3. The board shall keep minutes of proceedings showing the vote of each member
upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. It shall keep
records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.
22-3-4. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public.
22-3-5. A quorum shall be at least three members.
22-3-6. A favorable vote of three members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the board is required to
pass.
§ 22-2 ABINGDON CODE § 22-4
B:154
department, board or bureau of the county or municipality affected by any decision of
the zoning administrator or from any order, requirement, decision or determination made
by any other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this article
or any ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. Notwithstanding any charter provision to
the contrary, any written notice of a zoning violation or a written order of the zoning
administrator dated on or after July 1, 1993, shall include a statement informing the
recipient that he may have a right to appeal the notice of a zoning violation or a written
order within 30 days in accordance with this section, and that the decision shall be final
and unappealable if not appealed within 30 days. The appeal period shall not commence
until such statement is given. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the decision
appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator, and with the board, a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit
to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board that by reason of facts stated
in the certificate a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property,
in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
granted by the board or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the zoning
administrator and for good cause shown.
§ 22-5. Appeal procedure.
§ 22-6. Procedure on appeal.
The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application or appeal, give
public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same
within 90 days of the filing of the application or appeal. In exercising its powers the
board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, an order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from. The concurring vote of a majority of the
membership of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of an administrative officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under the ordinance or to effect any variance
from the ordinance. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and other official
actions which shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be public records. The
chairman of the board, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses.
§ 22-7. Certiorari to review decision of Board.
22-5-1. Appeals shall be mailed to the Board of Zoning Appeals, c/o the administrator
and a copy of the appeal mailed to the secretary of the Planning Commission. A
third copy shall be mailed to the individual, official, department or agency
concerned, if any.
22-5-2. All appeals requiring an advertised public hearing shall be accompanied by a
certified check for an amount authorized by the Town Council from time to time
payable to the treasurer. If a special hearing is requested, a certified check for an
amount authorized by the Town Council from time to time shall also accompany
said appeal.
§ 22-4 ZONING ORDINANCE § 22-7
B:155
22-7-1. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the
Board of Zoning Appeals, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or
bureau of the county or municipality, may present to the circuit court of the county
or city a petition specifying the grounds on which aggrieved within 30 days after
the filing of the decision in the office of the board.
22-7-2. Upon the presentation of such petition, the court shall allow a writ of certiorari
to review the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall prescribe therein
the time within which a return thereto must be made and served upon the relator's
attorney, which shall not be less than 10 days and may be extended by the court.
The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed
from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the board and on due cause
shown, grant a restraining order.
22-7-3. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not be required to return the original papers
acted upon by it but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof
or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall
concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the
grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified.
22-7-4. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for
the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a commissioner
to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with his
findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the
proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court
may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for
review.
§ 22-7 ABINGDON CODE § 22-7
B:156
ARTICLE 23
Airport Safety Overlay Zone
§ 23-1. Statement of intent. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
The Virginia Highlands Airport Safety Overlay Zone is adopted pursuant to Code
of Virginia, ch. 11, § 15.1-491.02, as amended. The zone consists of the airspace
over and around the Virginia Highlands Airport. The zone is designed to identify
and regulate obstructions within that airspace. In order to accomplish the necessary
controls for this area, the boundaries of this overlay district shall be concurrent with
those of those specific geometric standards as referred to in the definition of the term
"regulations" in this ordinance. The intent of the Virginia Highlands Airport Safety
Overlay Zone is to prevent any obstruction that has the potential for endangering the
lives and property of the users of the Virginia Highlands Airport and the residents of the
Town of Abingdon, Virginia, reduce the size of areas available for landing, take off and
maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the airport and the
public investment therein. It is declared that in the interest of the public health, safety,
and general welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions that are hazards
to air navigation be prevented, that the creation or establishment of an obstruction
has the potential for being a public nuisance and may injure the area served by the
Virginia Highlands Airport, that the Town of Abingdon, Virginia area derives economic
development and enhanced interstate commerce from Virginia Highlands Airport, when
such airport and its surrounding vicinity is held strictly to the highest possible safety
standards; and that the prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the
fullest extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation.
§ 23-2. Additional definitions. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
AIRPORT — Virginia Highlands Airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point on any usable landing surface expressed
in feet above mean sea level.
AIRPORT ZONE — A zone that is centered about the runway and primary surface, with
the floor set by the horizontal surface.
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface, whose design standards are set by the
regulations, longitudinally centered on a runway centerline, extending outward and
upward from the end of the primary surface, and at the same slope as the approach
zone height limitation slope. The perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the
perimeter of the approach zone.
APPROACH ZONE — A zone that extends away from the end of the primary surface
with the floor set by the approach surface for a distance set by the regulations.
CONICAL SURFACE — A surface, whose design standards are set by the regulations,
extending and sloping horizontally and vertically from the periphery of the horizontal
surface, like a cone, currently set by the Code of Federal Regulations at a slope of 20 to 1
for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet to a height of 500 feet above the airport elevation.
CONICAL ZONE — A zone that circles around the periphery of and outward from the
§ 23-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 23-2
B:157
horizontal surface, with the floor set by the conical surface.
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION — An obstruction determined by the Virginia
Department of Aviation or the Federal Aviation Administration to have a substantial
adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of navigable airspace in the
commonwealth.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones of this article
and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level (M.S.L.) elevation
unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane, whose design standards are set by
the regulations, above the established airport elevation, currently established at 150 feet
above the airport elevation, and the perimeter of which is established by swinging arcs
of specified radii from the center of each primary surface of each runway of the airport
and connecting the arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure or object of natural growth
which is inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance or any amendment to this
ordinance.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object,
which exceeds a limiting height, or penetrates any surface or zone floor, as set forth in
this article.
PERMIT — A document issued by the Town of Abingdon, Virginia allowing a person to
begin an activity which may result in any structures or vegetation exceeding the height
limitations provided for in this article.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint
stock association, or governmental entity. The term includes a trustee, a receiver, an
assignee, or a similar representative of any of them.
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface, whose design standards are set by the regulations,
longitudinally centered on a runway, which primary surface currently extends 200 feet
beyond the hard surface of each end of the airport runway. The width of the primary
surface is prescribed as set forth in the regulations. The elevation of any point on the
primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
REGULATIONS — Part 77.25 et seq., Subchapter E (Airspace) of Title 14 of the Code
of Federal Regulations and/or its successor federal regulations, as they may be amended
or substituted from time to time.
RUNWAY — A specified area on the airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft.
STRUCTURE — Any object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by
any person, including but not limited to buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth
formations, towers, poles, and electric lines of overhead transmission routes, flag poles,
and ship masts.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES — Surfaces, whose design standards are set by the
regulations, which extend outward perpendicular to the runway centerline sloping from
the sides of the primary surfaces and approach surfaces to where they intersect the
horizontal surfaces and conical surfaces.
TRANSITIONAL ZONE — A zone that fans away perpendicular to the runway
§ 23-2 ABINGDON CODE § 23-2
B:158
centerline and approach surfaces, with the floor set by the transitional surfaces.
VEGETATION — Any object of natural growth.
ZONE — All areas generally described in three dimensions by reference to ground
elevation, vertical distances from the ground elevation, horizontal distances from the
runway centerline and the primary and horizontal surfaces, with the zone floor set at
specific vertical limits by the surfaces found in the regulations.
§ 23-3. Establishment of airport safety zones. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
There are hereby established the airport zone, approach zone, transitional zone, and
conical zone as defined in this article including all of the area and airspace of the
Town of Abingdon, Virginia lying equal to and above the approach surfaces, transitional
surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to the Virginia
Highlands Airport and as the areas within those zones are defined from time to time
by the regulations. These zones are established as overlay zones, superimposed over
the existing land surface zones, a map of which shall be maintained by the Town
of Abingdon, VA. These zones are zones of airspace that do not affect the uses and
activities of the land surface zones, except as provided for in Section 23-5, use
restrictions, and Section 23-6, restrictions adjacent to airports. An area located in more
than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone having the most
restrictive height limitation.
§ 23-4. Zone height limitations. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
Except as otherwise provided in this article, in any zone created by this ordinance no
structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no vegetation shall be allowed to
grow to a height so as to penetrate any referenced surface, also known as the floor, of
any zone provided for in this article at any point. The height restrictions, or floors, for
the individual zones shall be those planes delineated as surfaces in Part 77.25 et seq.,
Subchapter E (Airspace), of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
§ 23-5. Use restrictions. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, and within the area below the
horizontal limits of any zone established by this ordinance, no use may be made of land
or water in such a manner as to:
(a) Create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication
between the airport and aircraft;
(b) Diminish the ability of pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lights;
(c) Result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport;
(d) Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport;
(e) Create the potential for bird strike hazards; or
(f) Otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or
maneuvering of aircraft in the vicinity of and intending to use the airport.
§ 23-2 ZONING ORDINANCE § 23-6
B:159
§ 23-6. Restrictions adjacent to airports. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
Places of public assembly, such as schools, churches, hospitals, apartment houses,
theaters and assembly halls, shall not be erected or otherwise located in any area which
would be classified as an approach zone.
§ 23-7. Uses made nonconforming by the addition of this article. [Mins. of
1-5-1998]
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the regulations prescribed by this article
shall not require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure
or vegetation not conforming to the provisions of this article, or otherwise interfere
with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained in this article shall
require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the
construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this article,
and is diligently prosecuted, except as required by the prior ordinances of the Code of
the Town of Abingdon, Virginia.
§ 23-8. Permits and variances. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
(a) This article shall not require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of
any structure or vegetation not conforming to this article as of the effective date of
the change of the requirements of the regulations, whether due to a change in the
enacted regulation or due to a change in the requirements for the airport.
(b) Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, the owner of any pre-existing
nonconforming structure or vegetation is hereby required to permit the installation,
operation, and maintenance thereon of whatever markers and lights deemed
necessary by the Federal Aviation Administration, the Virginia Department of
Aviation, or the administrator to indicate to operators of aircraft the presence of that
airport obstruction. These markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and
maintained at the expense of the airport owners, and not the owner of the
nonconforming structure or vegetation in question.
(c) Nothing herein shall prevent the condemnation of property not in conformity with
the provisions of this article by the appropriate governmental authority.
(d) Whenever a nonconforming structure, vegetation, or activity has been changed to a
more limited nonconforming existing use, such existing use may only be changed
to an even more limited use. Whenever a nonconforming structure, vegetation, or
activity is more than 50% destroyed or damaged by an Act of God or other casualty,
or has physically deteriorated or decayed, or has been abandoned, only a
conforming use may be rebuilt.
(a) Except as provided in this article, no structure or vegetation shall be erected or
otherwise established in any zone created by this article unless a permit therefor
shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate
the purpose for which desired with and sufficient geometric specificity and height
specificity, including references to mean sea level if necessary, to determine
whether the resulting structure or vegetation would conform to the regulations
prescribed in this article. No permit for a structure or vegetation inconsistent with
§ 23-6 ABINGDON CODE § 23-8
B:160
this article shall be granted unless a variance has been approved as provided in this
article.
(b) No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an
obstruction or permit a nonconforming use or structure or vegetation to become a
greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this ordinance or
any amendments thereto other than with relief as provided for in this article. All
nonconforming uses shall obtain a zoning permit and a certificate of occupancy
within 60 days from the effective date of this ordinance. Such permits shall be
issued promptly upon the written request of the owner or operator of a
nonconforming use.
(c) Whenever the administrator determines that a nonconforming structure has been
abandoned or more than 50% destroyed, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no
permit shall be granted that would enable such structure or vegetation to be rebuilt,
reconstructed, restored, or otherwise refurbished so as to exceed the applicable
height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations contained in this
article, except with the relief as provided for in this article.
(d) Any person desiring to erect or increase the height or size of any structure or
vegetation not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article may
apply for a variance from these regulations in accordance with Article 22 of the
Zoning Ordinance [this appendix] of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia.
(1) The application for a variance shall be accompanied by an appropriate
application form provided by the Virginia Highlands Airport Commission,
which form may be obtained from the administrator.
(2) The application to the Virginia Highlands Airport Commission shall be
deemed approved if no response is received by the administrator from the
Virginia Highlands Airport Commission within 21 days after the completed
form is received by the Virginia Highlands Airport Commission.
(3) Any such application for a variance shall be accompanied by:
a. Evidence of the submission of the necessary notice of proposed
construction or alteration to the Federal Aviation Administration together
with its action.
b. A determination from the Virginia Department of Aviation as to the effect
of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe,
efficient use of navigable airspace.
(4) Such variances shall only be allowed where it is duly found that a literal
application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary
hardship and relief granted will not be contrary to the public interest, will not
create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in
accordance with the spirit of this article. Once the foregoing are met, an
application may then be acted upon as allowed under Article 22 of this
ordinance.
(e) Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to
§ 23-8 ZONING ORDINANCE § 23-8
B:161
§ 23-9. Enforcement. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
The administrator shall administer and enforce the regulations prescribed in this article.
He or she shall be vested with the police power incumbent to carry out and effectuate this
article, including the action of injunction, prosecution and other available means through
the circuit court of Washington County, Virginia.
§ 23-10. Conflicting regulations. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in
this article and any other regulations applicable to the same subject, where the conflict
is with respect to the height of structures or vegetation and the use of land, or any other
matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern.
effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be
so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or vegetation in question
to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights
as may be deemed necessary by the Federal Aviation Administration, the Virginia
Department of Aviation, and/or the administrator. If deemed proper through the
failure of the owner of the structure or vegetation or with other reasonable cause
by the Board of Zoning Appeals of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia, this condition
may be modified to require the owner of the structure in question to permit Virginia
Highlands Airport Commission to install, operate, and maintain the necessary
markings and lights.
(f) Applications for permits and variances shall be made on forms available from the
administrator, with such forms allowing for enough specific detail such that proper
analysis can be given the request.
§ 23-8 ABINGDON CODE § 23-10
B:162
ARTICLE 24
Violation and Penalty
§ 24-1. Compliance. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
All departments, officials and public employees of this jurisdiction which are vested with
the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this
ordinance. They shall issue permits for uses, buildings or purposes only when they are
in harmony with the provisions of this ordinance. Any such permit, if issued in conflict
with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be null and void.
§ 24-2. Penalties. [Mins. of 1-5-1998; Ord. of 8-2-2010, eff. 9-2-2010]
(a) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
Class 1 misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to punishment by a fine
of not more than $2,500 per violation per day and confinement in jail for not more
than 12 months, either or both.
(b) Each day during which a violation of this article occurs or continues shall be
deemed a separate and distinct violation of this ordinance.
(c) Any person who commits any of the acts prohibited by this article or violates any
of the provisions of this ordinance shall be liable to the Town for any/all costs of
testing, containment, cleanup, abatement, removal, disposal and any other related
costs or expenses that the Town may incur in connection with the enforcement of
this article, the prohibition or correction of a violation of this article, or the
abatement of any violation hereunder.
(d) In addition to the penalties set forth above, all other actions are hereby reserved,
including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this ordinance, the
imposition of a civil fine or penalty for any violation or noncompliance or
permitting it to continue as provided for by the Code of Virginia (1950),
§ 10.1-603.14, as amended, which are incorporated herein by reference and
authorizes civil penalties and injunctions to address violations, hereunder; and all
such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance with this ordinance may be
declared by the Town Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
(e) Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certifications in any record, report, or other document, either filed or requested
pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required or used by the director under
this article in monitoring discharges, shall be guilty or liable of this article.
§ 24-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 24-2
B:163

ARTICLE 25
Amendments, Administration and Interpretation
§ 25-1. Amendments generally. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
The regulations, restrictions and boundaries established in this ordinance may, from
time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by a favorable
majority of votes of the Town Council provided:
§ 25-2. Administrator. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
This ordinance shall be enforced by the administrator who shall be appointed by the
Town Council. The administrator shall serve at the pleasure of Town Council.
Compensation for such shall be fixed by resolution of the Town Council.
§ 25-3. Existing permits. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the plans or construction of any
building or structure for which a permit was granted prior to the effective date of
this ordinance. However, such construction must commence within 30 days after this
ordinance becomes effective. If construction is discontinued for a period of six months
or more, further construction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance
for the district in which the operation is located.
§ 25-4. Interpretation. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
Unless district boundaries are fixed by dimensions or otherwise clearly shown or
described, and where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
25-1-1. That a public hearing shall be held in relation thereto at which parties in interest
and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
25-1-2. Notice shall be given in compliance with the Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431, as
amended.
25-1-3. Changes shall be made by Town Council in the zoning ordinance or the zoning
map only after such changes have been referred to the Planning Commission for a
report. Action shall be taken by Town Council only after a report has been received
from the Planning Commission, unless a period of 30 days has elapsed after the date
of referral to the commission, after which time it may be assumed the commission
has approved the change or amendment.
25-1-4. Amendments to either the ordinance, map or both will not be reconsidered in
substantially the same form for a period of 12 months after once having been
disapproved.
25-1-5. Fees charged for ordinance amendments shall be as authorized by the Town
Council from time to time.
25-1-6. Fees charged for map amendments (rezoning) shall be as authorized by the Town
Council from time to time.
§ 25-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 25-4
B:165
§ 25-5. Effective date generally. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
The effective date of this ordinance shall be from and after its passage and legal
application, and its provisions shall be in force thereafter until repealed.
§ 25-6. Severability. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be decided by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as
a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so held to be unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 25-7. Conflicting ordinances. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
All conflicting ordinances or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of
this ordinance are hereby repealed.
§ 25-8. Effective date stated. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
This zoning ordinance of Abingdon, Virginia shall be effective at and after 12:01 a.m.,
July 8, 1993.
This amendment to Article 17, deleting Section 17-11, and the amendments to articles 23
through 25 of the zoning ordinance of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia shall be effective
at and after 12:01 a.m., February 5, 1998.
§ 25-9. Filing of certified copy. [Mins. of 1-5-1998]
A certified copy of the foregoing ordinance of Abingdon, Virginia shall be filed in the
office of the zoning administrator of Abingdon and in the office of the clerk of the circuit
court of Washington County, Virginia.
25-4-1. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following or being at
right angles to the centerlines of streets, highways, alleys or railroad tracks, such
centerline or lines at right angles to such centerlines shall be construed to be such
boundaries, as the case may be.
25-4-2. Where a district boundary is indicated to follow a river, creek or branch or other
body of water, said boundary shall be construed to follow the centerline at low
water or at the limit of the jurisdiction, and in the event of change in shoreline, such
boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
25-4-3. If no distance, angle, curvature description or other means is given to determine
a boundary line accurately and the foregoing provisions do not apply, the same shall
be determined by the use of the scale shown on said map. In case of subsequent
dispute, the matter shall be referred to the Board of Zoning Appeals which shall
determine the boundary.
§ 25-4 ABINGDON CODE § 25-9
B:166
ARTICLE 26
Definitions
§ 26-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3-2005, 12-5-2005; Ord. of 4-6-2009, eff. 5-6-2009;
Ord. of 7-6-2009; Ord. of 8-2-2010, eff. 9-2-2010; Ord. of 2-6-2017; Ord. of
2-6-2017, eff. 3-6-2017]
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words and terms are defined as follows: Words
in the present tense include the future tense; words in the singular include the plural; and
the plural includes the singular. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in
this chapter, will have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this
section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined
in the International Building Code or the International Mechanical Code, such terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
100-YEAR FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. It does not imply that no greater flood is likely to occur, nor that such a
flood will not happen more often than once every 100 years.
ABUTTING — Having a common border with another, or being separated from such
other only by a right-of-way, alley or easement.
ACCESS — Refers to the right of pedestrians and vehicles to cross between a public
right-of-way and private property.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — An independent dwelling unit, the presence and use
of which is clearly subordinate to a single-family detached dwelling. When contained
within the structure of a single family dwelling, such apartment constitutes an "interior
accessory apartment."
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building, structure or use located
upon the same lot as the principal use, building, or structure, the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage sheds are
common residential accessory buildings and structures.
ACCESSORY USE — Uses of land that are found on the same parcel as the principal
use but are subordinate and incidental.
ACREAGE — A parcel of land, regardless of area, described by metes and bounds
which is not a numbered lot in any recorded subdivision.
ACUPUNCTURE — The stimulation of certain points on or near the surface of the body
by the insertion of needles to prevent or modify the perception of pain or to normalize
physiological functions, including pain control, for the treatment of certain ailments
or conditions of the body and includes the techniques of electro-acupuncture, cupping
and moxibustion. The practice of acupuncture does not include the use of physical
therapy, chiropractic, or osteopathic manipulative techniques; the use or prescribing of
any drugs, medications, serums or vaccines; or the procedure of auricular acupuncture
as exempted in § 54.1-2901 of the Code of Virginia when used in the context of a
chemical dependency treatment program for patients eligible for federal, state or local
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:167
public funds by an employee of the program who is trained and approved by the National
Acupuncture Detoxification Association or an equivalent certifying body.
ACUPUNCTURIST — Individual approved by the board to practice acupuncture. This
is limited to "licensed acupuncturist" which means an individual other than a doctor
of medicine, osteopathy, chiropractic or podiatry who has successfully completed the
requirements for licensure established by the board (approved titles are limited to:
Licensed Acupuncturist, Lic. Ac., and L.Ac.).
ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING) — Any walled and roofed expansion to
the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing
wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition that is connected by a firewall
or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction.
ADMINISTRATOR — The official charged with the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance.
ADULT ASSISTED LIVING — A residential facility in which aged, infirm or disabled
adults reside, and for which the licensing authority is the Virginia Department of Social
Services, or for which no state license is required. The term shall not include the home
or residence of an individual who cares only for persons related to him by blood or
marriage. The term shall also not include any facility licensed by the state board of
health or the state department of mental health, mental retardation and substance abuse
services, or any other facility excluded from the definition of "assisted living facility,"
set forth within Code of Virginia § 63.2-100.
ADULT DAY CARE — Any facility that is either operated for profit or that desires
licensure and that provides supplementary care and protection during only a part of the
day to four or more aged, infirm or disabled adults who reside elsewhere, except (i) a
facility or portion of a facility licensed by the State Board of Health or the Department
of Behavioral Health and Developmental Services, and (ii) the home or residence of an
individual who cares for only persons related to him by blood or marriage. Included in
this definition are any two or more places, establishments or institutions owned, operated
or controlled by a single entity and providing such supplementary care and protection to
a combined total of four or more aged, infirm or disabled adults. (See § 63.2-100, Code
of Virginia, 1950, as amended).
AGRICULTURE — The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, horticulture, forestry,
gardening, the keeping of animals and fowl.
ALLEY — A thoroughfare, whether dedicated to public use or privately owned, that
provides access for persons and vehicles to the rear and/or side lot lines of properties
from abutting public streets or private roads.
ALTERATION — Any change in the floor area, use, adaptability or external appearance
of an existing structure.
AMPHITHEATER — A place of open-air (outdoor) assembly, consisting of a central
space or stage for performances, which may be open to the sky or partially covered or
enclosed, with tiered/or sloped seating arranged in a semi-circular pattern in relation to
the performance area.
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Any establishment, business or location in which there are
more than three mechanical, electrical or electronic devices used, or designed to be used,
for entertainment or as games, by the insertion of currency, coins or tokens, or by the
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:168
payment of money to have them activated, and any place of business, or portion thereof,
containing more than one billiard table for use by patrons of the business. Jukeboxes,
rides and regulation size ten-pin or duck pin bowling alleys shall not, alone, form the
basis of a determination that an establishment is an amusement center.
AMUSEMENT ENTERPRISE — Any circus, carnival or similar transient show or
entertainment.
ANCILLARY USE — A use permitted only in conjunction with a principal use
permitted in the same zoning district. Except where otherwise specified, the total floor
area occupied by any ancillary use(s), in the aggregate, cannot exceed 25% of the gross
floor area of the building or development of which such use is a part.
ANIMAL SHELTER — A facility used to house or contain animals and which is
owned, operated or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare
society, society for prevention of cruelty to animals, animal rescue group, or other such
incorporated organization devoted to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of
animals.
ANTENNA or ANTENNA ARRAY — One or more whips (omnidirectional antenna),
panels (directional antenna), discs (parabolic antenna) or similar devices used for
broadcast, transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals. Reference to an
antenna or antenna array does not include the support structure. The following shall be
excluded for the purposes of this division, from the definition of antenna and antenna
array: amateur radio antennas, satellite earth station antennas one meter in diameter
or less; receive-only home television antennas; and satellite earth station antennas two
meters or less in diameter located in a commercial or industrial zoning district.
ANTIQUE SHOP — A commercial enterprise dealing in furniture, china, glassware,
etc., of a former period.
APARTMENT HOUSE — Multiple-family dwelling.
APOTHECARY — Any structure in which, for compensation, prescription and patent
medicines are compounded and dispensed. All other items generally found in a drug
store may be sold provided same are not publicly displayed.
APPURTENANCE — A feature or structure attached to a building that is used for or in
connection with a building, incidental to such building and for its benefit.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land within a community subject to a
1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Also known as "floodplain."
ARENA/STADIUM — A place of assembly designed primarily as a place for sporting
events, but which may occasionally be used for large concerts or other large-scale
assemblies. An arena or stadium consists of a building or structure, containing a playing
field, court or other central activity space surrounded by tiered or sloped seating on all
sides. An arena or stadium may be classified as indoor, or outdoor, depending on the
extent of its enclosure within a building or structure.
ART GALLERY — An establishment engaged in the sale, loan, or display of art books,
paintings, sculpture, or other works of art.
ART STUDIO — An establishment for preparation, display and sale of individually
crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture, pottery, art photography, leather craft,
hand-woven articles and related items.
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:169
ART WORKSHOP — Work space for artists or artisans.
ASSEMBLY HALL — A large room used to hold public meetings; meetings of
members of an organization such as a school, church, or deliberative assembly.
ASSEMBLY PLANT, HANDCRAFT — A facility in which hand-crafted products are
produced and assembled (i.e., ice cream, candy, jewelry, millinery, clothing, pottery,
etc.).
ASSEMBLY PLANTS — Commercial facilities of up to 10,000 square feet of gross
floor area, in which components are pieced together to form a finished product, and
where 10% or less of the gross floor area of the facility is devoted to fabrication of
component parts. The term includes any area devoted to research or testing of the
finished product or of any technologies, components or materials related to the assembly/
production process.
ASSEMBLY, INDUSTRIAL — An industrial facility in which components are pieced
together to form a finished product.
ATTACHED COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY or ATTACHED FACILITY — An
antenna or other communications equipment (broadcasting or receiving, including any
PWSF or microcell) that is attached to an existing building or structure ("attachment
structure"). For the purposes of this definition, the term structure shall include, without
limitation, utility poles, signs, and water towers; however, the term "structure" shall
exclude communications towers. Where reference is made to an attached facility, unless
otherwise specified the reference will be deemed to include any accompanying pole
or device ("attachment device") which attaches the antenna array or communications
equipment to the existing building or structure, as well as transmission cables and any
equipment shelter which maybe located either inside or outside the attachment structure.
ATTACHMENT STRUCTURE — Refers to the structure to which an attached
communications facility is affixed.
AUDITORIUM — A building, or portion thereof, designed or used for artistic
performances or for civic, cultural, educational, political, social, religious gatherings and
activities, or gatherings and activities of a similar nature.
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE (ATM) — A freestanding electronic banking
machine. Where such a machine is part of the premises of a financial institution, it shall
be considered a part of the financial institution and not a separate use.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR, MAJOR — An establishment primarily engaged in the repair
or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar large mechanical equipment,
including paint, body and fender, and major engine and engine part overhaul, which is
conducted within a completely enclosed building.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR, MINOR — An establishment primarily engaged in the repair
or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar mechanical equipment, including
brake, muffler, upholstery work, tire repair and change, lubrication, tune ups, and
transmission work, which is conducted within a completely enclosed building.
AUTOMOTIVE SELF-SERVICE MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING FACILITY — That
portion of property where flammable or combustible liquids or gases used as fuel are
stored and dispensed from fixed equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles by
persons other than a service station attendant. Such an establishment shall be permitted
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:170
to offer for sale at retail other convenience items as a clearly secondary activity and shall
be permitted also to include a free-standing automatic car wash.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING FACILITY — That portion
of property where flammable or combustible liquids or gases used as fuel are stored
and dispensed from fixed equipment into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles. Accessory
activities shall be permitted to include automotive repair and maintenance, car wash
service, and food sales.
AWNING — For purposes of the Town's sign regulations, means a shelter projecting
from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of non-rigid material
on a supporting framework (compare "canopy").
BAKERY, RETAIL — An establishment engaged in the retail sale of baked goods for
off-site consumption.
BAKERY, WHOLESALE — An establishment primarily engaged in the preparation of
baked goods for wholesale or institutional distribution.
BANNER — For purposes of the Town's sign regulations, means cloth, paper, or
material of any kind intended to attract attention.
BAR — A room or establishment where alcoholic drinks are served over a counter.
BAR — Refers to the Board of Architectural Review created by the Town pursuant to
Code of Virginia § 15.2-2306 to administer the provisions of the Town's historic district
regulations.
BARBER — Any person who shaves, shapes or trims the beard; cuts, singes, shampoos
or dyes the hair or applies lotions thereto; applies, treats or massages the face, neck
or scalp with oils, creams, lotions, cosmetics, antiseptics, powders, clays or other
preparations in connection with shaving, cutting or trimming the hair or beard, and
practices barbering for compensation and when such services are not performed for the
treatment of disease.
BARBERSHOP — Any establishment or place of business within which the practice of
barbering is engaged in or carried on by one or more barbers.
BASE FLOOD — For the purposes of this ordinance, the 100-year flood. The flood
having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The Federal Emergency Management Agency
designated 100-year water surface elevation. The water surface elevation of the base
flood in relation to the datum specified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the 100-year flood or 1% annual chance flood.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor surface sub-grade (below
ground level) on any side.
BED AND BREAKFAST ("B & B") — A temporary lodging facility in the nature of an
inn, which facility serves as the innkeeper's principal residence and wherein breakfast is
the only meal provided to guests.
BEDROOM — Shall have the same meaning as provided within the Uniform Statewide
Building Code, except as follows: where any number of required parking spaces, or a
restriction applicable to a particular dwelling unit, is based on a specified number of
bedrooms, any bedroom (i) that is larger by 30% or more than the average size of the
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:171
other bedrooms in a dwelling unit, or (ii) that has more than one means of ingress/egress,
shall be counted as two bedrooms for purposes of calculating parking requirements.
BEVERAGE OR FOOD PROCESSING — An business/industrial facility where foods
and beverages are processed and packaged for local, regional or national distribution.
This definition does not include a facility engaged in the brewing/bottling of beverages
(see brewery and bottling facilities).
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS — A quasi-judicial board appointed to review appeals
and requests for variances made by individuals with regard to decisions of the zoning
administrator in the interpretation of this ordinance.
BOARDING AND GROOMING, ANIMAL — Any premises, including, without
limitation, kennels, in which or upon which more than five dogs or more than five cats
over six months of age are kept for any purpose.
BOARDING HOUSE — A building, or portion thereof, other than a hotel, motel and
bed and breakfast, which contains three or more guest rooms designed or intended to
be used, let or hired out for occupancy, for monetary compensation, where the rental or
leases are for definite periods of time. Meals may or may not be provided, but there is
one common kitchen facility. No meals are provided to outside guests. Also commonly
known as a rooming house.
BODY SHOP, AUTOMOBILE — A facility, other than a parking garage, designed or
used for the repair, replacement and/or restoration of the body and/or chassis parts of
motor vehicles, including collision repairs, in which mechanical repairs are performed
only as is incidental and necessary to such body work.
BREWERY AND BOTTLING FACILITIES — A business/industrial facility where
beverages are brewed and bottled for local, regional or national distribution.
BUFFER — A strip of land, which may or may not have trees and shrubs planted
for screening purposes, designed to set apart and protect one space or activity from an
adjacent space or activity.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
BUILDING CODE — The Uniform Building Code of Virginia.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the level of the curb or
the established curb grade opposite the middle of the front of the structure to the highest
point of: the roof, if a flat roof; the deck line of a mansard roof; or the mean height level
between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. For buildings set back from
the street line, the height shall be measured from the average elevation of the ground
surface along the front of the building.
BUILDING LINE — The perimeter of that portion of a building or structure nearest a
property line, but excluding open steps, terraces, cornices and other ornamental features.
BUILDING PERMIT — Refers to the approval required under the Uniform Statewide
Building Code for or in connection with the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair or conversion of certain buildings and structures. This permit is obtained from the
Town's building code official.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line establishing the minimum required distance
between the wall of a building and the nearest adjacent lot line.
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:172
BUILDING, MAIN — The principal building or one of the principal buildings on a lot,
or the building or one of the principal buildings housing the principal use on the lot.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot on which it is located. Where a lot contains residential uses, the principal building on
the lot shall mean the largest building that contains any dwelling unit.
BUSINESS — An establishment intended for the conduct or service or administration
by a commercial enterprise, or offices for the conduct of professional or business service.
BY RIGHT — A use permitted or allowed in the district involved which complies
with the provisions of these zoning regulations and other applicable ordinances and
regulations.
CALIPER — A measure of tree size, determined by measuring the diameter of the tree
at a point: six inches above the root ball, at the time of planting, or 12 inches above the
ground, for established trees.
CAMPUS — An area of land constituting and making up the grounds of a college or
university containing the main building(s).
CANOPY — For purposes of the Town's sign regulations, means a permanent, rooflike structure of rigid materials supported by and extending from a building, including
marquees and port coachers (drive-under canopies).
CAR WASH — Any facility, whether manual, automatic or self-service, where, for
compensation, the washing of vehicles including cars, vans and pick-up trucks is
conducted. It includes auto dealer preparation and detailing, and non-government
facilities for the cleaning of fleet vehicles. This definition does not include facilities that
wash or steam clean engines, buses, horse/cattle trailers, tankers or tractor-trailers. A
manual car wash is a facility where cleaning is performed by employees of the facility.
An automatic car wash is a facility where cleaning is primarily performed by machines
(including drive-through facilities), but which may include some labor performed by
employees of the facility. A self-service car wash is one in which cleaning equipment
and facilities (such as water and soap) are available for use by members of the public,
including, without limitation, coin-operated equipment and facilities.
CARPORT — A space outside a single-family or two-family dwelling, and contiguous
thereto, wholly or partially covered by a roof but without side enclosure(s), used for the
shelter of motor vehicles.
CATERING BUSINESS — Any place or operation that prepares or stores food for
distribution to persons of another business operation, or a related business operation, for
service to the public, including, but not limited to operations preparing or storing food
for push-cart operations, hotdog stands and other mobile points of service.
CEMETERY — Any land or structure used or intended to be used for the interment of
human or pet remains, either by earth burial, entombment in a mausoleum, inurnment in
a columbarium, or a combination thereof.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — Refers to a permit issued by a board
created by the Town pursuant to Code of Virginia § 15.2-2306 to administer the
provisions of the Town's historic architectural design control, or entrance corridor
overlay district regulations.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Refers to the approval required under the
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:173
Uniform Statewide Building Code prior to the use or occupancy of certain buildings and
structures. This permit is obtained from the Town's building code official.
CHANGE OF USE — Any use which substantially differs from a previous use of a
building structure, or property.
CHILD DAY CENTER — A child day program offered to (i) two or more children
under the age of 13 in a facility that is not the residence of the provider or of any of the
children in care or (ii) 13 or more children at any location. Child day program means
a regularly operating service arrangement for children where, during the absence of a
parent or guardian, a person or organization has agreed to assume responsibility for the
supervision, protection, and well-being of a child under the age of 13 for less than a
twenty-four-hour period. (See § 63.2-100, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended)
CHILD or CHILDREN — Except where otherwise specifically limited, the terms
"child" or "children" shall refer to any person(s) under the age of 18 years.
CLINIC, HEALTH AND CLINIC, MEDICAL — Any building, or portion thereof,
in which the primary use is the provision of health care services to clients for
compensation. This term "health care services" shall include medical, dental, and mental
health services, and other services delivered by providers who are certified or licensed
by any of the health regulatory boards within the state department of health professions
(except the board of funeral directors and embalmers, or the board of veterinary
medicine). The term shall include ambulatory care facilities, outpatient clinics, and
similar uses.
CLINIC, PUBLIC HEALTH — Any building, or portion thereof, in which the primary
use is the provision of health care services to persons by any public or nonprofit agency
or organization.
CLUB or LODGE — A building, or portion thereof, used by a corporation, association,
or other grouping of persons for private social, civic, educational or recreational
purposes, and to which access is restricted to its private self-perpetuating membership.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A residential development designed in a manner that,
without exceeding the density allowed within an applicable zoning district, concentrates
lots in specific areas and allows the remaining, unoccupied land to be used for common
open space.
CO-LOCATION (COLLOCATION) — Use of an attachment structure or support
structure by (i) two or more wireless license holders, radio stations or television stations,
or combination thereof, (ii) one wireless license holder, radio station or television for
more than one type of communications technology, or (iii) two or more communications
facilities owned or operated by government or other public and quasi-public users.
COMMERCIAL CENTER, COMMUNITY — A completely planned and designed
commercial development providing for the sale of general merchandise and/or
convenience goods and services. A community commercial center shall provide for
the sale of general merchandise, and may include a variety store, discount store or
supermarket.
COMMERCIAL CENTER, CONVENIENCE — A completely planned and designed
commercial development providing for the sale of general merchandise and/or
convenience goods and services. A convenience commercial center shall provide a small
cluster of convenience shops or services.
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:174
COMMERCIAL CENTER, NEIGHBORHOOD — A completely planned and designed
commercial development providing for the sale of general merchandise and/or
convenience goods and services. A neighborhood commercial center shall provide for
the sales of convenience goods and services, with a supermarket as the principal tenant.
COMMERCIAL CENTER, REGIONAL — A completely planned and designed
commercial development providing for the sale of general merchandise and/or
convenience goods and services. A regional center shall provide for the sale of general
merchandise, apparel, furniture, home furnishings, and other retail sales and services, in
full depth and variety.
COMMERCIAL RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES — Establishments that engage in
the sale of general retail goods and accessory services. Businesses within this definition
include those that conduct sales and storage entirely within an enclosed structure (with
the exception of occasional outdoor "sidewalk" promotions); businesses specializing in
the sale of either general merchandise or convenience goods.
COMMERCIAL, HEAVY — An establishment or business that generally uses open
sales yards, outside equipment storage or outside activities that generate noise or other
impacts considered incompatible with less-intense uses. Typical businesses in this
definition are lumber yards, construction specialty services, heavy equipment suppliers
or building contractors.
COMMERCIAL, LIGHT — An establishment or business that generally has retail or
wholesale sales, office uses, or services, which do not generate noise or other impacts
considered incompatible with less-intense uses. Typical businesses in this definition are
retail stores, offices, catering services or restaurants.
COMMISSION AND/OR PLANNING COMMISSION — Refer to the Abingdon
Planning Commission, created by the Town in accordance with Code of Virginia
§ 15.2-2210 and charged with promoting the orderly development of the Town and its
environs.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any antenna, antenna array or other
communications equipment (including any PWSF) used by any commercial, government
or other public or quasi-public user(s). Where reference is made to a communications
facility, unless otherwise specified or indicated by context, such referenced will be
deemed to include the support structure on which the antenna or other communications
equipment is mounted, transmission cables, and any associated equipment shelter.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, FREESTANDING — Any communications facility
other than an attached communications facility or a microcell located on an existing
building, pole or other existing support structure.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — Refers to the plan prepared and recommended by the
Abingdon Planning Commission, and adopted by the Abingdon Town Council, in
accordance with the requirements of Title 15.2, Chapter 22, Article 3 (§ 15.2-2223
et seq.) of the Virginia Code, to guide and accomplish a coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development of land within the Town in a manner which will, in accordance
with present and probable future needs and resources, best promote the health, safety,
morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the Town's inhabitants.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that would become harmonious or compatible with
neighboring uses through the application and maintenance of qualifying conditions.
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:175
CONDOMINIUM — A multiple dwelling or development containing individually
owned dwelling units and jointly owned and shared areas and facilities, which dwelling
or development is subject to the provisions of state and local laws.
CONGREGATE RESIDENCE — Any building or portion thereof that contains facilities
for living, sleeping and sanitation as required by this code, and may include facilities for
eating and cooking for occupancy by other than a family. A congregate residence shall
be permitted to be a shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house,
but does not include jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses.
CONSUMER SERVICE BUSINESS — For the purpose of this ordinance shall mean a
business primarily engaged in the provision of a service in the nature of bicycle sales and
service; television and appliance repair and rental; book stores; dressmakers and tailors;
dry-cleaning outlets; florists; optical centers; photocopy centers; photography studios;
stationery stores/print-shops; express mail and mailbox services; shoe repair; jewelers;
travel agencies.
CONTRACTOR OR TRADESMAN'S SHOP (HAZMAT) — Contracting or trade
operations involving millwork with industrial lathe, heavy equipment, automated tools,
or dipping or refinishing of furniture, or similar processes in which any hazardous
materials or industrial tools or machinery are utilized or generated.
CONTRACTOR OR TRADESMAN'S SHOP, GENERAL — Building or service
industry contractors, including: carpentry, electrical, masonry, metalworking,
cabinetmaking, flooring installation, duct work, plumbing, heating, air conditioning,
electrical, framing or similar light work.
CONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE — A building or structure that, by location, design,
setting, materials, workmanship, feeling or association adds to the historic district's sense
of time and place and historical development.
CONVENT — An association or community of recluses devoted to a religious life under
a superior; a body of monks, friars, or nuns, constituting one residential community.
CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION; COMMUNITY CORRECTIONAL FACILITY;
LOCAL CORRECTIONAL FACILITY; AND STATE CORRECTIONAL FACILITY
— (See § 53.1-1, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended.)
COSMETOLOGIST — Any person who administers cosmetic or esthetic treatments;
manicures or pedicures the nails of any person; arranges, braids, dresses, curls, waves,
cleanses, cuts, shapes, singes, waxes, tweezes, shaves, bleaches, colors, relaxes,
straightens, or performs similar work, upon human hair, or a wig or hairpiece, by any
means, including hands or mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances unless such
acts as adjusting, combing, or brushing pre-styled wigs or hairpieces do not alter the
pre-styled nature of the wig or hairpiece, and practices cosmetology and permanent
cosmetics for compensation.
COSMETOLOGY — Includes, but is not limited to, the following practices:
administering cosmetic or esthetic treatments; manicuring or pedicuring the nails of
any person; arranging, braiding, dressing, curling, waving, cleansing, cutting, shaping,
singeing, waxing, tweezing, shaving, bleaching, coloring, relaxing, straightening, or
similar work, upon human hair, or a wig or hairpiece, by any means, including hands
or mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, but shall not include such acts as
adjusting, combing, or brushing prestyled wigs or hairpieces when such acts do not alter
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:176
the prestyled nature of the wig or hairpiece.
COSMETOLOGY SALON — Any commercial establishment, residence, vehicle or
other establishment, place or event wherein cosmetology is offered or practiced on
a regular basis for compensation and may include the training of apprentices under
regulations of the board.
COURTYARD — A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade
level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls of a building.
CRAFT SHOP — An establishment wherein handmade goods are offered for sale.
CREMATORY — A furnace for cremating human remains, or a building, or portion
thereof, containing such a furnace. Also commonly known as a crematorium. Where
permitted as a stand-alone facility, the term shall also be construed to include a facility
for the cremation of pet remains.
CRIMINAL JUSTICE FACILITY — A residential facility operated by the Department
of Criminal Justice Services (DCJS), or a contractor of DCJS, or by a local criminal
justice agency. The term includes juvenile detention facilities, adult jails and correctional
facilities, halfway houses, and similar residential accommodations for delinquent
juveniles or adult offenders.
DAIRY — A commercial establishment for the manufacture and sale of dairy products.
DATACENTER — Also commonly referred to as a hosting site, hosting center or
application service provider (ASP), means a specialized computer service business
that houses electronic web sites and provides data-serving and other services for
compensation. This type of facility may contain a network operations center (NOC),
a restricted access area containing automated systems that constantly monitor server
activity, web traffic, and network performance for irregularities.
DAY CARE, FAMILY — The keeping for part-time care and/or instruction, whether
or not for compensation, of six or less children at any one time within a dwelling, not
including members of the family residing on the premises.
DAY CARE, GROUP — An establishment for the care and/or instruction, whether
or not for compensation, of seven or more person at any one time. Child nurseries,
preschools and adult care facilities are included in this definition.
DAY-CARE FACILITY — A facility where, during the absence of a parent or guardian,
a person or organization provides supervision and care to a child under the age of 13 for
less than a twenty-four-hour period, and where such care is offered to (i) two or more
children under the age of 13, in a location that is not the residence of the provider of
any of the children in care; or (ii) to 13 or more children at any location. For purposes
of this Zoning Ordinance, the term includes facilities commonly known as childcare
center, day care, day-care center, nurseries, playschools, preschools and nursery schools.
The term excludes the following: school extended-day enrichment programs; family day
homes; an educational facility (other than preschools and nursery schools) unless such
facility is providing day care center outside of regular classes; and care provided by a
religious institution or organization, or a facility operated by a religious institution or
organization, during short periods of time while the parents or guardians of the children
are attending religious services. (See Sections 26-83 and 26-84.)
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units that are allowed on an area of land,
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:177
which area of land shall be permitted to include dedicated streets contained within the
development.
DETACHED — When pertaining to structures, means the absence of a physical
connection to a structure by a structural element or feature.
DEVELOPMENT — A tract of land developed or to be developed as a unit under single
ownership or unified control which is to be used for any business or industrial purpose or
is to contain three or more residential dwelling units. The term "development" shall not
be construed to include any tract of land which will be principally devoted to agricultural
production. (See § 15.2-2201 Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended.)
DISH ANTENNAS — A satellite antenna, also known simply as a "dish," used for
satellite communication and broadcast reception.
DISTRICT(S) — As referred to in the Code of Virginia, as amended, § 15.2-2288,
15.2-2287, 15.2-2303; 15.2-2286.
DORMITORY — A building for housing a number of persons, as at a school or resort. A
community whose inhabitants commute to a nearby city for employment and recreation.
DRIVE-IN WINDOW — A facility designed to provide access to commercial goods
(including foods and beverages), products and services for customers remaining in their
motor vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — A form of vehicular access from a public street, private road or alley to
the interior of a lot or parcel of land.
DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT — A facility where dry-cleaning of clothing
and household textiles for consumers is performed.
DRY-CLEANING OUTLET — A facility where clothing and household items are
received from consumers, and returned for pick-up by consumers, but at which no drycleaning processes are performed. This term shall exclude businesses falling within the
definition of a "laundry."
DUA — An acronym for the phrase "dwelling units per acre," which phrase describes
the residential density of development of a particular building, parcel or development.
DUPLEX — A two-family dwelling or a series of single-family attached dwellings
containing two dwelling units.
DWELLING — A building, or portion thereof, serving as a residence for any persons.
DWELLING UNIT — A building, or any portion thereof, containing a complete set
of living accommodations suitable for occupancy by one or more persons, consisting
of sleeping, bathroom, and complete kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of such
occupants, and having either direct access from the outside of the building or through a
common hall to the outside of the building.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY (MFD) — A building, or portion thereof, arranged or
designed to contain three or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED (SFA) — A building containing a single
dwelling unit, where such building is attached or connected to one other similar building
by a common party wall, and where each individual dwelling unit is designed and
constructed so as to permit its sale as an individual unit.
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:178
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED (SFD) — A freestanding building
containing a single dwelling unit, i.e., a building that has no attachment or connection by
a common party wall to another similar building.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE (TH) — Refers to any one of a series of single-family
attached dwellings, under single or multiple ownership, separated from one another by
continuous vertical walls without openings from basement floor to roof, "series" refers
to a row of three or more townhouse dwellings.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (TFD) — A building, or portion thereof, arranged or
designed to be occupied by two families, having only two dwelling units.
EASEMENT — A right possessed by the owner of one parcel of land to use the land
of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with the general property rights of that
owner.
ECRB — Refers to the Entrance Corridor Review Board created by the Town Council
pursuant to § 15.2-2306 Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, to administer the Town's
entrance corridor overlay district regulations.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY — An institution of learning, having a faculty, a student
body, and prescribed courses of study.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY, ARTISTIC — An educational facility devoted to the
study of the arts, such as music, drama, film, dance, etc.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY, COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY — An educational
facility that is authorized to award diplomas for completion of post-secondary degree
programs.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY, ELEMENTARY — An educational facility for children
attending any of the following grades: kindergarten through eighth grade.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY, HIGH SCHOOL — An educational facility authorized to
award diplomas for completion of secondary education.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY, VOCATIONAL — A secondary or higher education
facility primarily teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade and
meeting the state requirements as a vocational facility.
ELDERLY HOUSING — A multifamily residential housing development for persons
62 years of age or older, or for the disabled, that is funded by the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development, by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, or by the
Virginia Housing Development Authority. The term excludes assisted living facilities
and nursing homes.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls,
pilings, or columns (post and piers).
ENCROACHMENT — For the purposes of this ordinance, the advance or infringement
of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development
into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
EQUIPMENT SHELTER — An enclosed structure or housing, including cabinets and
sheds, located at the base of a communications facility mount, within which is housed
equipment for the facility, including such items as batteries, backup power supply,
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:179
electrical equipment, base transceiver stations, etc.
ESTHETICIAN — A person who engages in the practice of esthetics for compensation.
ESTHETICS — Includes, but is not limited to, the following practices of administering
cosmetic treatments to enhance or improve the appearance of the skin: cleansing, toning,
performing effleurage or other related movements, stimulating, exfoliating, or
performing any other similar procedure on the skin of the human body or scalp by
means of cosmetic preparations, treatments, any nonlaser device, electrical, mechanical,
or manual, for care of the skin; applying make-up or eyelashes to any person, tinting or
perming eyelashes and eyebrows, and lightening hair on the body except the scalp; and
removing unwanted hair from the body of any person by the use of tweezing, chemical,
or mechanical means. However, "esthetics" is not a healing art and shall not include
any practice, activity, or treatment that constitutes the practice of medicine, osteopathic
medicine, or chiropractic. The terms "healing arts." "practice of medicine," "practice of
osteopathic medicine," and "practice of chiropractic" shall mean the same as those terms
are defined in Code of Virginia, § 54.1-2900.
ESTHETICS SPA — Any commercial establishment, residence, vehicle, or other
establishment, place, or event wherein esthetics is offered or practiced on a regular basis
for compensation under regulations of the board.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE — The architectural character,
general composition and general arrangement of the exterior of a building structure,
including the kind, color and texture of the building material and type and character of
all exterior windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and appurtenances.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FACE OF BUILDING, PRIMARY — The wall of a building fronting on a street or
right-of-way, excluding any appurtenances such as projecting fins, columns, pilasters,
canopies, marquees, showcases or decorations.
FAMILY — For purposes of the Town's Zoning Ordinance, refers to persons residing
together as a single housekeeping unit. See "occupancy, residential." An individual, or
two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, plus not more
than two unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling
unit, or a group of not more than four persons not related by blood, marriage, adoption
or guardianship living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling or dwelling
unit.
FAMILY DAY HOME — A child day program offered in the residence of the provider
or the home of any of the children in care for one through 12 children under the age of
13, exclusive of the provider's own children and any children who reside in the home,
when at least one child receives care for compensation. The provider of a licensed or
registered family day home shall disclose to the parents or guardians of children in their
care the percentage of time per week that persons other than the provider will care for the
children. Family day homes serving five through 12 children, exclusive of the provider's
own children and any children who reside in the home, shall be licensed. However, no
family day home shall care for more than four children under the age of two, including
the provider's own children and any children who reside in the home, unless the family
day home is licensed or voluntarily registered. However, a family day home where the
children in care are all related to the provider by blood or marriage shall not be required
to be licensed. (See § 63.2-100 Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended)
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:180
FARM ANIMALS — Animals other than household pets that shall be permitted to,
where permitted, be kept and maintained for commercial production and sale and/or
family food production, education or recreation. Farm animals are identified by these
categories: large animals, e.g., horses and cattle; medium animals, e.g., sheep and goats;
or small animals, e.g., rabbits, chinchillas, chickens, turkeys, pheasants, geese, ducks and
pigeons.
FARM DWELLING — A dwelling whose occupants are engaged in the agricultural
activities of the farm upon which the dwelling is located.
FARM LABOR QUARTERS — A dwelling or dwellings whose occupants are
temporarily or permanently employed as laborers in the agricultural activities of the farm
upon which the dwelling or dwellings are located.
FARM SALES — The sale of agricultural or horticultural produce or merchandise
produced on a farm, conducted by the farmer or members of his family. Sales of items
not produced by the person engaged in such sales activity shall be limited to companion
items intended to be used with the agricultural or horticultural produce or merchandise
(such as canning jars, pumpkin carving kits, gift baskets, wreath making supplies,
floral arranging supplies, potting soil, pots, pruning shears, gardening gloves, etc., but
not including farm machinery and equipment [except hand tools], building materials,
furniture or other like items).
FARMERS MARKET — A public market at which farmers and often other vendors sell
products directly to consumers, namely any horticultural, viticulture, dairy, livestock,
poultry, bee, other farm or garden product, fish or fishery product, other foods, and arts
and crafts.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — An independent
agency of the United States government that provides a single point of accountability for
all federal emergency preparedness and mitigation and response activities.
FILL — The placing of any material which results in increasing the natural ground
surface elevation.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — Provision of financial and banking services to
consumers or clients. Walk-in and drive-in services are generally provided on site.
Typical uses include banks, savings banks, credit unions, lending establishments, and
automatic teller machines. See consumer service business.
FLAG — Non-governmental flags are deemed to be signs and shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter. The official flags of the federal, state, county or municipal
governments are not deemed to be signs.
FLEA MARKET — A commercial use in which various goods such as second-hand
articles, furniture, glassware, novelties, crafts, etc., are offered for sale by individual
sellers in a booth-type arrangement.
FLOOD CONTROL WORKS — Any man-made construction, such as a dam, levee,
groin, or jetty designed to alter the flood potential of the body of water on or adjacent to
which it is built.
FLOOD HAZARD DISTRICT — The land located within the base flood area which
includes the floodway, the special floodplain district, the approximated floodplain
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:181
district, and the other flood districts (designated as Zone X in the Town of Abingdon on
Flood Insurance Rate Map, Washington County, Virginia and Incorporated Areas).
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community, on
which the FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available
digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — An examination, evaluation and determination of
flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mudflow and/or flood-related erosion
hazards.
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOOD-PROOFING — A combination of design modifications that results in a
building or structure that is subject to flooding, including the attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, being watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — A term applied to full range of public policy and
action for ensuring wise use of the floodplains. It includes everything from collection
and dissemination of flood control information to actual acquisition of floodplain lands,
including the enactment and administration of floodplain regulations, including building
codes and the building of flood-modifying structures.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. See "area of special flood hazard."
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. The area identified as "floodway"
in the FIS prepared by FEMA. The term shall also include floodway areas which have
been identified in the FIS prepared by the FEMA.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
(2)
Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph
a.2. of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the
surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of
water and deposited along the path of the current.
(3)
(a)
The collapse or subsistence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as
defined in paragraph a.1. of this definition.
(b)
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:182
FLOODWAY FRINGE — The floodway fringe encompasses the portion of the
floodplain that could be completely obstructed without increasing the base flood
elevation by more than 1.0 foot at any point.
FLOOR — The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement),
i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame
construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking
vehicles.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — A dimensional measurement determined by dividing
the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the area of that lot.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (GFA) — The sum of all the horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building, measured from the interior faces of exterior walls. GFA shall
include: (i) basements, elevator shafts and stairwells at each story, (ii) spaces used or
occupied for mechanical equipment and having a structural head room of six feet six
inches or more, (iii) penthouses, (iv) attic space, whether or not a floor has actually been
laid, having a structural head room of six feet six inches or more, (v) interior balconies,
and (vi) mezzanines. GFA shall not include outside balconies that do not exceed a
projection of six feet beyond the exterior walls of the building; parking structures below
or above grade; or and roof top mechanical structures.
FOOD OR FOOD SPECIALTY SHOP — Food stores that typically sell items that are
considered as "unique and high-value food items made in small quantities from highquality ingredients," compared to staple foods, specialty foods may have higher prices
due to more expensive ingredients and labor.
FRONTAGE — The continuous uninterrupted distance, usually along which a parcel
abuts an adjacent road or street.
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION RATING — The characterization of a particular
highway or street as one of several types, or classes, of roads (such classes indicating the
character of the traffic carried by the street, i.e., local or long-distance, and the degree
of land-access the street allows), with reference to a rating system established by the
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) and implemented by the Virginia Department
of Transportation (VDOT). For urban areas such as the Town of Abingdon, highways
and streets will generally fall into one of four classes: urban principal arterial streets,
minor arterial streets, collector streets, and local streets. Where a zoning determination
turns on whether one street has a higher functional classification rating than another,
the street that provides for greater through-travel between major trip generators shall be
deemed the one with the higher classification rating (for example, a principal arterial
street is a higher functional classification than a local street).
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of a corpse for burial or the
preparation of a corpse for cremation, which may also be used for funeral services.
GARAGE, ACCESSORY — A building designed or used for the storage of
automobiles, boats and trailers, owned or used only by occupants of the building to
which it is accessory, and in which no business activity is conducted.
GARAGE, MIXED-USE — A building for the parking of automobiles, which (i)
encloses at least 45% of the parking area, (ii) has ramps which are not visible from the
exterior of the structure, and (iii) contains at least one permitted use, other than parking,
on the street-level floor of the building or structure.
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:183
GARAGE, PARKING — A building used or intended to be used for the off-street
parking of operable vehicles on a temporary basis, other than an accessory garage.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building designed or used for the storage of
automobiles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessible.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage,
designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, renting, selling or storing motordriven vehicles.
GARDEN SHOP — An establishment for the retail sale of plants, garden equipment,
tools, seeds and supplies.
GAS STATION — A business where gasoline or diesel fuel is stored, housed and sold
for supply to motor vehicles, and may include accessory motor vehicle servicing within
the principle building.
GENERAL STORE, COUNTRY — A single store, the ground floor area of which
is 4,000 square feet or less and which offers for sale primarily most of the following
articles; bread, milk, cheese, canned and bottled foods and drinks, tobacco products,
candy, papers and magazines, and general hardware articles. Gasoline may also be
offered for sale but only as a secondary activity of a country general store.
GFA — See "floor area, gross."
GOLF COURSE — Any golf course, publicly or privately owned, on which the game of
golf is played, including accessory uses and buildings customary thereto, but excluding
golf driving ranges as defined herein.
GOLF DRIVING RANGE — A limited area on which golf players do not walk, but onto
which they drive golf balls from a central driving tee.
GOVERNING BODY — The Town Council of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia.
GRADE — With reference to a building or structure: (i) for buildings adjoining one
street only, the elevation of the established curb at the center of the wall adjoining the
street; (ii) for buildings adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevations of
the established curbs at the center of all walls adjoining streets; (iii) for buildings having
no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls
of the building; (iv) all walls approximately parallel to and not more than 15 feet from a
street line are to be considered as adjoining a street; (v) finished grade refers to the final
elevation of the land surface of a site after completion of development, and shall be the
average grade of the site adjacent to a building.
GREENHOUSE — See "nursery."
GROUP CARE FACILITY — A facility, required to be licensed by the state, which
provides training, care, supervision, treatment and/or rehabilitation to the aged, disabled,
those convicted of crimes, or those suffering the effects of drugs or alcohol; this does not
include day care centers, family day care homes, foster homes, schools, hospitals, jails
or prisons.
GUEST ROOM — A room which is designed or intended for occupancy by one or more
persons, but in which no provision is made for cooking. A guest room does not include
dormitory rooms located on a college or university campus, or owned or operated by a
college or university.
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:184
HABITABLE SPACE (ROOM) — A space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating
or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and
similar areas are not considered habitable space.
HARDWARE STORE — A facility having 30,000 or fewer square feet of gross floor
area, primarily used for the retail sale of various basic hardware items, such as tools,
builder's hardware, plumbing and electrical supplies, paint and glass, house wares and
household appliances, garden supplies and cutlery; if greater than 30,000 square feet,
such a facility is a "home improvement center."
HEALING ARTS — For the purpose of this ordinance shall mean, the art and science
dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure of alleviation of human
physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities and shall, for the
purpose of this ordinance, include acupuncturists and massage therapy day spas.
HEALTH/SPORT CLUB — A building or portion of a building designed and equipped
for the conduct of sports, exercise, recreational, therapeutic or athletic activities, whether
or not under instruction, such as but not limited to: tennis and other court games,
swimming, aerobics, and weightlifting but excluding such uses as: bowling alley, billiard
hall, bingo, miniature golf, amusement center and dance hall.
HIGH INTENSITY DISCHARGE LAMP — A mercury vapor lamp, a metal halide
lamp and a sodium lamp (high pressure and low pressure).
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
HOME IMPROVEMENT CENTER — A retail sales facility having a gross floor area
of more than 30,000 square feet, primarily engaged in the retail or trade sale of various
hardware and home improvement products.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any occupation or activity which is clearly incidental and
secondary to use of the premises as a dwelling and which is carried on wholly or in part
within a main building or accessory building by a member of the family who resides on
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained
by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(a)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing
to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(b)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
or,
(c)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior;
or,
(1)
(2) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
(d)
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:185
the premises. Home occupations are classified as categories A and B; see Section 17-16.
HOSPITAL — Any facility licensed by the state commissioner of health (other than a
nursing home) in which the primary function is the provision: of diagnosis, of treatment
and of medical and nursing services (surgical or non-surgical) for two or more persons,
including facilities known as sanatoriums; sanitariums; and general, acute, rehabilitation,
chronic disease, short-term, long-term, outpatient surgical, and inpatient or outpatient
maternity hospitals.
HOSPITAL, SPECIAL CARE — An institution providing treatment to humans
primarily for mentally disabled or substance-abuse patients.
HOTEL/MOTEL — A building, or portion thereof, or any group of buildings, containing
providing guest rooms used, rented or hired out to be occupied for sleeping purposes on
a transient basis (i.e., by the day or week). This definition includes facilities commonly
known as motor lodges, motor courts, and convention centers. The following are
excluded from this definition: bed-and-breakfasts, rooming/boarding houses.
HOTEL/MOTEL, CONVENTION CENTER — A facility designed to accommodate
500 or more persons and used for conventions, seminars, product displays, recreation
activities, and entertainment functions, along with accessory functions including
temporary outdoor displays and food and beverage preparation and service for on
premise consumption.
HOUSEHOLD PETS — Dogs, cats, rabbits, birds, etc., for family use only
(noncommercial) with cages, pens, etc.
INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT SERVICE AND REPAIR — An establishment involved
in the repair of heavy equipment, including any vehicle with more than two axles.
INN — A public lodging house serving food and drink to travelers; a hotel.
JANITORIAL SERVICE — A business primarily engaged in furnishing building
cleaning and maintenance services to clients, such as restaurant or laboratory cleaning,
window cleaning, floor waxing and office cleaning, and where materials, supplies and
service vehicles may be stored.
JURISDICTION — As used in this Code, jurisdiction is any political subdivision that
adopts this Code for administrative regulations within its sphere of authority.
KENNEL — Any premises, including, without limitation, animal boarding and
grooming facilities, in which or upon which more than five dogs or more than five cats
over six months of age are kept for any purpose.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL — Any parcel of land on which sales, rental, caring,
breeding, grooming, keeping and boarding of dogs, cats or other domestic animals of
any age are kept for commercial gain.
KENNEL, PRIVATE — Any parcel of land with a minimum of one acre on which
more than two domestic animals over six months of age are kept as pleasure, hunting,
exhibiting, dog showing or field and obedience trials; commercial gain is not the primary
objective.
KIOSK — A freestanding structure upon which temporary information and/or posters,
notices, and announcements are posted, or a freestanding building with one or more open
sides from which commercial activities are conducted.
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:186
KITCHEN — Any room or portion of a room within a building designed and intended
to be used for the cooking or preparation of food.
LABORATORY, MEDICAL — A building or part thereof devoted to bacteriological,
biological, x-ray, pathological and similar analytical or diagnostic services to medical
doctors or dentists including incidental pharmaceuticals, and the production, fitting and/
or sale of optical or prosthetic appliances.
LABORATORY, PHARMACEUTICAL — A building or part thereof devoted to the
testing, analysis and/or compounding of drugs and chemicals for ethical medicine or
surgery, not involving sale directly to the public.
LABORATORY, RESEARCH — A facility that provides controlled conditions in
which scientific or technological research, experiments and measurement may be
performed.
LAMP — The component of a luminaire that produces light. A lamp is also commonly
referred to as a bulb.
LAND COVERAGE — Refers to the area of a lot or development site that is occupied
by the following: buildable lots, buildings, structures, improved parking, driveways,
alleys, sidewalks and streets, and other improvements.
LANDSCAPE SERVICE — A business engaged in the provision of yard and garden
maintenance services to clients, usually consisting of an office and other buildings or
structures for storage of inventory, equipment, and vehicles. The term shall not include
or allow any dump heap, landfill, or any other form or repository of construction or
demolition debris.
LANDSCAPING — The finishing and adornment of unpaved yard areas. Materials
and treatment generally include naturally growing elements such as grass, trees, shrubs
and flowers. This treatment shall be permitted also to include the use of logs, rocks,
fountains, water features and contouring of the earth.
LAUNDROMAT — A facility where patrons wash, dry, or dry clean clothing or other
fabrics in machines operated by the patron.
LAUNDRY/LAUNDRIES — A facility that launders, washes or otherwise cleans
(including, without limitation, dry-cleaning processes) clothing, uniforms, towels,
sheets, linens, rugs or other cloth or textile items, for commercial customers.
LIBRARY — A public facility for the use, but not sale, of literary, musical, artistic, or
reference materials.
LIFT — A floor over a business or commercial space, usually unpartitioned, that is
converted into an apartment.
LIVESTOCK MARKET — A commercial establishment wherein livestock are
collected for sale and auction.
LOADING SPACE — A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith,
providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks.
LOT — A parcel of land that is either shown on a recorded subdivision plat or described
by metes and bounds or other legal description.
LOT FRONTAGE — A portion or portions of a lot abutting street right-of-way.
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:187
LOT OF RECORD — A lot, a plat or other legal description of which has been recorded
in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Washington County, Virginia prior to
the effective date of this ordinance.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more street rights-of-way at their
intersection.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot having a frontage on two nonintersecting street
rights-of-way as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot with frontage on but one street right-of-way.
LOT, WIDTH OF — The average horizontal distance between side lot lines.
LOWEST FLOOR — The floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, but
excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for vehicle parking,
building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render
the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal
Code 44CFR § 60.3.
LUMEN — A standard unit of measurement of luminous flux.
LUMINAIRE — A complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps together with
the components designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps, and to
connect the lamps to the power supply. A luminaire is also commonly referred to as a
light-fixture.
LUMINAIRE, FULL CUTOFF — An outdoor light fixture shielded in such a manner
that all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the
fixture, is projected downward (below the horizontal plane).
LUMINAIRE, OUTDOOR — A luminaire which is permanently installed outdoors
including, but not limited to, devices used to illuminate any site, structure, or sign, except
that it does not include an internally illuminated sign.
MALL — (1) A shaded walkway or promenade for pedestrian travel, and or (2) a
shopping center where stores front on both sides of a pedestrian way that may be
enclosed or open.
MANUFACTURE or MANUFACTURING — Refers to the transformation of materials
into an article or product of substantially different character or use.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain
management purposes the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel
trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days,
but does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT — Refers to facilities for the mass manufacture of: rugs,
mattresses, pillows, quilts, millinery, hosiery, clothing, and fabrics; for the compounding
of cosmetics, toiletries, drugs and pharmaceutical products; and other similar uses. The
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:188
manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembling, packaging or testing of goods or
equipment, including research activities, conducted entirely within an enclosed structure,
with no outside storage, serviced by a modest volume of trucks or vans and imposing
a negligible impact on the surrounding environment by noise, vibration, smoke, dust or
pollutants.
MARQUEE — For purposes of the Town's sign regulations, means a projecting
structure over an entrance to a building, such as a theater or motel, and generally
designed and constructed to provide protection against the weather.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) to which base
flood elevations shown on the firm are referenced.
MEDICAL CENTER — Establishment wherein medical care is provided by more than
two doctors on an outpatient basis as distinguished from a hospital.
MICROBREWERY — A facility for the production and packaging of malt beverages
of low alcoholic content for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on or off premise, with a
capacity of not more than 15,000 barrels per year. The development may include other
uses such as a standard restaurant, bar or live entertainment as otherwise permitted in the
zoning district.
MICROCELL — A facility for wireless communications, consisting of an antenna that
is either: (i) not more than four feet in height and with an area of not more than 580
square inches; or (ii) if a tubular antenna, no more than four inches in diameter and no
more than six feet in length.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT — A building or project containing residential uses in
combination with commercial and/or institutional uses. No use that is or will be merely
accessory to, or ancillary to, a residential use shall qualify as a commercial or industrial
use, for purposes of this definition.
MODULAR HOME — A dwelling unit constructed on-site in accordance with the
Virginia one- and two-family dwelling code and composed of components substantially
assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final
assembly on a permanent foundation.
MORTUARY, FUNERAL HOME — An establishment in which the dead are prepared
for burial or cremation. The facility shall be permitted to include a chapel for the
conduct of funeral services and spaces for funeral services and informal gatherings, and/
or display of funeral equipment.
MOVIE THEATER, CINEPLEX — Complex structures with multiple movie theaters,
each theater capable of providing performances independent of the others in the
complex.
MUSEUM — Includes all collections open to the public, of artistic, technical, scientific,
historical or archaeological material, including zoos and botanical gardens, but
excluding libraries, except in so far as they maintain permanent exhibition rooms
NAIL SALON — Any commercial establishment, residence, vehicle or other
establishment, place or event wherein nail care is offered or practiced on a regular basis
for compensation and may include the training of apprentices under regulations of the
board.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — A vertical control used as
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:189
a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.
NEIGHBORHOOD GROCERY STORE — A single store or shop containing not more
than 2,500 square feet of floor space which offers for sale, primarily, most of the
following articles; bread, milk, cheese, canned and bottled food and drinks, tobacco
products, candy, papers and magazines.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures
for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after September 29, 2010, or
after March 16, 1988, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. For floodplain management or development purposes, new construction
means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective
date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the Town of Abingdon and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NON-CONFORMING LOT — A lawful lot of record existing on the effective date of
the zoning regulations applicable to the district in which the lot is located, that does not
comply with the minimum applicable size or other lot requirements of that district.
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE — A lawful structure existing on the effective
date of the zoning regulations applicable to the district in which the structure is located,
that does not comply with the minimum applicable bulk, height, setback, floor area or
other dimensional requirements applicable to structures within that zoning district.
NON-CONFORMING USE — A lawful principal use of a lot, existing on the effective
date of the zoning regulations applicable to the district in which the use is located, or a
more restricted use, that does not comply with applicable use regulations of that district.
NURSERY — A business engaged in the retail sale of plants and horticultural and
gardening supplies materials.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A public or private facility operated exclusively for children
of preschool age.
NURSING HOME — A residential facility, or identifiable component of a residential
facility, for which the licensing authority is the state health commissioner/department
of health, and in which the primary function is the provision of nursing services and
health-related services for the treatment and inpatient care of two or more non-related
individuals. Such facilities are also variously known as convalescent homes, skilled
nursing facilities, skilled care facilities, intermediate care facilities, extended care
facilities, and nursing or nursing care facilities.
OBSTRUCTION — Any obstacle, impediment or hindrance such as a hedge, fence or
other barrier.
OCCUPANCY, RESIDENTIAL — For purposes of this Zoning Ordinance, this term
refers to the number of persons who may reside together within one dwelling unit, as a
single housekeeping unit. Each of the following shall be deemed a single housekeeping
unit: (i) one person; (ii) two or more persons related by blood or marriage, together with
any number of their children (including biological children, stepchildren, foster children,
or adopted children); (iii) two persons unrelated by blood or marriage, together with any
number of the children of either of them (including biological children, stepchildren,
foster children, or adopted children); (iv) within certain designated university residential
zoning districts: up to three persons unrelated by blood or marriage; (v) within all other
residential zoning districts: up to four persons unrelated by blood or marriage; or (vi)
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:190
a group of persons required by law to be treated as a single housekeeping unit, in
accordance with the Federal Fair Housing Act, or a similar state law.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA — Space provided for vehicular parking outside the
dedicated street right-of-way.
OFFICE — Any building, or portion thereof, in which the primary use is the conduct
of a business such as (i) accounting, correspondence, research, editing, administration
or analysis; (ii) the activities of a salesman, sales representative or manufacturer's
representative, where no product inventory is maintained or delivered to purchasers onsite; and (iii) the activities of professionals such as engineers, architects, land surveyors,
artists, lawyers, accountants, real estate brokers, insurance agents and landscape
architects. This definition excludes medical offices and employment offices.
OFFICE, EMPLOYMENT — Any building, or portion thereof, at which day-labor
services are solicited or arranged.
OFFICE, MEDICAL — Any building, or portion thereof, in which the primary use is the
practice of dentistry or medicine, with the exception of (i) methadone treatment or (ii)
opioid replacements other than opioid replacements approved for the treatment of opioid
addiction by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. See Opiate substitution treatment
and Substance abuse treatment facilities also.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL — A building in which space is utilized for the practicing
of a profession such as accountants, architects, computer service, engineers, dentists,
doctors, lawyers, consultants and insurance agents.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map of legally established and proposed public streets,
waterways, and public areas adopted by a locality in accordance with the provisions of
Article 4 (§ 15.2-2233, et seq., Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended). See § 15.2-2201,
Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended.
OPEN SPACE — Land area not covered by buildings, roads, driveway and parking
areas, or outdoor storage areas, including, but not limited to, landscape areas, gardens,
woodlands, walkways, courtyards or lawns, and outdoor recreation areas. Except as
otherwise provided by this title, open spaces includes setback areas that meet the
requirements defined in this chapter.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — Private open space provided within a development which
is provided for, and which is permanently accessible to, all residents/tenants of the
development.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE — A small parcel of land or outside area (deck, lanai, patio)
immediately adjacent to an individual dwelling unit maintained by and for its residents
and reserved exclusively for their use.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — An area dedicated in free to the municipality and operated
and maintained by it. Public open space in a planned residential development is designed
primarily for the use of residents of the particular development, but cannot be reserved
for this exclusive use due to the public ownership.
OPEN STORAGE YARD — Refers to the outdoor storage of lumber, or of construction
materials or equipment. The term "construction materials" does not include any
construction or demolition debris or waste materials.
OPIATE SUBSTITUTION TREATMENT — An organization that administers or
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:191
dispenses an approved drug as specified in § 54.1-3507 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as
amended, pertaining to the scope of practice of and qualifications for licensed substance
abuse treatment practitioners. (See Substance abuse treatment facilities)
OUTSIDE RUNS OR PENS — When referring to facilities associated with animal
boarding/grooming facilities, animal shelters, kennels, or veterinary clinics, shall mean
and refer to any outdoor areas and facilities in which animals are exercised, boarded,
groomed or otherwise kept or cared for.
OWNER — The holder of title in fee simple; and/or any person, group of persons,
company, association or corporation in whose name tax bills on the property are
submitted. For the purposes of this chapter, the owner of premises on which a sign is
located is presumed to be the owner of the sign unless acts to the contrary are officially
recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of the zoning administrator.
PARK — An area of land set aside for public use, such as:
PARKING LOT — A parking area for automobiles which is not an accessory use to a
building or structure on the same lot.
PARKING SPACE — An area not less than nine feet wide by 18 feet long for an
automobile or other motor vehicle; such space being exclusive of necessary drives,
aisles, entrances and exits and being fully accessible for the parking or storage of
permitted vehicles.
PARTY HOUSE — A place for the occasional service of meals to organized groups.
PEN — A small enclosure used for the concentrated confinement and housing of animals
or poultry; a place for feeding and fattening animals; a coop. An enclosed pasture or
range with an area in excess of 100 square feet for each hog or small animal or 200
square feet for each larger animal shall not be regarded as a pen.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company, business,
trust, joint venture or other legal entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY (PWSF) — An unstaffed
communications facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless
communications services, usually consisting of an antenna array, transmission cables, an
equipment shelter and a support structure to achieve necessary elevation.
PHILANTHROPIC INSTITUTION/AGENCY — And refers to an organization holding
legal nonprofit status (i.e., 401(c)(3) certification; or state or local tax-exempt status) that
has as its purpose (i) the provision of health care or other services to elderly, disabled,
indigent or other disadvantaged persons, or (ii) the study of matters of public, political
or civic interest (e.g., institutions sometimes referred to as "think tanks," and similar
organizations).
PHOTOGRAPHY AND PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDIO — A facility engaged in the retail
A piece of land with few or no buildings within or adjoining a Town, maintained
for recreational and ornamental purposes.
(a)
(b) A landscaped Town square.
A tract of land kept in its natural state and usually reserved for the enjoyment and
recreation of visitors.
(c)
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:192
sales, lease and service of photography equipment and supplies, including limited on-site
process or development.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A form of development characterized by
unified site design, intended to allow for a variety of housing types and densities,
clustering of buildings, common open space, and/or a mix of building types and land
uses, in which project planning and density calculations are performed for the entire
development rather than on an individual lot basis.
PLAT or PLAT OF SUBDIVISION — The schematic representation of land divided
or to be divided and information in accordance with the provisions of §§ 15.2-2241,
15.2-2242, 15.2-2258, 15.2-2262, and 15.2-2264, and other applicable statutes. See
§ 15.2201, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended.
PLOT PLAN — A plot of a lot, drawn to scale, showing the actual measurements, the
size and location of any existing buildings or buildings to be erected, the location of the
lot in relation to abutting streets, and other such information.
POOLS, HOT TUBS AND SPAS —
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER — A portable, weather-resistant receptacle
designed and used for the temporary storage or shipment of materials, household goods,
wares or merchandise. The term shall not include containers used for the collection of
solid waste by the Town.
(a) ABOVE-GROUND/ON-GROUND POOL — See "private swimming pool."
BARRIER — A fence, a wall, a building wall, the wall of an above-ground
swimming pool or a combination thereof, which completely surrounds the
swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.
(b)
(c) HOT TUB — See "private swimming pool."
(d) IN-GROUND POOL — See "private swimming pool."
POWER SAFETY COVER — A pool cover that is placed over the water area, and
is opened and closed with a motorized mechanism activated by a control switch.
(e)
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any structure that contains water over 24 inches
(610 mm) in depth and which is used, or intended to be used, for swimming or
recreational bathing in connection with an occupancy in use group R-3 and which is
available only to the family and guests of the householder. This includes in-ground,
above-ground, and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
(f)
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR — Any private swimming pool that is
totally contained within a private structure and surrounded on all four sides by walls
of said structure.
(g)
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR — Any private swimming pool that
is not an indoor pool.
(h)
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL — Any swimming pool other than a private
swimming pool.
(i)
(j) SPA — See "private swimming pool."
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:193
PREMISES — A single lot, or an area of multiple, contiguous lots under common
ownership, along with any building(s) or structure(s) occupying it.
PRINCIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — The business which occupies the most square
footage on a parcel of land as compared to all other businesses situated on the same
parcel. No more than one business per parcel may be considered the principal
establishment.
PROFFER — A written condition offered by a person who has applied for a zoning
map amendment that imposes a regulation or requirement that is in addition to the
zoning district regulations otherwise applicable to property which is the subject of the
application.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any agency or body, any official or any representative of
local, State or Federal government.
PUBLIC HOUSE — Tavern consisting of a building with a bar and public rooms; often
provides light meals
PUBLIC UTILITIES — Any service or convenience to the public whether above
ground level or under the ground including, but not limited to, electrical, telephone
and cable television poles, wires or other conductors, lights and transformers and to
water, sewer and gas pipes, meters, valves as well as to storm and other drains and to
all other appurtenances and facilities necessary for the safe and efficient transmission,
distribution and provision of such utilities in the quantities and capacities necessary to
provide adequate services to any area or areas of the Town of Abingdon and environs.
Such definition of public utilities shall also include the ability of utility companies to
maintain, replace and rehabilitate such facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY STATION — A structure or facility used by a public or quasi-public
utility agency to store, distribute, generate electritown, gas, telecommunications, and
related equipment, or to pump or chemically treated water. This does not include storage
or treatment of sewage, solid waste or hazardous waste.
PUBLIC WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS — A water or sewer system owned and
operated by a municipality or county, or owned by a private individual or a corporation
approved by the governing body and properly licensed by the state corporation
commission.
PUBLIC WAY — Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed
from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently
appropriated to the public for public use.
QUASI-PUBLIC — Essentially a public use, although under private ownership or
control.
QUORUM — A majority of the authorized members of a board or commission.
RADIO AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING STATION — An establishment
engaged in transmitting oral and visual programs to the public and that consists of a
studio, transmitter, and antennas.
RECREATION VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
(a) Built on a single chassis;
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:194
RECREATION, INDOOR — An establishment providing completely enclosed
recreation activities. Accessory uses shall be permitted to include the preparation and
serving of food and/or the sale of equipment related to the enclosed uses. Included in this
definition shall be bowling, roller skating or ice skating, billiards, pool, motion picture
theatres, and related amusements.
RECREATION, OUTDOOR — An area free of buildings except for restrooms, dressing
rooms, equipment storage, maintenance buildings, open-air pavilions and similar
structures used primarily for recreational activities.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Any area, structure, or building, or combination
thereof used for activities including walking, jogging, picnicking, swimming, golf,
tennis, basketball and other similar activities.
RECYCLING FACILITY — Any location whose primary use is where waste or scrap
materials are stored, bought, sold, accumulated, exchanged, packaged, disassembled or
handled, including, but not limited to, scrap metals, paper, rags, tires and bottles, and
other such materials.
REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — An architect or engineer registered or
licensed to practice professional architecture or engineering as defined by statutory
requirements of the professional registration laws of the state in which the project is to
be constructed.
RELIGIOUS, CULTURAL AND FRATERNAL ACTIVITY — A use or building
owned or maintained by organized religious organizations or nonprofit associations
for social, civic or philanthropic purposes, or the purpose for which persons regularly
assemble for worship.
RENOVATION — Interior or exterior remodeling of a structure, other than ordinary
repair.
RESEARCH AND TESTING FACILITY — A facility for conducting scientific or
engineering tests on materials, parts, and products, not involving sales directly to the
public.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY — An establishment or institution, public or private,
providing residential human care, including homes for the aged, family care homes,
foster homes or group homes serving mentally disabled or other developmentally
disabled persons.
RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY — A residential facility in which no more
than eight persons reside, together with one or more resident counselors or other resident
staff person(s), and for which either (i) the department of mental health, mental
retardation and substance abuse services, or (ii) in the case of a children's residential
facility, as defined with Code of Virginia § 63.2-100, the department of social services
is the state licensing authority.
RESTAURANT — Any place of business wherein foods or beverages are provided
(b) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(c) Designed to be self-propelled or towable; and
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(d)
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:195
for human consumption. The term restaurant includes, without limitation: lunchrooms,
cafeterias, coffee shops, cafes, taverns, delicatessens, hotel dining rooms, dinner
theaters, soda fountains, and dining accommodations of public or private clubs. A fast
food restaurant is one at which patrons order and receive food orders at a counter or
window for consumption either on or off-premises. A full service restaurant is one
at which patrons are seated at tables or booths, where food orders are taken at and
delivered to such tables/booths by wait staff. This definition excludes: bakeries; bedand-breakfast facilities; catering businesses (where food is prepared for consumption
at another site); places that manufacture packaged or canned foods for distribution to
grocery stores or other, similar food retailers for sale to the public; facilities licensed
by the department of agriculture; snack bars and refreshment stands at public recreation
facilities, operated for the convenience of patrons of the facility; concession stands at
youth athletic activities, if such stands are promoted or sponsored by either a youth
athletic association or a charitable nonprofit organization; or any facility exempt from
state licensure requirements pursuant to Code of Virginia § 35.1-25.
RESTAURANT, ALL-NIGHT — A restaurant that remains open between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day(s).
RESTAURANT/DANCE HALL — A restaurant wherein more than one-eighth of its
gross floor area is or may be used for dancing, or which serves, or may serve, as standing
room for patrons listening to live music (such as bands or disc-jockey performances).
The following spaces may be excluded from gross floor area to determine the space
attributable to dancing or standing room: kitchen facilities and storage areas.
RETAIL STORES AND SHOPS — Buildings for display and sale of merchandise at
retail or for rendering of personal services (but specifically exclusive of coal, wood
and lumber yards) such as the following, which will serve as illustration; drug store,
newsstand, food store, candy shop, milk dispensary, dry goods and notions store, antique
store and gift shop, hardware store, household appliance store, furniture store, florist,
optician, music and radio/television store, tailor shop, barber shop and beauty parlor.
RETIREMENT HOME — An establishment or institution, public or private, providing
minimal care of elderly persons. "Minimal residential care" as used herein is a lesser
degree of care than provided by a residential care facility, nursing home or hospital.
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boarding house."
SCHOOL — Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or used for
education or instruction in any branch of knowledge.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL — A school establishment to provide for the teaching of
industrial, clerical, managerial or artistic skills. This definition applies to schools that
are owned and operated privately for profit and that do not offer a complete educational
curriculum (e.g., beauty school or modeling school).
SCHOOL, COSMETOLOGY — A place or establishment licensed by the state to accept
and train students and which offers a cosmetology curriculum approved by the state.
SCHOOLS, SPECIAL INSTRUCTION — A school offering business, musical,
dramatic, artistic, cultural and vocational subjects including dance, karate and similar
instructional schools.
SCREENING — Landscaping that physically and visually separates different uses, or
that shields uses from adjacent property or uses.
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:196
SERVICE, MEDICAL — Refers to work performed by an individual or business entity
within the scope of the practice of medicine, dentistry and mental health services, and
other health care providers who are certified or licensed by any of the health regulatory
boards within the state department of health professions (except the board of funeral
directors and embalmers and the board of veterinary medicine).
SERVICE, PROFESSIONAL — Refers to work performed by an individual or business
within the scope of the practice of accounting, actuarial services, architecture,
engineering, or law. Setback for purposes of this article means when referencing the
support structure for a communications facility, the term setback shall refer to the
required distance from the center of the support structure to the applicable property line
of the parcel on which the communications facility is located.
SHALLOW FLOODING AREA — A special flood hazard area with base flood depths
from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
SHELTER CARE — A building, or portion thereof, used for the provision of emergency
overnight shelter for homeless, indigent and other disadvantaged persons, and associated
services, such as: crisis intervention, counseling, service referral, hotline, and similar
social service functions.
SHOPPING CENTER — A commercial development consisting of two or more retail
stores, usually one store deep, that fronts on a street for a distance of one Town block or
more.
SIDEWALK CAFE — An establishment serving food and/or beverages on public
sidewalk space.
SIGN — A structure, wall or other object, or portion thereof visible from the public
right-of-way, used for the display of any information or message, including without
limitation, any device, structure, fixture or placard using graphics, symbols and/or
written copy; provided, however, that this definition shall not include works of art or
temporary holiday decorations. Any display of any letters, words, numerals, figures,
devices, emblems, pictures or any combinations thereof by any means whereby the same
are made visible for the purpose of making anything known, whether such display be
made on, attached to, or as a part of a structure, surface or any other thing; including, but
not limited to the ground, any rock, tree or other natural object, which display is visible
beyond the boundaries of the parcel of land on which the same is made. A display of less
than one square foot is excluded from this definition.
SITE PLAN — The proposal for development or a subdivision including all covenants,
grants or easements and other conditions relating to use, location and bulk of buildings,
density of development, common open space, public facilities and such other
information as required by the subdivision ordinance to which the proposed development
or subdivision is subject. See § 15.2-2201, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended.
SKATEBOARD PARK — A building, structure, or open area containing or developed
with slopes, hills, passageways, and other challenges where people using skateboards
may practice the sport for a fee; rental or sale of skateboards and related equipment may
be included.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A special use that is a use not permitted in a particular
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:197
district except by a special use permit granted under the provisions of this chapter and
any zoning ordinance adopted herewith. See § 15.2-2201, Code of Virginia, 1950, as
amended.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or
greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in Section 15-8-4 of this
ordinance.
SPECIALTY RETAIL SHOPS — Any buildings for display and sale of retail goods and
merchandise of the following type: antiques, baked goods, books, clothing, crafts, gifts,
flowers, specialty foods and furniture.
STADIUM/ARENA — See "arena/stadium."
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement,
substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
STEEP SLOPE — Refers to the portion of a lot that has a grade in excess of 25%.
STORY — That portion of a building, other than the basement, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; and, if there is no floor
above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of
roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level and in which
space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off for use.
STREET — A highway, street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, alley, or public way. See
§ 15.2-2201, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended.
STREET LINE — A dividing line between a street or road right-of-way and the
contiguous property.
STREET, PRIVATE — A right-of-way or easement in private ownership, not dedicated
or maintained as a public street, which affords the principal means of access to two or
more sites.
STREETWALL — The facade of a building fronting along a street.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
STUDIOS, PROFESSIONAL — An establishment where a fine art is taught, studied,
performed and/or sold: such as sculpture, painting/drawing, dance, design.
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:198
SUBDIVISION — Unless otherwise defined in an ordinance adopted pursuant to
§ 15.2-2240, means the division of a parcel of land into three or more lots or parcels
of less than five acres each for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building
development, or, if a new street is involved in such division, any division of a parcel
of land. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate as to the context, shall
relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided and solely for the purpose
of recordation of any single division of land into two lots or parcels, a plat such division
shall be submitted for approval in accordance with § 15.2-2258. See § 15.2-2201, Code
of Virginia, 1950, as amended.
SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT FACILITIES — Any facility, use or activity
subject to regulation and licensure pursuant to § 37.2-404 of the Code of Virginia, 1950,
as amended, subject to the following restrictions as well as conditions or restrictions
imposed by the legislative body as part of the special exception permit. No such facility
shall be located within 0.5 mile of any public or private K-12 school, public or private
licensed day care center, church, synagogue or other place of worship, residentially
zoned district (R-1 and R-2), nor within 1,000 feet of a residential dwelling.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed
50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This
term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS —
A manufactured home park in which the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equal or exceeds 50% of the value of the
streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.
SUPPORT STRUCTURE — For purposes of Article IX, Section 34-1070, et seq.,
a structure (other than an attachment structure) designed and constructed specifically
to support a communications facility, and may include alternative towers, monopole
towers, self-supporting or lattice towers, and other similar structures.
TATTOO PARLOR — Any place in which is offered or practiced the placing of designs,
letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin of any
person with ink or any other substance, resulting in the permanent coloration of the
skin, including permanent make-up or permanent jewelry, by the aid of needles or any
other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin. No individual or entity shall
operate a barbershop, cosmetology salon, nail care salon, waxing salon, hair braiding
salon, tattoo parlor, body-piercing salon, or esthetics spa without a valid license issued
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure
safe living conditions, or
(a)
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
(b)
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:199
by the Commonwealth. (§ 54.1-704.1 Code of Virginia).
TATTOOER — Any person who for remuneration practices tattooing.
TATTOOING — The placing of designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other
marks upon or under the skin of any person with ink or any other substance, resulting
in the permanent coloration of the skin, including permanent make-up or permanent
jewelry, by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the
skin.
TECHNOLOGY-BASED BUSINESS — Refers to a business such as computer
component assembly; computer software development/testing; financial service
company; graphic design firm; research laboratory or other research facility, and similar
businesses, where: (i) the use has no more than a minimal adverse environmental impact,
including noise, odor, light, glare, traffic or vibration, when measured at the nearest
property line; and (ii) all operations, including storage, are house completely within an
enclosed building.
THEATER — A building, or portion thereof, used for dramatic, operatic, motion picture,
musical productions or other performances.
TOURIST HOME — One or more rooms located within a single-family dwelling which
is actually used as such, which rooms are used secondarily to such single-family use for
the temporary accommodation of transients in return for compensation, whether or not
such rooms are used in conjunction with other portions of such dwelling.
TOWER, ALTERNATIVE — For purposes of Article IX, Section 34-1070, et seq.,
a support structure that camouflages or conceals the presence of the antenna array,
equipment shelter and other apparatus for a PWSF or other communications facility,
to an extent that the communications facility is either invisible or otherwise made an
integrated part of the feature enclosing it. Examples of an alternative tower structure
include, but are not limited to: clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, water towers,
and light poles.
TOWER, COMMUNICATIONS — Refers to a support structure.
TOWER, GUYED — A monopole or lattice tower support structure that is secured and
stabilized by diagonal cables (guy wires) anchored to the ground or other surface.
TOWER, LATTICE — A support structure that is self-supporting with multiple legs and
cross-bracing of structural steel.
TOWER, MONOPOLE — A support structure consisting of a single pole, constructed
without any guy wires and ground anchors.
TOWER, SELF-SUPPORTING — A support structure that is self-supporting with a
single shaft of wood, steel or concrete and antennas or other communications facilities
at the top.
TOWING SERVICE — A business engaged in the moving of motor vehicles, typically
consisting of an office area used for administration and dispatch activities and an area
for parking and temporary storage of tow-trucks and automobiles that have been moved
by such business.
TOWN COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of Abingdon, Virginia.
TRANSIT FACILITY — A facility used or intended to be used as an area for the
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:200
loading, unloading, and interchange of transit passengers. Typical uses include bus
terminals, rail stations, and passenger related mass transit facilities.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and designed
to be used for temporary occupancy for travel, recreational or vacation use with the
manufacturer's permanent identification "travel trailer" thereon; and when factory
equipped for the road, being any length provided its gross weight does not exceed 4,500
pounds, or being any weight provided its overall length does not exceed 29 feet. For the
purpose of this ordinance, a travel trailer shall not be deemed a mobile home.
TREE CANOPY or TREE COVER — All areas of coverage by plant material exceeding
five feet in height, and the extent of planted tree canopy at 10 or 20 years maturity, as
applicable. Planted tree canopy at maturity shall be based on published reference texts
generally accepted by landscape architects, nurserymen and arborists, i.e., in The Manual
of Woody Landscape Plants by Michael A. Dirr (4th edition, 1990).
USE — The activity occurring on a lot or parcel for which land or a building is arranged,
designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied, including
all accessory uses.
USE, CHANGE OF — The change within the classified use of a structure or premise.
USE, NONCONFORMING — The use that lawfully occupied a building or land at the
time this Code became effective, which has been lawfully continued and which does not
now conform with the use regulations.
USE, PRINCIPAL — A use that fulfills a primary function of a household,
establishment, institution or other entity.
USE, TEMPORARY — A use that is authorized by this Code to be conducted for a
fixed period of time. Temporary uses are characterized by such activities as the sale of
agricultural products, contractors' offices and equipment sheds, fireworks, carnivals, flea
markets, and garage sales.
UTILITIES — All lines and facilities that provide for the transmission, transfer,
distribution, collection, transmission, or disposal of water, storm and sanitary sewage,
oil, gas, power, information, telecommunications and telephone cable, and includes
facilities for the generation of electritown.
UTILITY FACILITIES — And refers to the following: sewage treatment plants, sewer
pumping stations, water treatment plants, water pumping stations, gas regulator
facilities, gas distribution facilities, incinerators and electric power transformer
substations, and utility transmission line alignments and towers owned by public service
corporations but which are not governed by Town franchise arrangements.
VARIANCE — In the application of the Zoning Ordinance, a reasonable deviation from
those provisions regulating the size or area of a lot or parcel of land, or the size, area,
bulk, or location of a building or structure, when the strict application of the ordinance
would result in unnecessary or unreasonable hardship to the property owner, and such
need for a variance would not be shared generally by other properties, and provided that
such variance is not contrary to the intended spirit and purpose of the ordinance. It shall
not include a change in use, which change shall be accomplished by a rezoning or by a
conditional zoning. See § 15.2-2201, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL — A place where animals are given medical care
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:201
administered by one or more professionals licensed by the state board of veterinary
medicine, and where boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to such
hospital care. Also commonly known as a "veterinary clinic."
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant
with the Town of Abingdon's Zoning Ordinance.
VISITABLE — When used in reference to a residential dwelling, means that such
dwelling is wheelchair-friendly, to the extent that: (i) one exterior entrance is constructed
at-grade, or is served by a ramp, and (ii) on the same floor as is served by the wheelchairaccessible entrance, there is at least one bathroom with sufficient space in which a
wheelchair may maneuver, i.e., a minimum of 30 inches by 48 inches (exclusive of the
space over which the door swings) of unobstructed floor area.
WAREHOUSE — A commercial or industrial building or structure used for storage and
inventory of goods and materials.
WATERCOURSE — A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic
feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes
specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
WELDING OR MACHINE SHOP — A commercial or industrial building in which
machines, machine parts, or other metal products are fabricated.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — An establishment for the sale and distribution of goods
and merchandise to a retailer for resale, as opposed to sale directly to the public.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless services, as defined in
the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes FCC-licensed commercial
wireless telecommunications services, including cellular, personal communications
services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio
(ESMR), and paging, as well as unlicensed wireless services and common carrier
wireless exchange access services, and similar services that currently exist or that may in
the future be developed. The term does not mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite
services, as defined in Section 303(v) of the Act.
WORKING DAY — A day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or other day on which
Abingdon Town Hall is closed to the public.
YARD — Refers to the distance between the exterior facade of a building or any
projection thereof (other than steps, unenclosed balconies and uncovered unenclosed
porches) and an adjacent property line. The term "required yard," where used within
this Zoning Ordinance, refers to the minimum distance required by the regulations of
a particular zoning district to be unobstructed by any building, structure, or projection
thereof (other than steps), extending the full length of the adjacent property line. Also
commonly referred to as "setback," "required setback," and "building setback line."
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard
lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line
(In accordance with Article 15 Flood hazard District) A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence
of compliance required in § 60.3(d)(3) of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
(a)
§ 26-1 ABINGDON CODE § 26-1
B:202
and the main building or any projection thereof other than steps. On corner lots, the front
yard shall be considered as being adjacent to the street on which the lot has its least
dimension.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the rear of a lot between side lot lines and
being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot lines and the rear of the
main building or any projection other than steps. On corner lots the rear yard shall be
considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both
corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the
lot from the front yard.
YARD, SIDE — A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending
from the front lot line to the rear yard line and being the mum horizontal distance
between a side line and the side of the main building or any projections thereof other
than steps.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The director of the department of planning, zoning
and preservation designated by the Town Manager to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
ZONING or TO ZONE — The process of classifying land within a locality into areas
and districts, such areas and districts being generally referred to as "zones," by legislative
action and the prescribing and application in each area and district of regulations
concerning buildings and structure designs, building and structure placement and uses to
which land, buildings and structures within such designated areas and districts may be
put. See § 15.2-2201, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended.
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:203

Code Comparative Table
§ 26-1 ZONING ORDINANCE § 26-1
B:205

Chapter CCT
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
§ CCT-1. Code Comparative Table 1985 Code.
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1985 Code, as
updated, which are included herein. Sections of the 1985 Code, as supplemented, not
listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and
permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the
table immediately following this table.
1985 Code Section Section this Code
1-1 — 1-5 1-1 — 1-5
1-6 1-6
1-9
2-1 66-1
2-2, 2-3 2-26, 2-27
2-4, 2-5 2-41, 2-42
2-6 2-28
2-7 — 2-24 2-43 — 2-60
2-25 2-29
2-26, 2-27 2-61, 2-62
2-28 — 2-34 2-76 — 2-82
2-35 — 2-45 2-96 — 2-106
2-46(a) — 2-46(d) 2-126 — 2-129
2-47, 2-48 2-130, 2-131
2-57 2-151
2-59 2-152
3-6, 3-7 6-26, 6-27
4-1 — 4-3 10-26 — 10-28
4-3.1 10-29
4-4, 4-5 10-1, 10-2
5-6 14-27
5-7 14-26
5-8 — 5-15 14-28 — 14-35
6.1-1 — 6.1-4 42-26 — 42-29
7-1 34-1
§ 26-1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE § CCT-1
CCT:1
1985 Code Section Section this Code
7-2 — 7-5 34-26 — 34-29
7-6 — 7-13 34-51 — 34-58
7-14 — 7-17 34-81 — 34-84
8-6 30-51
8-7, 8-8 30-61, 30-62
8-9 30-63, 30-64
9-1 — 9-6 18-26 — 18-31
9-8, 9-9 18-32, 18-33
9-11, 9-12 18-34, 18-35
10-1, 10-2 18-57, 18-58
10-3 18-56
10-4(a) 18-59
10-4(b), (c) 18-60
10-5 — 10-11 18-61 — 18-67
10-12 18-59
10-13 18-68, 18-69
11-1 70-2
11-2 — 11-5 70-41 — 70-44
11-6 70-1
11-7, 11-8 70-26
11-9 — 11-12 70-27 — 70-30
11-13 — 11-16 70-102 — 70-105
11-17 — 11-19 70-105 — 70-107
11-20 70-144
11-21 70-108
11-22, 11-23 78-7, 78-8
11-24(a) — (d) 70-132
11-25 — 11-34 70-133 — 70-142
11-34.1 70-143
11-35, 11-36 70-145
11-37 — 11-39 70-157 — 70-159
11-40 — 11-43 70-172 — 70-175
11-44 70-146
11-45 — 11-53 70-187 — 70-195
§ CCT-1 ABINGDON CODE § CCT-1
CCT:2
1985 Code Section Section this Code
11-54 — 11-66 70-66 — 70-78
11-67 70-217
11-69 — 11-72 70-219 — 70-222
12-1 30-26, 30-27
12-2, 12-3 30-28, 30-29
13-1 50-1
13-3, 13-4 50-2, 50-3
13-4.1 50-4
13-5 50-5
13-6, 13-7 70-3, 70-4
13-9, 13-10 50-6, 50-7
14-1 58-1
14-8 — 14-11 38-26 — 38-29
15-1 74-26
15-2 — 15-6 74-28 — 74-32
15-8 — 15-14 74-46 — 74-52
15-15 — 15-17 74-33 — 74-35
15-18 — 15-22 74-66 — 74-70
15-23 74-36
15-26, 15-27 74-36, 74-37
15-27.1 74-37
15-30, 15-31 74-38, 74-39
15-32 74-171
15-33 74-173
15-34 74-176
15-36 74-178
16-1 62-1
16-2 62-61
16-3 62-2
16-4 62-62
16-5 62-26
16-6 62-63
16-7 — 16-9 62-3 — 62-5
16-10, 16-11 62-36, 62-37
§ CCT-1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE § CCT-1
CCT:3
1985 Code Section Section this Code
16-13 62-80
16-14 62-81
62-101
16-16 — 16-19 62-102 — 62-105
16-20 — 16-23 18-126 — 18-129
17-1, 17-2 66-2, 66-3
17-5 — 17-12 66-37 — 66-44
17-13 — 17-22 66-81 — 66-90
17-23 — 17-28 66-56 — 66-61
18-1, 18-2 82-26, 82-27
18-3 82-50
18-4 — 18-9 82-28 — 82-33
18-10 — 18-13 82-46 — 82-49
18-14 — 18-18 82-51 — 82-55
18-19 82-66 — 82-68
18-20 82-69
19-1 — 19-3 46-1 — 46-3
20-1 — 20-3 78-1 — 78-3
20-4 — 20-6 78-3 — 78-5
20-7, 20-8 78-5, 78-6
20-10 78-7
20-11 — 20-15 78-31 — 78-35
21-1(b) — (d) 54-51
21-2 — 21-4 54-52 — 54-54
§ CCT-2. Code Comparative Table - Ordinances.
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1985
Code, as updated, which are included herein. Prior ordinances were incorporated into the
1985 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since the 1985 Code, and not listed
herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent
nature.
Ordinance
Number Date Section Section this Code
4-4-1977 (Ord.) 6-1 — 6-8 30-86 — 30-93
1-7-1985 (Ord.) 2 1-7
§ CCT-1 ABINGDON CODE § CCT-2
CCT:4
Ordinance
Number Date Section Section this Code
86-9-1 9-8-1986 74-35
3-30-1987 (Ord.) 1(17-24) — 1(17-39) 66-111 — 66-126
3-30-1987 (Ord.) 66-146
17-40 — 17-42 66-147 — 66-149
17-42(A) 66-150
17-43 — 17-46 66-151 — 66-154
10-5-1987 (Ord.) 3-8 6-51
3-9 — 3-12 6-66 — 6-69
3-13 6-53
3-14 6-70
3-15 6-52
3-16 6-55
3-17 6-54
87-11-1 11-2-1987 70-218
4-4-1988 (Ord.) App. B, § 11-1
6-6-1988 (Ord.) 66-45
88-6-2 6-7-1988 66-45
7-1-1988 (Ord.) 16-12, pt. I(a) —
16-12, pt. I(c)
62-76 — 62-78
16-12, pt. II 62-79
1989-1 1-9-1989 70-72
1-9-1989 (Ord.) App. B, § 13-1
89-6-1 6-5-1989 74-171 — 74-173
89-6-3 6-29-1989 15-1 74-26
15-5 74-31
15-17 74-35
15-33.1, 15-33.2 74-174, 74-175
15-34 74-176
15-36 74-178
15-38 74-179
89-6-4 6-29-1989 74-176
89-9-1 9-11-1989 1 66-26
10-2-1989 (Ord.) App. B, § 21-1
§ CCT-2 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE § CCT-2
CCT:5
Ordinance
Number Date Section Section this Code
App. B, § 21-3
App. B, § 21-6
89-11-1 11-6-1989 11-1 70-2
89-12-3 12-4-1989 1-6
2-5-1990 (Ord.) App. B, § 8-11
3-5-1990 (Ord.) App. B, § 24-1
90-4-3 4-2-1990 2-49 — 2-51 54-26 — 54-28
2-52 54-30, 54-31
2-52(1) — (4) 54-29
12-3-1990 (Ord.) 70-107
5-6-1991 (Ord.) App. B, § 8-2
7-1-1991 (Ord.) 74-171 — 74-173
10-4-1991 (Ord.) App. B, § 11-1
11-4-1991 (Ord.) 1 26-26
1.1 — 1.5 26-27 — 26-31
12-2-1991 (Ord.) 15-34 — 15-36 74-176 — 74-178
12-2-1991 (Ord.) 11-44 70-146
11-53 70-195
1-1-92 1-6-1992 15-39.1.1 74-81
15-39.1.2 74-26, 74-27
15-39.1.3 74-27
15-39.1.4, 15-39.1.5 74-91, 74-92
15-39.1.6 —
15-39.1.10
74-93 — 74-97
15-39.1.11,
15-39.1.12
74-111, 74-112
15-39.1.13 74-126
15-39.1.14.1 —
15-39.1.15.4
74-127 — 74-136
15-39.1.16 —
15-39.1.19
74-137 — 74-140
15-39.1.20 —
15-39.1.25
74-151 — 74-156
15-39.1.26 74-157
3-2-1992 (Ord.) 70-4
§ CCT-2 ABINGDON CODE § CCT-2
CCT:6
Ordinance
Number Date Section Section this Code
App. B, § 8-2
4-6-1992 70-4
92-6-1 6-1-1992 11-1 70-2
6-7-1993 (Ord.) 66-40
66-42
66-112
8-6-1993 (Ord.) 14-1, 14-2 58-26, 58-27
14-4, 14-5 58-41, 58-42
14-7 — 14-9 58-43 — 58-45
14-10 58-46, 58-47
14-12 — 14-15 58-48 — 58-51
14-17, 14-18 58-52, 58-53
14-35 — 14-40 58-66 — 58-71
14-41(a) 58-72
14-42(a) 58-73
14-43 — 14-46 38-26 — 38-29
9-13-1993 (Ord.) 1 — 3 22-26 — 22-28
4(1) — (4) 22-29
4(5), 4(6) 22-30, 22-31
6-6-1994 (Ord.) 70-2
9-6-1994 (Ord.) 1 — 4 2-176 — 2-179
5 — 12 2-191 — 2-198
13 2-199, 2-200
14 — 21 2-201 — 2-208
21(A), 21(B) 2-209, 2-210
22 — 27 2-211 — 2-216
28 — 36 2-226 — 2-234
37 — 44 2-246 — 2-253
44(A), 44(B) 2-254, 2-255
45 2-256
46 2-180
12-5-1994 (Ord.) 18-67
1-9-1995 (Ord.) 6-1 — 6-8 30-86 — 30-93
§ CCT-2 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE § CCT-2
CCT:7
Ordinance
Number Date Section Section this Code
1-9-1995 (Ord.) 11-54 — 11-65 70-67 — 70-78
2-6-1995 (Ord.) 11-54 — 11-66 70-66 — 70-78
5-1-1995 (Ord.) 70-2
7-10-1995 (Ord.) 1 — 7 Adopting Ordinance,
p. ix
2-5-1996 (Amend.) 74-26 — 74-37
74-46 — 74-52
74-66 — 74-70
74-81, 74-82
74-91 — 74-97
74-108 — 74-112
74-123 — 74-131
74-140 — 74-147
74-158 — 74-170
74-181 — 74-185
74-191 — 74-197
74-203 — 74-207
74-212 — 74-214
74-220, 74-221
74-232 — 74-240
8-5-1996 (Ord.) Added 9-1(9-1-26)
1-6-1997 (Ord.) Arts. 1 — 9 18-26 — 18-34
6-2-1997 (Ord.) 1 — 3 26-41 — 26-43
8-4-1997 (Mins.) Added App. B, § 13-1-21
1-5-1998 (Amd.) Rpld 17-11
1-5-1998 (Mins.) 23-1 — 23-10
24-1, 24-2
25-1 — 25-9
5-3-1999 (Ord.) 62-1
3-6-2000 (Ord.) 54-53
4-3-2000 (Ord.) 70-217
7-3-2000 (Ord.) 66-111 — 66-145
8-7-2000 (Ord.) 78-1 — 78-15
§ CCT-2 ABINGDON CODE § CCT-2
CCT:8
Ordinance
Number Date Section Section this Code
9-11-2000 (Ord.) 70-133(a)
10-2-2000 (Ord.) 66-81 — 66-110
2-5-2001 (Mins.) Added 74-53
6-4-2001 (Ord.) 70-140 — 70-145
Added 70-140.1 — 70-140.9
9-10-2001 (Ord.) Rpld App. B, §§ 14-1 —
14-8
Added App. B, §§ 14-1 —
14-11
9-10-2001 (Mins.) App. B, § 17-11
9-10-2001 (Ord.) 30-86 — 30-93
1-2002 5-6-2002 Added 70-108
2-2002 5-6-2002 Added 50-8
3-2002 5-6-2002 Added 70-222
4-2002 5-6-2002 Added 50-9
6-2002 11-4-2002 30-30 — 30-35
1-2003 4-7-2003 Added App. B, § 18-9
5-5-2003 (Amd.) App. B, § 11-1-28
6-2-2003 (Ord.) App. B, § 8-1
App. B, § 8-2-2
App. B, § 8-2-15
App. B, §§ 8-4 —
8-10
Rnbd App. B, § 8-11 as
8-12
Added App. B, § 8-11
Added App. B, §§ 8-13 —
8-15
7-7-2003 (Amd.) App. B, § 18-9-4
App. B, § 18-9-7
8-4-2003 (Amd.) Added 14-51 — 14-57
2003-59 8-4-2003 54-26
2-2-2004 (Amd.) App. B, § 9-1-4
App. B, § 9-1-7
§ CCT-2 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE § CCT-2
CCT:9
Ordinance
Number Date Section Section this Code
Added App. B, §§ 9-1-27,
9-1-28
Rpld App. B, § 9-2-1
2004-65 9-7-2004 1 App. B, § 18-9-3
2 Added App. B, § 18-9-8(f)
10-12-2004 (Ord.) 66-88
Added 66-89(c)
12-6-2004 (Ord.) Added 34-30
3-7-2005 (Ord.) Rpld 30-51
Added 30-52, 30-53
Rpld 30-61 — 30-64
Added 30-65, 30-66
6-6-2005 (Amd.) Added App. B, § 17-17
7-7-2005 (Ord.) 38-26 — 38-32
2005-90 12-5-2005 62-76
2-2005 12-5-2005 1 — 4 Added 66-66 — 66-69
3-2005 12-5-2005 App. B, §§ 8-1, 8-2
Added App. B, § 8-2A
App. B, Art. 26
12-5-2005 (Ord.) App. A, §§ 1.1, 1.2,
3.1 — 3.4,
4.1 — 4.14,
5.1 — 5.26,
6.1 — 6.16,
7.1, 7.2,
8.1 — 8.3,
9.1 — 9.4,
10.1 — 10.5,
11.1,
12.1 — 12.3,
13.1, 13.2,
14.1,
15.1
§ CCT-2 ABINGDON CODE § CCT-2
CCT:10
Ordinance
Number Date Section Section this Code
1-2006 1-3-2006 (Ord.) App. B, § 8-9-1
2-2006 2-6-2006 (Amd.) Added 18-130 — 18-143
10-2-2006 (Ord.) 1.1, 1.2 Added 2-301,
2.1 2-302,
3.1, 3.2 2-326, 2-327,
4.1 — 4.7 2-351 — 2-357,
5.1 — 5.6 2-376 — 2-381,
6.1 2-303
11-6-2006 (Ord.) App. B, § 8-2
11-6-2006 (Ord.) App. B, § 8-2
Added App. B, § 8-2B
11-6-2006 (Ord.) App. B, § 8-2
App. B, §§ 8-2A,
8-2B
2-5-2007 (Ord.) 2-191, 2-192
2-5-2007 (Ord.) 10-30 Added 10-51
2-5-2007 (Ord.) 54-55 Added 54-76
3-7-2007 (Ord.) 54-55 54-76
5-7-2007 (Ord.) Added 62-106, 62-107
6-4-2007 (Ord.) App. B, § 8-2B
6-4-2007 (Ord.) App. B, §§ 21-1 —
21-20
8-1-2007 (Ord.) Added 66-155 — 66-164
12-3-2007 (Ord.) App. B, § 6-4-1
App. B, § 6-6-2
9-4-2007 (Ord.) App. B, § 13-2
9-4-2007 (Ord.) App. B, § 18-9-7
9-4-2007 (Ord.) App. B, § 21-6-6
App. B, § 21-16
App. B, § 21-19-1
7-1-2008 (Ord.) 5 66-112
66-147
10-8-2008 (Ord.) 2-376(a)
12-1-2008 (Ord.) App. B, § 9-2
§ CCT-2 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE § CCT-2
CCT:11
Ordinance
Number Date Section Section this Code
4-6-2009 (Ord.) App. B, Art. 26
App. B, § 8-2B
App. B, § 10-1
App. B, § 11-1
App. B, § 12-1
6-1-2009 (Ord.) 3 66-1
66-2(a)
66-43
Added 66-66(d)
7-6-2009 (Ord.) 3 App. B, Art. 26
App. B, § 15-4
10-5-2009 (Ord.) 66-27 — 66-31
Added
66-71 — 66-75
10-5-2009 (Ord.) Added App. B, §§ 8A-1 —
8A-9
1-4-2010 (Ord.) 54-53(b)
7-1-2010 (Ord.) 3 30-30 — 30-35
8-2-2010 (Ord.) App. B, §§ 15-1 —
15-13
App. B, § 24-2
App. B, Art. 26
2-7-2011 (Ord.) Added 22-41 — 22-45
2-7-2011 (Ord.) 74-26 — 74-37,
74-46 — 74-53,
74-66 — 74-70,
74-81, 74-82,
74-91 — 74-97,
74-108 — 74-112,
74-123 — 74-131,
74-140 — 74-147,
74-158 — 74-171,
74-181 — 74-185,
74-191 — 74-197,
74-203 — 74-207,
§ CCT-2 ABINGDON CODE § CCT-2
CCT:12
Ordinance
Number Date Section Section this Code
74-212 — 74-214,
74-220, 74-221,
74-232 — 74-240
3-7-2011 (Ord.) 26-26
3-7-2011 (Ord.) 54-26
6-6-2011 (Ord.) 66-45
6-6-2011 (Ord.) Added 74-198
7-5-2011 (Ord.) 62-1(a) — (c)
Added 62-1(d) — (g)
7-5-2011 (Ord.) Added 70-223 — 70-225,
70-239 — 70-254
8-1-2011 (Ord.) 10-51
2-6-2012 (Ord.) 50-6
50-7
4-2-2012 (Ord.) 66-81 — 66-89
Added
66-80.1 — 66-80.9
10-1-2012 (Ord.) 18-131
Added 18-132(a)(5), (6)
11-5-2012 (Ord.) 66-71 — 66-75
Added 66-76 — 66-78
3-4-2013 (Ord.) 58-26, 58-27
58-41 — 58-53
58-66 — 58-73
6-3-2013 (Ord.) 14-1 — 14-4
14-26 — 14-35
14-51 — 14-57
9-3-2013 (Ord.) 38-26 — 38-32
3-3-2014 (Ord.) 3 App. B, §§ 13-1, 13-2
4-7-2014 (Ord.) 14
4-7-2014 (Ord.) Added 30-100 — 30-115
5-5-2014 (Ord.) 3 App. B, § 11-1
6-2-2014 (Ord.) 3 66-36 — 66-45
7-1-2014 (Ord.) 3 App. B, §§ 11-1, 11-2
§ CCT-2 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE § CCT-2
CCT:13
Ordinance
Number Date Section Section this Code
7-1-2008 (Ord.) 5 66-112
66-147
4-6-2015 (Ord.) 3 70-66 — 70-69
Rpld 70-70 — 70-78
11-2-2015 (Ord.) Added 70-31
1-4-2016 (Ord.) 34-51 — 34-56
Rpld 34-57
34-58
Added 34-59
1-4-2016 (Ord.) 3 82-26 — 82-69
2-6-2017 (Ord.) App. B, Art. 26
7-10-2017 (Ord.) Added 18-160 — 18-165
5-7-2018 (Ord.) Added 30-126 — 30-131,
30-141 — 30-143,
30-151 — 30-154
5-6-2019 (Ord.) 3 30-30 — 30-35
10-1-2019 (Ord.) Rpld App. B, § 17-4
10-1-19 2 App. B, § 18-9
2020.01.06.A 1-6-2020 Added 2-382 — 2-388
2020.01.06.B 1-6-2020 2 54-26 — 54-31
2020.01.06.C 1-6-2020 1 2-126 — 2-131
2020.03.02.A 3-2-2020 2 2-96
2020.03.02.B 3-2-2020 2 2-129
2020.03.02.C 3-2-2020 2 Rpld 2-176 — 2-180,
2-191 — 2-216,
2-226 — 2-234,
2-246 — 2-256
Added 2-176
2020.03.02.D 3-2-20 2 74-28
74-34
2020.03.02.E 3-2-20 2 74-82
74-123
74-124
§ CCT-2 ABINGDON CODE § CCT-2
CCT:14
Ordinance
Number Date Section Section this Code
2020.04.20.A 4-20-2020 2 App. B, § 8-6
2020.05.18.A 5-18-2020 2 2-326
2020.06.15.A 6-15-2020 2 2-351
2-356
2020.07.01.B 7-1-2020 2 App. B, § 8-2-4
2020.07.01.C 7-1-2020 2 App. B, § 8-2-13
2020.09.08.A 9-8-2020 3 Rpld App. B, §§ 21-1 —
21-20
Added 21-1 — 21-9
2020.11-2.A 11-2-2020 2 App. B, § 9-2
§ CCT-2 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE § CCT-2
CCT:15

Disposition List
§ CCT-2 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE § CCT-2
CCT:17

Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Town of Abingdon
adopted since the publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the
reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation which is not general and permanent
in nature is considered to be non-Code material (NCM).]
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2021.01.04.A 1-4-2021 Zoning
Ordinance
Amendment
Apx. B 2
2021.01.04.B 1-4-2021 Zoning
Ordinance
Amendment
Apx. B 2
2021.01.04.C 1-4-2021 Zoning
Ordinance
Amendment
Apx. B 2
2021.02.16 2-16-2021 Street Vacation NCM 2
2021.05.03.A 5-3-2021 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 2
2021.05.03.B 5-20-2021 Buildings and
Building
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 14 2
2021.05.20.A 5-20-2021 Removal of
Traffic Control
Signals
NCM 2
2021.05.20.B 5-20-2021 Budget NCM 2
2021.06.07 6-7-2021 Budget NCM 2
2021.07.06.A 7-6-2021 Vehicles for
Hire
Amendment
Ch. 82 2
2021.07.06.B 7-6-2021 Charter
Amendment
Ch. C, footnote
only
2
2021.08.02 8-2-2021 Franchise
Agreement
NCM 2
2021.09.23 9-23-2021 Budget NCM 2
2021.11.01.A 11-1-2021 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 2
2021.11.01.B 11-1-2021 Taxation
Amendment
Ch. 66 2
§ CCT-2 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:1