CODE OF THE CITY OF BUENA VISTA, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Published in 2012 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted March 21, 2013 
____________ 

____________ 
Lawrence F. Hogan 
Mayor 
____________ 
Larry F. Tolley, Vice-Mayor 
Melvin Henson 
Steve Baldridge 
Lewis Plogger 
Jane Armstrong 
Lisa Clark 
City Council 
____________ 
Jay Scudder 
City Manager 
____________ 
Brian Kearney 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Dawn W. Moore 
Clerk of the Council 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Buena Vista, Virginia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1981 Code, as supplemented through September 8, 1994, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS LDC1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS INDEX LDRi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Senior Code Attorney, and D. J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Dawn W. Moore, Administrative Assistant, Brian Kearney, City Attorney, and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Buena Vista, Virginia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Buena Vista, Virginia. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Buena Vista, Virginia. 2012. 
ORDINANCE NO. 13-03 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF BUENA VISTA, VIRGINIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BUENA VISTA: 
Section 1.  The Code entitled "Code of Ordinance, City of Buena Vista, Virginia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 36, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2.  All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 24, 2012, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3.  The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4.  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor or an offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor or an offense, and no specific class of misdemeanor or penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, however, that such penalty shall not exceed the penalty prescribed by general law for a like offense. 
    Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city or any rule or regulation promulgated by any officer or agency of the city, under authority duly vested in such officer or agency, it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a Class 1, 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Class 1 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $2,500.00, or by confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(2)  Class 2 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by confinement in jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(3)  Class 3 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(4)  Class 4 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $250.00. 
    Except as otherwise provided, each day any violation of this Code or any such ordinance, rule, regulation or order continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
    Wherever authorized by law, the penalties provided in this section shall apply to violations occurring inside or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
    The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5.  Additions or amendements to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6.  Ordinances adopted after May 24, 2012, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7.  This ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days after the adoption. 
Passed and adopted by the Council of the City of Buena Vista this 21st day of March 2013. 
/s/ Laurence F. Hogan 
      Mayor   /s/ Dawn W. Moore 
      Clerk of the Council   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
 Number Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supplement 
Number 13-01  1-24-2013 Include 1 13-02  2-21-2013 Include 1 13-03  3-21-2013 Include 1 13-04  4- 4-2013 Include 1 13-05  4- 4-2013 Include 1 13-06  5- 2-2013 Omit 1 13-12 10- 3-2013 Omit 2 13-13 10-17-2013 Omit 2 13-14 11-21-2013 Omit 2 14-01  3- 6-2014 Include 2 14-02  4- 3-2014 Omit 2 14-03  4-17-2014 Omit 2 14-07  6- 5-2014 Include 2 14-11  9- 4-2014 Omit 3 14-12  9- 4-2014 Omit 3 14-13  9- 4-2014 Omit 3 14-14  9- 4-2014 Omit 3 14-15  9- 4-2014 Omit 3 R14-12(Res.)  8-21-2014 Omit 3 R14-13(Res.)  8-21-2014 Omit 3 16-02  4- 7-2016 Include 3 16-07 10- 6-2016 Include 4 16-08 10- 6-2016 Include 4 18-01  1-18-2018 Include 5 18-02  1-18-2018 Omit 5 18-03  1-18-2018 Include 5 18-04  2-15-2018 Include 5 18-05  3- 1-2018 Include 5  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed here is the Charter for the City of Buena Vista as enacted by Acts 1952, ch. 325 approved March 12, 1952. Amendments have been worked into their proper places and are indicated by history notes appearing in parentheses at the end of the amended section. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived unamended from Acts 1952, ch. 325. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Any words appearing in brackets were added by the editor for clarity. 
State Law reference- Relation of state law of cities to Charter, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-100, 15.2-1103; municipal charters generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-200 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - INCORPORATION 

Sec. 1.1. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the territory embraced within the present limits of the City of Buena Vista, as hereinafter defined, or as the same hereafter may be altered or established by law, shall constitute and continue a body politic and corporate, to be known and designated as the City of Buena Vista, and as such shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with, and may have a corporate seal which it may alter, renew, or amend at its pleasure. 
Sec. 1.2. - Form of government. 
    The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "city manager plan." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the Constitution and by this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as "the council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the city manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. 
Sec. 1.3. - Boundaries. 
    The corporation limits shall remain the same as they now are or until changed as provided by law and are described by metes and bounds as follows: 
    Beginning at a point on the north bank of the Maury River (formerly North River), thence north of center line of what was formerly Richmond & Alleghany Railroad, thence eastward with the same six hundred and sixty (660) feet to the line of the lands formerly owned by Buena Vista Company and John Dunlop and with their lines to the intersection with the western line of Aspen Avenue; thence with the lines of Aspen Avenue and Forty-first Street to Juniper Avenue; thence with Juniper Avenue to Thirty-sixth Street; thence with Thirty-sixth Street to Woodbine Avenue; thence with Woodbine Avenue to Thirty-second Street; thence with straight line to the intersection of Birch Avenue and Twenty-eighth Street; thence with Birch Avenue to Hill Street; thence with Hill Street to Maple Avenue; thence with Maple Avenue to Twenty-sixth Street; thence with Twenty-sixth Street to Oak Avenue; thence with Oak Avenue to Twenty-fifth Street; thence with Twenty-fifth Street to Hawthorn Avenue; thence with Hawthorn Avenue to Twenty-seventh Street; thence with Twenty-seventh Street to Holly Avenue; thence with Holly Avenue to Twenty-sixth Street; thence with Twenty-sixth Street to Ash Avenue; thence with Ash Avenue to Twenty-fourth Street; thence with Twenty-fourth Street to Hickory Avenue; thence with Hickory Avenue to Twentieth Street; thence south thirty-seven (37) degrees and twelve (12) minutes west to the northeast corner of Pine Avenue and Eleventh Street; thence with a straight line to corner of Hazel Avenue and First Street; thence with First Street to the line of the property formerly owned by John E. Laird, thence with the line of the Laird land to the lands known as the Loch Laird Land and Improvement Co., and the extension of the same to the west bank of Maury River (formerly North River) then up said river to a point opposite the point of beginning and then crossing the said river to the point of beginning, all of said lands being in Rockbridge County, Virginia. 
    When, in the above description, a street or avenue is mentioned as a boundary line the outside line of said street or avenue shall be taken and held to be such boundary line. The streets and avenues referred to are located on the map and plat of the subdivision of the lands of the Buena Vista Company on file and of record in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of the City of Buena Vista in Deed Book 2 at page 107 and on the map or plat of the subdivision of lands of the Loch Laird Land and Improvement Company on file and of record in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Rockbridge County in Deed Book 53 at page 412. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
State Law reference- When amended, boundaries to be incorporated in Charter by reference, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-207. 
ARTICLE 2. - POWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Powers granted cities vested in governing bodies, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1401, 15.2-1405. 

Sec. 2.1. - General grant of powers. 
    The City of Buena Vista shall have and may exercise all powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to cities under the Constitution and the laws of the commonwealth and all other powers pertinent to the conduct of a city government the exercise of which is not expressly prohibited by said Constitution and laws and which, in the opinion of the council[,] are necessary or desirable to promote the general welfare of the city and the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience, and morals of its inhabitants, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated in this Charter, and no enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive but shall be held to be in addition to this general grant of powers. 
State Law reference- Powers of cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1100 et seq. 
Sec. 2.2. - Financial powers. 
    In addition to the powers granted by other sections of this Charter the city is empowered: 
§ 2.201.  To raise annually by levy of taxes and assessments in the city on all property, real and personal, as is now or may be subject to taxation by cities by the laws of this commonwealth, such sums of money as the council shall deem necessary for the purposes of the city, in the manner as the council shall deem expedient in accordance with the Constitution of this state and of the United States. 
State Law reference- Municipal taxes and assessments generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104. 
§ 2.202.  To impose special or local assessments for local improvements and to enforce payment thereof, subject to such limitations prescribed by the Constitution and laws as may be in force at the time of the imposition of such special or local assessments. 
State Law reference- Assessments for local improvements, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2400 et seq.; authority to impose assessments for improvements on property subject to flooding in the city, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2404 D. 
§ 2.203.  To require by ordinance the owner or person having possession of every motor vehicle kept and every motor vehicle regularly used in the city for business purposes, except passenger buses which have a point of origin and destination without the city, on a date to be designated by the council, to annually register such motor vehicle and to obtain a license to operate the same by making application to the city treasurer, or such other person as may be designated by the council to issue said license, and to require the vehicle owner to pay an annual license fee therefor to be fixed by the council provided that the license shall not exceed the amount charged by the state on the said vehicle. 
(Acts 1975, ch. 169, § 1) 
§ 2.204.  To establish, levy, and collect, except when prohibited by general law, a tax or license on any person, firm, or corporation, except motor vehicle carriers liable for and which pay the road tax calculated on gross receipts prescribed by section 58-638 of the Code of Virginia, pursuing or conducting any trade, business, profession, occupation, employment or calling whatsoever within the boundaries of the city, whether a license may be required therefor by the state or not, and may exceed the state license, if any be required, and may provide penalties for nonpayment thereof. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
Editor's note- Code of Virginia, § 58-638 was repealed by Acts 1978, ch. 673. There is a road tax calculated on the amount of fuel used in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2600 et seq. 
§ 2.205.  To establish, levy, and collect taxes for admission to or other charge for any public amusement, entertainment, performance, exhibition, lecture, sport or athletic event in the city, which taxes may be added to and collected with the price of such admission or other charge. 
§ 2.206.  To establish, levy, and collect taxes upon the amount paid for the use of water, electricity, gas, telephone or other public utility service used within the city, which taxes may be added to and collected with the bills rendered the purchasers of such service. 
§ 2.207.  To establish, levy, and collect a tax on all subjects of taxation not prohibited to it by, nor exempted in, the Constitution and general laws of Virginia. 
§ 2.208.  To establish, levy, and enforce the collection of water and sewage rates and charges, and rates and charges for public utilities, products, or conveniences, operated, rented or furnished by the city; and to assess, or cause to be assessed, after reasonable notice to the owner or owners, water and sewage rates and charges directly against the owner or owners of the buildings or against the proper tenant or tenants. In the event such rates and charges are assessed against the owner or owners such rates and charges, together with such penalties and interest not to exceed eight (8) per centum as the council may by ordinance prescribe, shall constitute and be a lien against the real estate and buildings in or on which such service is rendered and may be filed in the clerk's office of the Circuit Court of the City of Buena Vista and collected in the same manner as delinquent taxes are filed and collected; and in the event such rates and charges shall be assessed against a tenant then the council may by ordinance, require of such tenant a deposit of such reasonable amount as it may by such ordinance prescribe before furnishing such service to such tenant. 
(Acts 1975, ch. 169, § 1) 
§ 2.209.  To charge and to collect fees for permits to use public facilities and for public services and privileges. The said city shall have the power and right to charge a different rate for any service rendered or convenience furnished to citizens without the corporate limits from the rates charged for similar service to citizens within the corporate limits. 
§ 2.210.  To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city government. 
§ 2.211.  To provide, or aid in the support of, public libraries, public schools, public hospitals, and recreational facilities, and to grant financial aid to charitable or benevolent institutions and organizations whose functions further the public purposes of the city. 
(Acts 1975, ch. 169, § 1) 
§ 2.212.  To provide for the control and management of the fiscal affairs of the city, and prescribe and require the adoption and keeping of such books, records, accounts and systems of accounting as may be necessary to give full and true accounts of the affairs, resources, and revenues of the city and the handling, use and disposal thereof. 
§ 2.213.  To provide each fiscal year for the assessment and valuation of all property, real and personal, within the corporate limits of the city, for the purpose of local taxation. The authority hereby vested is not to conflict with any state control of local assessments or valuation, but is to be exercised generally for all other purposes of local taxation and revenue. 
§ 2.214.  To borrow money, contract debts, and make and issue, or cause to be made and issued, as evidence thereof, bonds, notes, or other obligations, within the limitations prescribed by the Constitution, and in accordance with the provisions of the law concerning bond issues by cities, upon the credit of the city, or solely upon the credit of specific property owned by the city or solely upon the credit of income derived from property used in connection with any public utility owned or operated by the city. Except, that any bonded indebtedness shall be by referendum and passed by a majority of the qualified voters voting in the referendum and all other indebtedness incurred by the city council shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the previous year[']s taxes levied against real estate, except in case of fire, flood, epidemic or other disaster or act of God in which life and property are in danger. However, the referendum required by this section for bond issuance shall not apply to bonds issued for the sole purpose of constructing a flood control project, provided such bonds are issued before June 30, 1996. 
State Law reference- Public Finance Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2600 et seq. 
§ 2.215.  To expend the money of the city for all lawful purposes. 
(Acts 1975, ch. 169, § 1; Acts 1988, ch. 139; Acts 1992, ch. 36; Acts 1992, ch. 280) 
Sec. 2.3. - Powers relating to public works, utilities and properties. 
    In addition to the powers granted by other sections of this Charter, the city is empowered: 
§ 2.301.  To acquire by purchase, gift, devise, condemnation or otherwise property, real or personal, or any estate therein within or without the city for any of the purposes of the city; and to hold, improve, sell, lease, mortgage, pledge, or otherwise, dispose of the same or any part thereof, including any property now owned by the city. 
§ 2.302.  To own, operate and maintain waterworks and to acquire in any lawful manner in any county of the state, such water, lands, property rights, riparian rights as the council may deem necessary for the purpose of providing an adequate water supply to the city and of piping and conducting the same; to lay, erect and maintain all necessary mains and service lines, either within or without corporate limits of the city, for the distribution of water to its customers and consumers, both within and without the corporate limits of the city and to charge and collect water rents thereof; to erect and maintain all necessary dams, pumping stations and other works in connection therewith; to make reasonable rules and regulations for promoting the purity of its water supply and for protecting the same from pollution; and for this purpose to exercise full police powers and sanitary control over all land comprised within the limits of the watershed tributary to any such water supply wherever such lands may be located in this state; to enforce adequate penalties for the violation of any such rules and regulations; and to prevent by injunction any pollution or threatened pollution of such water supply and any and all acts likely to impair the purity thereof; and to carry out the powers herein granted, the city may exercise within the state all powers of eminent domain provided by the laws of this state. 
§ 2.303.  To construct, maintain, regulate and operate public improvements of all kinds, including municipal and other buildings, armories, sewage disposal plants, jails, comfort stations, markets, and all buildings and structures necessary or appropriate for the use and proper operation of the various departments of the city; and to acquire by condemnation or otherwise, all lands, riparian and other rights, and easements necessary for such improvements, or any of them; either within or without the city; and to construct, maintain or aid therein, roads and bridges to any property owned by the city and situated beyond the corporate limits thereof, and to acquire the land necessary for the aforesaid by condemnation or otherwise. 
§ 2.304.  To survey, establish, enter, open, widen, extend, grade, construct, pave, maintain, light, sprinkle, and clean public streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, parkways or parks and to relocate, alter or close the same; to regulate the weight of loads to be hauled or carried over and upon the streets insofar as such regulation of weights of loads does not conflict with general state laws relating to load limits to be carried or transported over state highways; to regulate the use of all such highways, parks, streets, alleys, parkways, and public places; to prevent the obstruction, destruction or injury to any of such streets, alleys or highways in conformity with the general state laws in effect from time to time; to require any railroad company operating a railroad at the place where any highway or street is crossed within the limits of the city to construct and maintain adequate crossings and to erect and maintain at such crossing any style of gate or warning signal deemed proper; to regulate the operation and speed of all cars, motorcycles, bicycles or vehicles upon said streets or highways as well as the speed of all engines, cars, or railroad trains within the city; to permit or prohibit towers, poles or wires for electric, telephone, telegraph, radio, or television purposes to be erected or wires or gas or water lines to be laid in the streets or alleys, and to prescribe and collect an annual charge for such privileges hereafter granted; to require the owner or lessee of any electric light, telephone, telegraph, radio or television towers, poles, or wires, or the owner or lessee of gas, sewer or water mains or lines, now in use or hereafter erected or constructed to change the location or remove the same; to construct, maintain and operate bridges, viaducts, subways, tunnels, sewers, and drains; to plant, maintain or remove shade trees along the streets and upon public grounds; and to do all other things whatsoever to make said streets and highways safe, convenient, and attractive. 
§ 2.305.  To establish, maintain, and regulate the use of parks, golf courses, playgrounds, and public grounds and to keep them lighted and in good order; to construct in such parks, playgrounds, and public grounds, as the city may maintain, or upon any city property, stadia, swimming pools, gymnasia, and recreation or amusement buildings, structures, or enclosures of every character, refreshment stands, restaurants, et cetera; to charge admission for use of the same, and to rent out or lease the privileges of constructing or using such stadia, swimming pools, recreation or amusement buildings, structures, or enclosures of every character, refreshment stands, or restaurants, et cetera. 
§ 2.306.  To establish, construct, and maintain sanitary sewers, sewer lines and systems, and to require the abutting property owners to connect therewith; to establish, construct, maintain and operate sewage disposal plants; to acquire by condemnation or otherwise, within or without the city, all lands, rights-of-way, riparian and other rights, and easements necessary for the purposes aforesaid; and to charge, assess, and collect reasonable fees, rentals, assessments or costs of service for connection with and using the same. 
§ 2.307.  To grant franchises for public utilities subject to the provisions of the Constitution and general laws of Virginia and this Charter; provided, however, the city shall at any time have the power to contract for, own, operate, manage, sell, encumber or otherwise dispose of, either within or without the city any and all public utilities for the city and to sell the services thereof, existing franchise to the contrary notwithstanding. 
State Law reference- Franchises, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2100 et seq. 
§ 2.308.  To own, operate and maintain electric light and gas works, either within or without the corporate limits of the city and to supply electricity, and gas whether the same be generated or purchased by said city, to its customers and consumers both without and within the corporate limits of the said city, at such price and upon such terms as it may prescribe, and to that end it may contract [for] and purchase electricity and gas from the owners thereof upon such terms as it may deem expedient. 
§ 2.309.  To establish, maintain and operate a landing field or airport within or without the city and for such purpose to acquire real estate by gift, lease, purchase or condemnation; to lease such landing field or airport to others to be used for any lawful purposes; to erect and maintain buildings and appurtenances necessary for the use of such landing field or airport and to prescribe and enforce rules and regulations not in conflict with the laws, rules and regulations prescribed by the State of Virginia and the federal government, for the use and protection of such landing field or airport. 
State Law reference- Municipal airports, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1123. 
§ 2.310.  To give names to or alter the names of streets, and to establish and maintain a system of house numbering. 
§ 2.311.  To acquire in any lawful manner for the purpose of encouraging commerce, industry, and manufacture, lands within or without the city and from time to time to sell or lease the same or any part thereof for industrial or commercial uses and purposes. 
(Acts 1975, ch. 169, § 1) 
§ 2.312.  To acquire, construct, own, maintain and operate, within and without the city, places for parking or storage of vehicles by the public, which shall include but shall not be limited to parking lots, garages, buildings, and other land, structures, equipment and facilities, when in the opinion of the council they are necessary to relieve congestion in the use of streets and to reduce hazards incident to such use; provide for their management and control by a department of the city government or by a board, commission or agency specially established by ordinance for the purpose; authorize or permit others to use, operate or maintain such places or any portions thereof, pursuant to lease or agreement, upon such terms and conditions as the council may determine by ordinance; and charge or authorize the charging of compensation for the parking or storage of vehicles or other services at or in such places. 
§ 2.313.  To accept, by ordinance, or to refuse the dedication of streets, alleys, easements or other public use or purpose unless the title to the same be acquired in fee simple in accordance with any subdivision regulations adopted under the provisions of Article 7. 
§ 2.314.  To exercise the power of eminent domain within this state with respect to lands and improvements thereon, for any lawful purpose of the city. 
Provided, however, that the provisions of Code of Virginia 1950, § 25.1-102 shall apply as to any property owned by a corporation possessing the power of eminent domain that may be sought to be taken by condemnation under provisions of this Act [Charter]. 
State Law reference- Condemnation of property wherever public necessity exists, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1900 et seq. 
Sec. 2.4. - Power relating to the preservation of the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience, morals and welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
    In addition to the powers granted by other sections of this Charter, the city shall have power to pass and enforce bylaws, rules, regulations, and ordinances, not in conflict with this Charter or prohibited by the general laws of the commonwealth[,] for the preservation of the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience, morals, and welfare of its inhabitants, and among such powers, but not in limitation thereof, the city is empowered: 
§ 2.401.  To collect and dispose of sewage, offal, ashes, garbage, carcasses of dead animals and other refuse, and to make reasonable charges therefor; to acquire and operate reduction or any other plants for the utilization or destruction of such materials; to contract for or regulate the collection and disposal thereof. 
§ 2.402.  To inspect, test, measure and weigh any commodity or commodities, or articles of consumption for use within the city; and to establish, regulate, license and inspect weights, meters, measures and scales. 
§ 2.403.  To license and regulate the holding and location of shows, circuses, public exhibitions, carnivals, and other similar shows or fairs, or prohibit the holding of the same, or any of them, within the city. 
§ 2.404.  To compel the abatement and removal of all nuisances within the city or upon property owned by the city beyond its limits at the expense of the person or persons causing the same, or of the owner or occupant of the ground or premises whereon the same may be, and to collect said expense by suit or motion or by distress and sale; to require all lands, lots and other premises within the city, to be kept clean and sanitary and free from stagnant water, weeds, filth and unsightly deposits, or to make them so at the expense of the owners or occupants thereof; and to collect said expenses by suit or motion or by distress and sale; to pass and enforce any ordinance that may be necessary to the public safety for the control of dogs; to regulate, or prevent slaughterhouses or other noisome or offensive business within the city, the keeping of hogs, or other animals, poultry or other fowl therein, or the exercise of any dangerous or unwholesome business, trade or employment therein; to regulate the transportation of all articles through the streets of the city; to compel the abatement of smoke, dust, vapor, odor, stench, industrial waste, residue, refuse or radio-active substance; and prevent radio interference and unnecessary noise; to regulate the location of stables and the manner in which they shall be kept and constructed; to regulate the location, construction, operation, and maintenance of billboards, signs, advertising, and generally to define, prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent all things detrimental to the health, morals, aesthetic sensibilities, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; and to require all owners or occupants of property having sidewalks in front thereof to keep the same clean and sanitary, and free from all weeds, filth, unsightly deposits, ice and snow. 
§ 2.405.  To extinguish and prevent fires, and to establish, regulate and control a fire department or division; to regulate the size, height, materials and construction of buildings, fences, walls, retaining walls and other structures hereafter erected in such manner as the public safety and conveniences may require; to remove or require to be removed or reconstructed any building, structure or addition thereto which by reason of dilapidation, defect of structure or other causes may have become dangerous to life or property, or which may be erected contrary to law; after September 1952 to establish and designate from time to time fire limits, within which limits wooden buildings shall not be constructed, added to, enlarged or repaired and to direct that any or all future buildings within such limits shall be constructed of stone, natural or artificial, concrete, brick, iron or other fireproof materials; and may enact stringent and efficient laws for securing the safety of persons from fires in halls and buildings used for public assemblies, entertainments or amusements. 
§ 2.406.  To direct the location of all buildings for storing explosives or combustible substances; to regulate the sale and use of gunpowder, nitroglycerine, liquid petroleum, kerosene oil or other like materials; to regulate the discharge of firearms, and the making of bonfires in the streets and yards; to prohibit the sale and use of fireworks. 
§ 2.407.  To provide for regular and safe construction of houses in the city for the future; and to provide building, plumbing and electrical Codes for the city, and setback lines on the streets and alleys. 
§ 2.408.  To provide for the preservation of the general health of the inhabitants of the city, make regulations to secure the same, inspect all foodstuffs, and prevent the introduction and sale in the city of any article or thing intended for human consumption, which is adulterated, impure or otherwise dangerous to health, and to condemn, seize and destroy or otherwise dispose of any such article or thing without liability to the owner thereof; to prevent the introduction or spread of contagious or infectious diseases, and prevent and suppress disease generally; to provide and regulate hospitals within or without the city limits, and if necessary to the suppression of disease, to enforce the removal of persons afflicted with contagious or infectious diseases to hospitals provided for them; to construct and maintain or to aid in the construction and maintenance of a hospital or hospitals for the use of the people of the city. 
§ 2.409.  To provide and maintain, either within or without the city, charitable, recreative, curative, corrective, detentive or penal institutions. 
§ 2.410.  To prevent fowls and animals being kept in or running at large in the city, or any thickly populated portion thereof, and to subject the same to such taxes, regulations and penalties as the council may think proper. 
§ 2.411.  To prevent the riding or driving of horses or other animals at an improper speed, to prevent the flying of kites, throwing of stones, or engaging in any sort of employment in the public streets which is dangerous or annoying to property owners or passersby, and to prohibit and punish the abuse of animals. 
§ 2.412.  To control, regulate, limit and restrict insofar as not prohibited by general law, the operation of motor vehicles carrying passengers for hire upon the streets or alleys of the city; to regulate the use of automobiles and other automotive vehicles upon the streets; to regulate the routes in and through the city to be used by motor vehicle carriers operating in and through the city and to prescribe different routes for different carriers; to prohibit the use of certain streets by motor trucks; and generally to prescribe such regulations respecting motor traffic therein as may be necessary for the general welfare. 
State Law reference- Municipal control of the operation of taxicabs, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310. 
§ 2.413.  To exercise full police powers and establish and maintain a department or division of police. 
§ 2.414.  To restrain and punish drunkards, vagrants and street beggars, to prevent and quell riots, disturbances and disorderly assemblages; to suppress houses of ill fame and gambling houses; to prevent and punish lewd, indecent and disorderly exhibitions in the city; to expel therefrom persons guilty of such conduct who have not resided therein as much as one year. 
§ 2.415.  To prohibit and punish for mischievous, wanton or malicious damage to school and public property, as well as private property. 
§ 2.416.  To offer and pay rewards for the apprehension and conviction of criminals. 
§ 2.417.  To prohibit begging, soliciting, or the peddling or hawking of any article for sale on the streets of the city. 
§ 2.418.  To punish for contempt of court, releasing or attempting to release a prisoner, or interfering in any manner with an officer in the exercise of his official duties. 
§ 2.419.  To make and enforce ordinances to regulate, control, license and tax the manufacture, bottling, sale, distribution, handling, advertising, possession, dispensing, drinking and use of alcohol, and all liquids, beverages and articles containing alcohol obtained by distillation, fermentation or otherwise; provided, however, that no such ordinance shall be in conflict with any of the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act or the general laws of this commonwealth with respect to such alcoholic beverages, liquids, and articles. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-100 et seq. 
§ 2.420.  To provide for the protection of the city's property, real and personal, the prevention of the pollution of the city's water supply, and the regulation of the use of parks, playgrounds, playfields, recreational facilities, cemeteries, airports and other public property, whether located within or without the city, provided, however, the City of Buena Vista shall have the power and authority to condemn such land situate in Rockbridge County, Virginia, as may be necessary for the reasonable and orderly expansion of the cemetery presently owned by the said municipality and being more particularly described and designated as the Green Hill Cemetery, and further provided that the Board of Supervisors, or other governing body of Rockbridge County, Virginia, shall be made parties to any such condemnation proceedings. For the purpose of enforcing such regulations all city property wheresoever located shall be under the police jurisdiction of the city. Any member of the police force of the city or employee thereof appointed as a special policeman shall have power to make arrests for violations of any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this section and the General District Court of the City of Buena Vista shall have exclusive original jurisdiction in all cases arising thereunder within the city or within one mile of the corporate limits of the city as provided by general law. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361; Acts 1975, ch. 169, § 1) 
State Law reference- Jurisdiction of court in extraterritorial matters, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1124; territorial jurisdiction of district court judge, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-69.6. 
§ 2.421.  To prescribe the location in, under or over, and grant permits for the use of streets, alleys, and other public places for the maintenance and operation of tracks, poles, wires, cables, pipes, conduits, bridges, subways, vaults, sewers, areas and cellars; to require tracks, poles, wires, cables, pipes, conduits and bridges to be altered, removed or relocated whether permanently or temporarily; charge and collect compensation for the privileges so granted and prohibit such use of the streets, alleys and other public places of the city without the consent of the council. 
§ 2.422.  To prevent any obstruction of or encroachment over, under or in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place; provide penalties for maintaining any such obstruction or encroachment, remove the same and charge the cost thereof to the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the property so obstructing or encroaching, and collect the sum charged in any manner provided by law for the collection of taxes; to require the owner or owners or the occupant or occupants of the property so obstructing or encroaching to remove the same; authorize encroachments upon streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places, subject to such terms and conditions as the council may prescribe, and recover possession of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or any other property of the city by suit or action. 
§ 2.423.  To regulate, in the interest of public health, the production, preparation, distribution, and sale of milk, other beverages and foods for human consumption, and the places in which they are produced, prepared, distributed, sold, served or stored; regulate the construction, installation, maintenance and condition of all water and sewer pipes, connections, toilets, water closets and plumbing fixtures of all kinds; regulate the construction and use of septic tanks and dry closets, and the sanitation of swimming pools; compel the use of sewers, the connection of abutting premises therewith, and the installation in such premises of suitable sanitary facilities; regulate or prohibit connections to and use of sewers; to prevent the connecting of roof drains and storm sewers to the sanitary sewer system; to regulate or prohibit the use of garbage disposal units connected to the sanitary sewer system; and make and enforce all regulations necessary to preserve and promote public health and sanitation and protect the inhabitants of the city from contagious, infectious or other diseases. 
§ 2.424.  To regulate the light, ventilation, sanitation and use and occupancy of buildings heretofore or hereafter constructed, altered, remodeled or improved, and the sanitation of the premises surrounding the same. 
§ 2.425.  To enjoin and restrain the violation of any city ordinance or ordinances, although a penalty is provided for conviction of such violation. 
§ 2.426.  To prescribe penalties for the violation of any city ordinance, rule, or regulation, not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or twelve (12) months' imprisonment in jail, or both, but not exceeding any penalty established by the commonwealth for a similar offense. 
§ 2.427.  To make and adopt a comprehensive plan for the city, and to that end all plats and replats hereafter made subdividing any land within the city or within two (2) miles thereof, into streets, alleys, roads, and lots or tracts shall be submitted to and approved by the council or such official or board, including the planning commission, as the council designates in any regulations controlling the orderly subdivision of land it may adopt before such plats or replats are filed for record or recorded in the office of the clerk of the Circuit Court of the City of Buena Vista. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
§ 2.428.  To do all things whatsoever necessary or expedient and lawful to be done for promoting or maintaining the general welfare, comfort, education, morals, peace, government, health, trade, commerce, or industries of the city, or its inhabitants. 
ARTICLE 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 3.1. - Vesting of administration and government; wards generally. 
    The administration and government of the City of Buena Vista shall be vested in the common council and in such other officers and boards as are hereinafter provided for or may be appointed by the common council or prescribed by state laws for cities of this class. There shall be two (2) wards, as there now exists, until such time as it may be changed in the manner prescribed by law. 
State Law reference- Establishment of election districts or precincts, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-307. 
Sec. 3.2. - Validity of certain contracts and obligations. 
    All contracts and in office, not inconsistent with this Charter and the general laws and Constitution of this state, shall be and are hereby declared to be valid and legal obligations of the City of Buena Vista. 
Sec. 3.3. - Composition of council; qualifications of members. 
    The council of the City of Buena Vista shall consist of a body of seven members, including the mayor, elected at large, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Buena Vista and the State of Virginia for one year and are qualified to vote in the City of Buena Vista. 
(Acts 1962, ch. 164; Acts 1999, ch. 268, § 1) 
Sec. 3.4. - Election of council; terms of members; procedure when membership of council is reduced to three or less. 
    The council shall be elected in the manner prescribed by law, as follows: 
    At the regular municipal election to be held on the first Tuesday in May, 1972, three councilmen shall be elected, each for a term of four years beginning on the first day of July next following their election. 
    At the regular municipal election to be held on the first Tuesday in May, 1974, and every four years thereafter, four councilmen shall be elected each for a term of four years beginning on the first day of July next following their election. Each councilman elected as hereinabove provided shall serve for the term stated or until his successor shall have been elected and qualified. Those three councilmen elected during the regular municipal election in 1968, or their successors, shall complete their term of office as of June 30, 1972. The council shall be a continuing body, and no measure pending before such body shall abate or be discontinued by reason of expiration of the term of office or removal of any of its members. If membership of the council shall for any reason be reduced to three or less members, the clerk of the council shall notify the Circuit Court of the City of Buena Vista which shall order a special election to be held within thirty days, and all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms at such election. 
    Notwithstanding the above provisions, beginning with the regular municipal election to be held in May 2000, the council shall be elected as follows: 
    In the year 2000, there shall be elected two councilmembers for terms of four years and a mayor for a term of two years. 
    In the year 2002, there shall be elected three councilmembers for terms of four years, one councilmember for a term of two years, and a mayor for a term of two years. The candidate for council receiving the fourth highest number of votes shall serve the two-year term. 
    Thereafter, all councilmembers shall be elected for terms of four years, except for the mayor, who shall be elected for a term of two years. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361; Acts 1962, ch. 164; Acts 1973, ch. 82; Acts 1999, ch. 268, § 1) 
Editor's note- Election date was changed to November in accordance with Code of Virginia, §§ 24.2-222.1 and 24.2-223 which supersedes the Charter and allows for the modification of the election date to November without a formal change to the Charter. 
State Law reference- Alternative election of mayor and council at November general election, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-222.1; alternative election of school board members at November general election, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-223. 
Sec. 3.5. - Further provisions as to filling vacancies on council. 
    All other vacancies shall be filled within thirty (30) days, for the unexpired term, by majority vote of the remaining members, provided that if the term of office to be filled does not expire for two (2) years or more after the next regular election for councilman following such vacancy and such vacancy occurs in time to permit it, then the council shall fill such vacancy only for the period remaining until such election and a qualified person shall then be elected by the qualified voters and shall from and after the date of his election and qualification succeed such appointee and serve the unexpired term. The number of candidates equal to the number of vacancies to be filed for full terms receiving the highest number of votes shall be entitled to such full terms and the candidate receiving the next highest [number] of votes shall be entitled to the unexpired term caused by such vacancy. 
State Law reference- Election to fill vacancy, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-226; interim appointment to fill vacancy, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-228. 
Sec. 3.51. - Effect of conviction of councilman of felony. 
    Any member of the council who shall have been convicted of a felony while in office shall thereby forfeit his office. 
State Law reference- Felony defined, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-8. 
Sec. 3.6. - Vesting of city powers, etc., in council; enumeration generally of powers of council. 
    All powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the council. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the council is empowered to: 
§ 3.601.  Appoint and remove the city manager, the clerk of the council, the city attorney, justices of the peace, medical examiner, and officers of the volunteer fire department. 
Editor's note- The office of justice of the peace has been abolished. See Code of Virginia, § 19.2-30 et seq. 
§ 3.602.  Adopt the budget of the city. 
State Law reference- Authority of council to follow budget requirements of general law, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2513. 
§ 3.603.  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city, make investigations as to municipal affairs and shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and require the production of records. 
State Law reference- Authority to make such investigations, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1409. 
§ 3.604.  Appoint the members of the school board of the City of Buena Vista and fill any vacancies thereon. Appoint the members of the planning commission, the board of zoning appeals, and the recreation commission, and fill any vacancies thereon. (Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
Editor's note- The members of the school board of the city are elected. Under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2308, the members of the board of zoning appeals are appointed by the circuit court of the city. 
§ 3.605.  Create a housing authority. 
§ 3.606.  Adopt and modify the official map of the city. 
§ 3.607.  Enact and adopt all laws and ordinances relating to its municipal affairs, subject to the Constitution and general laws of the commonwealth and of this Charter and may from time to time amend, reamend or repeal any or all of its ordinances for the proper regulation, management and government of the city and impose fines and penalties for the violation or nonobservance thereof. 
§ 3.608.  To compel the attendance of its members, and to punish its members for disorderly behavior and by a vote of two-thirds of the whole council, expel a member for good cause. 
§ 3.609.  To be the judge of the election and qualifications and returns of its members and for such purpose shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and require the production of records. 
§ 3.610.  To require and secure such bonds for any of the city employees as it may deem necessary. 
§ 3.611.  To keep a journal of its proceedings, which journal shall be open to public inspection. 
§ 3.612.  To fix the salaries and wages of all officers and employees of the city as herein specifically provided. 
Sec. 3.7. - Mayor, vice-mayor, etc., generally. 
    At the regular municipal election to be held on the first Tuesday in May 2000, the same time members of council are to be elected, and at each regular municipal election thereafter, there shall be elected a mayor. The mayor shall preside over meetings of the council, have the same right to vote therein as other members and have a vote but no veto. He shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, the purpose of military law, and the service of civil process. 
    On the first day of July 2000, and on the first day of July every second year thereafter, the council shall choose by a majority vote of all its members thereof one of the number to be vice-mayor for the ensuing two years. The vice-mayor shall in the absence or disability of the mayor perform the duties of mayor. In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the vice-mayor shall become mayor for the unexpired term. In the absence or disability of both the mayor and vice-mayor, the council shall, by majority vote of those present, choose one of their number to perform the duties of mayor. 
(Acts 1972. ch. 257; Acts 1999, ch. 268, § 1) 
Editor's note- The mayor and members of the council are now elected at the General Election in November and the terms commencing on January 1, under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 24.2-222.1. The references to the first Tuesday in May and the first day of July in the above section are obsolete. 
Sec. 3.8. - Salaries of mayor and councilmen. 
    The salaries of the mayor and councilmen shall be fixed by a commission to be appointed by the judge of the circuit court of the City of Buena Vista, after September 1956, notwithstanding the fact that at the special election held on the fifth day of December 1950, a majority of the qualified voters of the City of Buena Vista voting therein, voted that the councilmen shall serve without compensation. 
Sec. 3.9. - Council's rules of procedure; council meetings open to public; quorum. 
    The council is empowered, subject to the provisions of the Charter, to adopt its own rules of procedure. Such rules shall provide for the time and place of holding regular meetings of the council which shall not be less frequently than once each month. They shall also provide for the calling of special meetings by the mayor or by any four (4) members of the council and shall prescribe the method of giving notice thereof, provided that the notice of each special meeting shall contain a statement of the specific item or items of business to be transacted and no other business shall be transacted at such meetings except by the unanimous consent of all the members of the council. The meetings of the council shall be open to the public, except when the Virginia Freedom of Information Act would otherwise permit. A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Acts 1962, c. 164; Acts 1975, ch. 169, § 1) 
State Law reference- Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq. 
Sec. 3.901. - Action of council by ordinance, etc.; confinement of ordinances to one subject. 
    Except in dealing with questions of parliamentary procedure, the council shall act only by ordinance or resolution, and all ordinances, except ordinances making appropriations, or authorizing the contracting of indebtedness or issuance of bonds or other evidence of debt, shall be confined to one subject. Ordinances making appropriations or other obligations and appropriating the money to be raised thereby shall be confined to those subjects respectively. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
Sec. 3.902. - Enacting clause of ordinances; passage and amendment of ordinances. 
    The enacting clause of all ordinances passed by the council shall be: "Be it ordained by the council of the City of Buena Vista." No ordinance, unless it be an emergency measure, shall be passed until it has been read at two (2) regular meetings not less than seven (7) days apart, unless the requirement of such reading has been dispensed with by the affirmative vote of five (5) of the members of the council. No ordinance or section thereof shall be revised or amended by its title or section only, but the new ordinance shall contain the entire ordinance, or section as revised or amended. The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances or resolutions and entered upon the journal of the proceedings of the council and every ordinance or resolution shall require, on final passage, the affirmative vote of at least four (4) of its members. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361; Acts 1962, ch. 164, p. 244) 
Sec. 3.903. - When ordinances, etc., effective; emergency measures. 
    All ordinances and resolutions passed by the council shall be in effect from and after thirty (30) days from the date of their passage, except that the council may, by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of its members present, pass emergency measures to take effect at the time indicated therein. Ordinances appropriating money for any emergency may be passed as emergency measures, but no measure provided for the sale or lease of city property, or making a grant, renewal, or extension of a franchise or other special privilege or regulating the rate to be charged for its services by any public utility, shall be so passed as an emergency measure. 
Sec. 3.904. - Recordation and authentication of ordinances, etc. 
    Every ordinance or resolution upon its final passage shall be recorded in a book kept for the purpose, and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the clerk of the council. 
Sec. 3.905. - Duty, and limitations thereon, of councilmen to vote. 
    Every member, when present, when a question is put, shall vote unless excused by the council. But no member who has any personal or financial interest in the result of any ordinance or resolution before the council shall vote thereon. 
Sec. 3.906. - Appointment, duties, etc., of city manager; power of chief of police to discipline, etc., subordinates. 
    At the first meeting in January following each councilmanic election, or as soon thereafter as practicable the council shall appoint: 
(Acts 1975, ch. 169, § 1) 
Editor's note- The date of the meeting was editorially changed from July to January as the election date was changed from May to November pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 24.2-222.1. 
State Law reference- Terms to begin January 1, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-200. 
§ 3.907.  A city manager who shall be the administrative and executive head of the municipal government. He shall be chosen by the council without regard to political beliefs and solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. At the time of his appointment he need not be a resident of the city or the commonwealth but during his tenure of office shall reside within the city. He shall be appointed and hold office during the pleasure of the council. He shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by the council by ordinance or resolution. He may be bonded as the council may deem necessary. During the absence or disability of the city manager or in case of a vacancy, the council may designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence, disability, or vacancy. No councilman shall receive such appointment during the term for which he shall have been elected, nor within one year after the expiration of his term. Neither the council nor any of the members shall direct or request the appointment as hereinafter provided, of any person to office by the city manager or by any of his subordinates. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. The city manager shall have the authority and it shall be his duty. 
§ 3.908.  To see that all laws, ordinances, resolutions, and bylaws of the council are faithfully enforced. 
§ 3.909.  To appoint such officers and employees, as the council shall determine and authorize as are necessary for the proper administration of the affairs of the city with the power to discipline and remove any such officer or employee, but he shall report each appointment of any officer having supervisory or administrative authority to the council for confirmation at the next meeting thereof following any such appointment. The chief of police so appointed by the city manager and confirmed by the council shall have the power to discipline his subordinates and with the approval of the city manager to discharge any subordinate for just cause. 
§ 3.910.  To attend all meetings of the council, with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote. 
§ 3.911.  To recommend to the council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
§ 3.912.  To make reports to the council from time to time upon the affairs of the city and to keep the council fully advised of the city's financial condition and its future financial needs. 
§ 3.913.  To prepare and submit to the council a tentative budget for the next fiscal year as provided by the general law and by this Charter. 
State Law reference- Budgets, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2500 et seq. 
§ 3.914.  To make all contracts on behalf of the city pursuant to a resolution or an ordinance of the council and to act as city purchasing agent. 
§ 3.915.  To supervise and control all encumbrances, expenditures and disbursements and to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded. 
§ 3.916.  To protect the interests of the city by causing to be withheld the payment of any claim or demand by any person, firm, or corporation against the city until any indebtedness or other liability due from such person, firm or corporation shall have first been settled and adjusted. 
§ 3.917.  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed or requested by [the] council. 
Sec. 3.918. - Appointment, duties, etc., of the clerk of the council. 
    The council shall also appoint a clerk of the council, for an indefinite term. The clerk so appointed shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by the council by ordinances or resolution. The clerk shall have the following duties: 
§ 3.919.  To be the custodian of the corporate seal. 
§ 3.920.  To give notice of council meetings. 
§ 3.921.  To keep a journal of council proceedings. 
§ 3.922.  To authenticate by signature and record in full in a book kept for that purpose all ordinances and resolutions. 
Sec. 3.923. - Appointment, duties, etc., of the city attorney. 
    The council of the City of Buena Vista shall appoint a city attorney for an indefinite term and such officer shall be a duly qualified and practicing attorney at law. Provided, however, such officer shall receive such compensation as shall be determined and fixed by the council of the said city, and further provided, such officer shall be vested with the following authority and powers and shall perform the following duties. 
    (Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
§ 3.924.  To be the legal advisor of the council, the city manager and of all departments, boards, commissions and agencies of the city, including the school board, in all matters affecting the interests of the city and shall upon request furnish a written opinion on any question of law involving their respective official powers and duties. 
§ 3.925.  To prepare, at the request of the city manager or any member of council, ordinances for introduction and, at the request of the council or any member thereof, shall examine any ordinance after introduction and render his opinion as to the form and legality thereof. 
§ 3.926.  To draw or approve all bonds, deeds, leases, contracts or other instruments to which the city is a party or in which it has an interest. 
§ 3.927.  To represent the city as counsel in any civil case, or in any criminal case arising under and by virtue of the ordinances of the city, when the city attorney shall be of the opinion that such representation is necessary and proper and is in the public interest. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
Sec. 3.928. - (Repealed). 
Editor's note- Section 3.928 of the Charter was repealed by Acts 1975, ch. 169. It formerly made provision for the appointment and term of the judge, substitute judge and clerk of the municipal court. 
Sec. 3.929. - Appointment of fire department officers. 
    The council of the City of Buena Vista shall during the month of April, 1954, and during the same month each year thereafter, appoint the fire department officers as provided in section 27-13, Code of Virginia. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
Sec. 3.930. - Election generally and term of city treasurer, commissioner of the revenue, attorney for the commonwealth, city sergeant [sheriff] and clerk for circuit court of city; combination of elective and appointive offices. 
    There shall be elected by the qualified voters of said city on Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 1953, and every four (4) years thereafter, the following officers: A city treasurer, a commissioner of the revenue, an attorney for the commonwealth, and a city sergeant [sheriff] for said city who shall hold their offices for four (4) years from the first day of January following their election. The foregoing officers shall serve until their successors are duly elected and qualified unless sooner removed from office and there shall be elected as prescribed by the general assembly of this state one clerk of the circuit court of the City of Buena Vista who shall hold office for eight (8) years. All of said elections shall be conducted under the general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and when two (2) or more persons are running for the same office the one receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. The council may at its discretion combine in one person an elective and an appointive office, where the duties of such office do not conflict. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
Sec. 3.931. - Oath required of councilmen, etc.; effect of failure to take oath or give bond. 
    The councilmen and all elective officers before entering upon the duties of their respective offices shall be sworn according to the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia by anyone authorized to administer oaths under the laws of this state. If any person elected or appointed to any office in said city shall neglect to take the oath of office required of him for sixty (60) days after receiving notice of his election or appointment or neglect to give bond as required of him, he shall be considered as having declined such office and the same may be declared vacant and the vacancy filled as provided in this act. 
Sec. 3.932. - City treasurer-Further provisions as to election; bond; powers and duties generally. 
    The city treasurer shall be elected every four (4) years in the manner and the time hereinbefore mentioned. He shall give bond in such sum as the council may prescribe with surety to be approved by the council, conditioned upon the faithful discharge of his official duties in relation to the revenue of the city, and of such other official duties as may be imposed on him by the Charter and the ordinances of the city. The city treasurer shall be responsible for the collection of taxes, licenses and levies due to the city, as well as water taxes or rents. He shall have authority to appoint and remove his deputy or clerk when he deems it necessary. Delinquent taxes and levies shall be transferred from his office into the hands of a special collector when in the discretion of the council it shall be proper to do so. He shall receive all money belonging to the city which it is his duty to collect from persons, firms and corporations owing the same to the city, or which it is the duty of other officers to collect and pay over to him, and pay the same out as the ordinances of the city and state law prescribe; to keep such monies safe and account therefor and pay all drafts and orders made in conformity with the city ordinances and state laws. 
Sec. 3.933. - Same-Deposit, etc., of city funds; books generally. 
    The funds of the city shall be deposited by the treasurer in such bank or banks as the council may direct. He shall keep books showing accurately the state of his accounts and the money and he is hereby expressly prohibited from using directly or indirectly the money of the city or state in his custody and any violation of this provision shall subject him to immediate removal from office. 
Sec. 3.934. - Same-Inspection, etc., of books and accounts. 
    The books and accounts of the city treasurer and all papers relating to accounts and transactions of the city, shall be at all times, during business hours, subject to the inspection of the city manager, the city councilmen, the mayor and such persons as the council may appoint to examine the same and all such books and accounts, together with any balance or moneys on hand[,] shall be transferred by the treasurer to his successor or be delivered up as the council may require. 
Sec. 3.935. - Same-Monthly account and additional information. 
    The city treasurer shall render an account to the city manager and the council each month showing the state of the financial condition of the city up to the end of the previous month and the balance of money on hand, and he shall furnish such other information as the city manager or council may direct. 
Sec. 3.936. - Same-Annual account. 
    The city treasurer shall render an annual account to the city manager and the council at the first meeting of each new fiscal year and account for all money taken in and money paid out during the previous fiscal year. 
Sec. 3.937. - Same-How money received to be credited. 
    All taxes, levies or other sums of money received by the treasurer belonging to the city shall be credited by the treasurer on his books to the City of Buena Vista. 
Sec. 3.938. - Same-Disposition of money received on special assessment. 
    All money received on special assessments shall be held by the treasurer in a special fund, to be applied to the payment to the account for which the assessment was made and said moneys shall be used for no other purpose. 
Sec. 3.939. - Same-Additional duties. 
    The treasurer shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the council not inconsistent with state laws. 
Sec. 3.940. - Same-Compensation. 
    The treasurer shall receive for his services the compensation allowed by the ordinances of the city and the compensation board of the State of Virginia. 
State Law reference- Compensation of city treasurers, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1608.1. 
Sec. 3.941. - Further provisions as to the commissioner of the revenue. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall be elected for four (4) years at the time and in the manner hereinbefore provided. He shall give bond of such type and amount as the council may prescribe, conditioned for the faithful performance of all his duties under this Charter, the ordinances of the City of Buena Vista and the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. The commissioner of revenue shall perform all duties in relation to the assessment of property for the purpose of levying taxes that may be ordered by the city council and such other duties as the council may prescribe or direct. He shall keep his office in the courthouse building and shall keep therein such books, schedules, and records and other papers which shall be subject to inspection and examination by the city manager, members of the city council or any committee thereof. He shall receive for his services the compensation allowed by the compensation board of the State of Virginia and the ordinances of the City of Buena Vista. He shall assess all real estate and personal property in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the ordinances of the City of Buena Vista. 
State Law reference- Compensation of city commissioners of revenue, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1636.1. 
Sec. 3.942. - Further provisions as to the city sergeant [sheriff]. 
    The city sheriff shall be elected for four (4) years at the time and in the manner hereinbefore provided. Before entering upon his duties he shall give bond as may be prescribed by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the ordinances of the City of Buena Vista, conditioned for the faithful discharge of his duties as such officer. The city sheriff shall attend the terms of the circuit court of said city and shall act as an officer of the said court and shall have the authority and powers and jurisdiction which is [are] granted to sheriffs of other cities of the class of Buena Vista by the general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and the ordinances of the City of Buena Vista and he shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the state laws and the ordinances of the City of Buena Vista. The city sheriff is to be conservator of the peace and in criminal matters or offenses shall have jurisdiction for one mile beyond the city limits of Buena Vista in enforcing the criminal laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Acts 1975, ch. 169, § 1) 
Sec. 3.943. - Further provisions as to the attorney for the commonwealth. 
    The attorney for the commonwealth shall be elected for four (4) years at the time and in the manner hereinbefore provided, and shall hold office until his successor be elected and qualified. He shall represent the commonwealth in the courts of the said city in all commonwealth cases where he is required by law to act. He shall receive such compensation as prescribed by the compensation board of the State of Virginia and the ordinances of the City of Buena Vista. 
State Law reference- Compensation of the attorney for the commonwealth, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1630. 
Sec. 3.944. - Further provisions as to the clerk of the circuit court of the city. 
    The clerk of the circuit court of the City of Buena Vista shall be elected for eight (8) years as prescribed by the laws of this state and shall have the same powers and duties as provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia in respect to clerks of the circuit courts of the several cities of this class and shall receive such fees as are provided by law for such clerks and in addition, such compensation as the council may provide. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
State Law reference- Compensation of clerks of circuit court, Code of Virginia, § 17.1-287. 
ARTICLE 4. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of council to elect to follow budget requirements of general law, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2513. 

Sec. 4.1. - Budgets and appropriations. 
§ 4.11.  Fiscal year. The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July and end on the thirtieth day of June of the succeeding year. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2500. 
§ 4.12.  Submission of budgets. Between the first and thirtieth day of April, the city manager shall submit to the council separate current expense budgets for the general operation of the city government, hereinafter referred to as the general fund budget, and for each utility operated by the city and a capital budget. 
§ 4.13.  Contents of budgets. The general fund and/or utility budgets shall contain: 
§ 4.131.  An itemized statement of the appropriations recommended with comparative statements in parallel columns showing appropriations made from the current and next preceding year. 
§ 4.132.  An itemized statement of the taxes and/or utility service charges required and of the estimated revenues of the city and/or utilities from all other sources for the ensuing year, with comparative statements in parallel columns of the taxes and other sources of revenue for the current and next proceeding [sic] year and of the increases or decreases estimated or proposed. 
§ 4.133.  A statement of the financial condition of the city and/or utilities. 
§ 4.134.  A budget message relative to the condition, reasons, etc., connected with the estimates for the ensuing year together with a work program showing the undertakings to be begun and those to be completed during the next year. 
§ 4.135.  Such other information as may be requested by council. 
§ 4.14.  Introduction, etc., of appropriation ordinances. At the same time that the city manager shall submit a general fund and/or utility budget he shall introduce appropriation ordinances listing the appropriation for each department, utility, branch, board or commission, and such budget, or budgets, shall act as the supporting schedules for the appropriation ordinances. (Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
§ 4.15.  Hearing on budget plan; insertion, etc., of items. A public hearing on the budget plan as a whole shall be held by the council within thirty (30) days after its submission to the council but not until a resume of the proposed budgets and notice of such hearing shall have been published at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing. After the conclusion of the public hearing the council may insert new items of expenditure or may increase, decrease, or strike out any items of expenditure in the budgets except that for debt service. 
§ 4.16.  Approval of budgets and adoption of appropriation ordinances. Within forty (40) days, but in no event later than the thirty-first day of May, the council shall approve, upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the membership of the council, a general fund and/or utility budget and adopt appropriation ordinances. If for any reason the council fails to approve the budgets on or before such date, then the budgets as submitted by the city manager shall be the budgets for the ensuing year and the appropriation ordinances recommended by the city manager shall have the same force and effect as if the same had been adopted by the council. 
§ 4.17.  Additional appropriations. The council may, after referring to the city manager for a recommendation, make additional appropriations during the fiscal year upon the affirmative vote of four (4) members of the council. (Acts 1962, ch. 164) 
§ 4.18.  Lapse of unexpended, etc., annual appropriations. Any portion of an annual appropriation, except for capital expenditures, remaining unexpended and unencumbered at the close of the fiscal year, shall lapse. 
§ 4.19.  Program of proposed capital improvement projects. The capital budget shall contain a program previously acted upon by the city planning commission, as provided in section 7.101 of this Charter, of proposed capital improvement projects, for the ensuing fiscal year and for the four (4) fiscal years thereafter, with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The council shall have power to accept with or without amendments or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing for the ensuing fiscal year but, except in the case of emergency as provided in Article 3 of this Charter, the council shall not authorize any capital improvement project or make any appropriation therefor unless the appropriation for such project is included in the capital budget as adopted by it. The council shall take final action on the capital budget not later than the twenty-eighth day after the date prescribed for the adoption of the general fund budget. No appropriation for a capital improvement project contained in the capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned, provided that any project shall be deemed to have been abandoned if three (3) fiscal years elapse without any expenditure from or encumbrance of the appropriation therefor. Any such lapsed appropriation shall be applied to the payment of any indebtedness incurred in financing the project concerned and the next capital budget. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit the power of the city council to originate or initiate capital improvements. 
Sec. 4.2. - Bids and purchases. 
    At least two (2) bids shall be secured on all purchases involving more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) except, when the council orders a different procedure; when only one bid can be secured; and in cases of emergency. The fact that bids are received does not make it mandatory that the low bid be accepted in all cases. The council must approve purchase before placing order if low bid is not accepted. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
Sec. 4.3. - Independent audit. 
    Prior to the end of each fiscal year the council shall designate qualified certified public accountants or the auditor of public accounts of the Commonwealth of Virginia, who, as of the end of the fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidence of financial transactions of the city government and shall mail a copy of their report to each member of the city council and to the city manager. The auditors shall postaudit the books and documents kept by the treasurer and any separate or subordinate accounts kept by any other office, department or agency of the city government. 
State Law reference- Independent audit, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2511. 
Sec. 4.4. - Tax liens; remedies for collection of taxes. 
    A lien shall exist on all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits for taxes, levies, and assessments in favor of the city, together with all penalties and interest at the rate of six (6) per centum due thereon from the end of the year for which the same were assessed and the procedure for collecting said taxes, for selling real estate for city taxes and for the redemption of real estate sold for city taxes shall be the same as provided in the general law for the state to the same extent as if the provisions of said general law were herein set out at length. The said city and its treasurer shall have the benefit of other and additional remedies for the collection of city taxes which are now or hereafter may be granted or permitted under the general law. All goods and chattels wheresoever found may be distrained and sold for taxes and licenses assessed and due thereon; and no deed of trust or mortgage upon goods and chattels or real estate shall prevent the same from being distrained and sold for taxes and licenses assessed against the grantor in such deed while such goods and chattels remain in the grantor's possession. 
Sec. 4.5. - Tax rate or levy. 
    The council of the City of Buena Vista shall, prior to the thirty-first day of December of each year, or at its option prior to the first day of July if a fiscal year of July one to June thirty be adopted, adopt and fix the rate of taxation or levy on all personal property situate within the said city which is classified as machinery, tools, motor vehicles, or mobile trailers, and shall likewise prior to said date adopt and fix the rate of taxation or levy on all public service corporation property situate within the said city, and upon the value of the shares of stock of all banks situate within the said city, as provided by general law for the calendar year commencing on the first day of January of the year next succeeding. 
    The council for the City of Buena Vista shall, prior to the thirtieth day of June of each year, adopt and fix for the ensuing fiscal year the rate of taxation or levy on all real property situate within the said city, as provided by general law for the fiscal year commencing on the first day of July of the next succeeding year. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361; Acts 1972, ch. 257; Acts 1975, ch. 169, § 1) 
Editor's note- The tax on bank stock has been replaced by a tax on the net capital of banks. See Code of Virginia § 58.1-1200 et seq. 
ARTICLE 5. - ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 

Sec. 5.1. - Circuit court-Continuation; jurisdiction, authority and powers. 
    The circuit court of the City of Buena Vista as presently created and established by the general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia shall be continued and the said circuit court shall have the jurisdiction, authority and powers now or hereafter conferred upon and vested in the circuit courts of the several counties and cities, and the corporation courts of the several cities, by the general laws of the said commonwealth. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
State Law reference- Circuit courts, Code of Virginia, § 17.1-500 et seq. 
Sec. 5.102. - Same-Compensation of judge. 
    The City of Buena Vista shall pay such annual salary unto the judge of the circuit court of the City of Buena Vista as shall be fixed by the council of the said city and the same shall be paid in addition to the pro rata portion or share of the regular salary of such judge allocated unto the said city by the general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Provided, however, the foregoing annual salary shall not be reduced or diminished during the term of office of the said judge. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
Secs. 5.103-5.7. - (Repealed). 
Editor's note- Sections 5.103-5.7 of the Charter were repealed by Acts 1975, ch. 169. Sections 5.103-5.4 formerly made provision for a municipal court, a juvenile and domestic relations court and justices of the peace. Sections 5.5-5.6 formerly made provision for a joint trial justice system with Rockbridge County. Section 5.7 validated acts of the civil and police justice. 
Secs. 5.8-5.906. - (Repealed). 
Editor's note- Sections 5.8-5.906 of the Charter were repealed by Acts 1954, ch. 361. 
ARTICLE 5A. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Acts 1954, ch. 361, designated sections 5.907-5.910 as "Article 5A. Police Department." 

Sec. 5.907. - Generally. 
    The police force shall be composed of a superintendent or chief of police and of such officers, patrolmen and other employees as the council may determine. The superintendent or chief of police shall have the immediate direction and control of the said force, subject, however, to the supervision of the city manager and to such rules, regulations and orders as the said city manager may prescribe. The superintendent or chief of police shall issue all orders, rules and regulations for the government of the whole force. In case of the disability of the superintendent or chief of police to perform his duties by reason of sickness, absence from the city or other cause, the city manager shall designate some member of the police force to act as superintendent or chief of police during such disability, and the officer so designated shall serve without additional compensation. The members of the police force shall be appointed and may be removed by the city manager. Each member of the said force, both rank and file[,] shall have issued to him a warrant of appointment signed by the city manager, in which the date of his appointment shall be stated, and such warrant shall be his commission. Each member of the said force shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe an oath before the clerk of the circuit court that he will faithfully without fear or favor perform the duties of this office, and such oath shall be filed with the clerk of said court and preserved with the records of his office. And, in addition, the several officers of the said force shall if so required by the council, give bond in such penalty and with such security as the council may by ordinance prescribe. 
Sec. 5.908. - Special police, special detectives, etc. 
    No person except as otherwise provided by general law or by this Charter shall act as special police, special detective or other special police officer for any purpose whatsoever, except upon written authority from the city manager; such authority[,] when conferred, shall be exercised only under the direction and control of the superintendent or chief of police and for a specified time, provided, however, that the council may from time to time designate the maximum number of such special police, special detectives or other special police officers. 
State Law reference- Auxiliary police force, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1731. 
Sec. 5.909. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The officers and privates constituting the police force of said city shall be, and they are, hereby vested with all of the power and authority which pertains to the office of constable at common law in taking cognizance of and in enforcing criminal laws of the state and the ordinances and regulations of said city and it shall be the duty of each such officer and private to use his best endeavors to prevent the commission within the said city of offenses against the laws of said state, and against the ordinances and regulations of said city; to observe and enforce all such laws, ordinances and regulations; to detect and arrest offenders against the same; to preserve the good order of said city and to secure the inhabitants thereof from violence and the property therein from injury. Such policemen shall have no power or authority in civil matters, but shall execute any criminal warrant or warrant of arrest and summons in criminal cases that may be placed in his [their] hands, by any justice of the city and shall make due return thereof. 
Sec. 5.910. - Uniforms, badges, etc. 
    The city manager shall prescribe the uniforms and badges for the members of the police force, and direct the manner in which a member of said force shall be armed. Any person other than a member of said force who shall wear such uniform or badge as may be prescribed as aforesaid, may be subjected to such fine or imprisonment, or both, as may be prescribed by the council by ordinance. 
ARTICLE 6. - SCHOOLS 

Sec. 6.1. - Further provisions as to wards; each ward to be separate school district. 
Editor's note- This section was repealed by Acts 1994, ch. 91, § 2. 
Sec. 6.2. - Members of school board. 
    The school board shall consist of seven members who shall be elected from the city at large. In compliance with a November 2, 1992, referendum, members of the school board shall be elected or appointed in the manner as hereinafter set forth. 
    The terms of the five members of the present school board which are now scheduled to expire on June 30, 1994, and June 30, 1995, shall all expire on June 30, 1994. The remaining two members of the present school board whose terms expire on June 30, 1996, shall remain in office until June 30, 1996. The other five members whose terms will expire on June 30, 1994, shall be replaced in a manner as hereinafter set forth. The present term of the at-large member expires on June 30, 1994. At that time the city council shall appoint an at-large member to serve on the school board for a term expiring on June 30, 1996. 
    At the regular municipal election to be held on the first Tuesday in May 1994, and every four years thereafter, four school board members shall be elected for a term of four years beginning on the first day of July next following their election. 
    At the regular municipal election to be held on the first Tuesday in May 1996, and every four years thereafter, three school board members shall be elected for a term of four years beginning on the first day of July next following their election. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 82; Acts 1994, ch. 91, § 1) 
Editor's note- Election date was changed to November in accordance with Code of Virginia, §§ 24.2-222.1 and 24.2-223 which supersedes the Charter and allows for the modification of the election date to November without a formal change to the Charter. 
State Law reference- Alternative election of mayor and council at November general election, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-222.1; alternative election of school board members at November general election to coincide with election of the governing body, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-223. 
Sec. 6.201. - Regulations as to school district, etc., applicable in the event the city is divided into more than two wards. 
Editor's note- This section was repealed by Acts 1994, ch. 91, § 2. 
Sec. 6.202. - Length of service. 
Editor's note- This section was repealed by Acts 1994, ch. 91, § 2. 
Sec. 6.203. - Current terms of members of school boards. 
Editor's note- This section was repealed by Acts 1994, ch. 91, § 2. 
Sec. 6.3. - Powers, duties, etc., of school board. 
    The establishment, maintenance, and operation of a system of free public schools within the city of Buena Vista shall be under the control of the school board, appointed by the city council or elected in accordance with the provisions of this charter, the Constitution of Virginia, the laws of the Commonwealth, and the regulations of the state board of education; and said board shall have all the rights, privileges, powers, and duties granted or empowered by the said provisions, Constitution, laws, and regulations; and nothing in this charter shall negate any rights, privileges, powers, or duties granted or empowered to the school board by said provisions, Constitution, laws, and regulations; and neither shall the school board have any such rights, privileges, powers, and duties not provided by said provisions, Constitution, laws and regulations 
(Acts 1994, ch. 91, § 1) 
State Law reference- Public school system, Code of Virginia, § 22.1-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE 7. - PLANNING, ZONING, SUBDIVISION, ETC., CONTROL, ETC. 

Sec. 7.1. - Powers of council as to master plan, zoning and subdivisions and as to building, electrical, plumbing, heating, etc., codes. 
    The city council, in addition to any other powers, shall have and may exercise all other powers which now or may hereafter apply to cities under the Constitution and general laws of this state as pertains to the following: 
§ 7.101.  The power to adopt, administer, and enforce by ordinance a master plan for the comprehensive long-range development of the city, provided, however, that any such master plan so adopted shall first have been subjected to a thorough study of not less than one year by a planning commission or board appointed for that specific purpose; and, provided further that such master plan after adoption shall not be later altered except by referendum following at least one year of study by a planning commission or board appointed by the city council for that specific purpose. 
§ 7.102.  The power to adopt, administer and enforce, by ordinance, a comprehensive zoning plan for the control of location, type, use[,] height, area, bulk, and arrangement of all structures, buildings, improvements to land and premises, and to provide for a zoning board of appeals. 
§ 7.103.  The power to adopt, administer and enforce, by ordinance, a comprehensive plan for the regulation of all subdivisions of land within the city, or outside the city when served by the city with utilities including any of the following: Water, sewage lines, fire protection or safety protection. 
§ 7.104.  The power to adopt, administer and enforce, by ordinance, any building code, and/or electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, fire safety or other code for the safety, uniformity, appearance, convenience, and construction, alteration, or repair of any building, or structure used by the public or for private use within the city unless otherwise provided for in this Charter. 
ARTICLE 8. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8.1. - Officers, etc., to hold over until appointment, etc., of successors. 
    Whenever under the provisions of this Charter any officer of the city or member of any board or commission is elected or appointed for a fixed term, except the mayor and vice-mayor, such officer or member shall continue to hold office until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
Sec. 8.2. - Continuation in effect of ordinances, etc. 
    All ordinances of the city and all rules, regulations, contracts and orders legally made by any department, board, commission or officer of the city, in force at the effective date of this Charter, insofar as they or any portion thereof are not inconsistent herewith, shall remain in force until amended or repealed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 8.3. - Application of general law to city and officers thereof. 
    The City of Buena Vista and all the officers thereof elected or appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act [Charter] shall be clothed with all the powers and subject to all the provisions of general law not in express conflict with the provisions of this Act [Charter]. 
Sec. 8.4. - Separability of parts, sections, etc., of Charter. 
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this Act [Charter] shall, for any reason, be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, said judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of said Act [Charter], but shall be confined in its operations to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have been rendered. 
Sec. 8.5. - How Charter cited. 
    This Act [Charter] and all amendments thereto may for all purposes be referred to or cited as the City of Buena Vista Charter of 1952. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
Sec. 8.6. - Construction of references to particular sections of Code of Virginia. 
    The reference herein to any section of the Code of Virginia shall be construed to mean such section as it existed January 1, 1952, provided that this shall not apply as to any section referred to in any subsequent amendment of this Charter when any such section of the Code of Virginia is referred to as amended, in which event such section shall be construed to mean such Code section as it exists on January one of the year in which the reference is made. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
Sec. 8.7. - Construction of references to particular sections, etc., of Charter. 
    All references to a specific section or subsection of the City of Buena Vista Charter of 1952, herein contained[,] shall be construed to refer to such specific section or subsection as the same may be now or hereafter amended. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 361) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ACTS 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Acts 
Year Chapter 
Number Section/ 
Page Section 
this Charter 1952 325 Char. (note) 1954 361 1.3 2.2 2.4 2.4 3.4 3.6 3.901 3.902 3.923 3.927 3.929 3.930 3.944 4.1 4.2 4.5 5.1 5.102 8.5 8.6 8.7 1962 164 3.3 3.4 3.9 p. 244 3.902 1972 257 3.7 4.5 1973 82 6.2 3.4 1975 169 1 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.3 2.4 3.9 3.906 3.942 4.5 1988 139 2.2 1992 36 2.2 280 2.2 1994 91 1 6.2 6.3 1999 268 1 3.3 3.4 3.7  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Buena Vista, Virginia," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Buena Vista Code." 
(Code 1967, § 1-1; Code 1981, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to codify and recodify its ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
    In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions of the city, the following rules of construction and definitions shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing with such surety, if any, as the city council may direct, shall be sufficient. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the city, as it now exists or as it may be amended in the future. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Buena Vista, in the County of Rockbridge and the State of Virginia. 
    Code. Whenever the term "Code" is referred to, without further qualification, it means the Code of the City of Buena Vista, Virginia, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
    Council, city council. The term "council" or "city council" means the city council of the City of Buena Vista, Virginia. 
    County. The term "county" means the County of Rockbridge in the State of Virginia. 
    Director of public health. The term "director of public health" means the director of public health of the City of Buena Vista or authorized representative. 
    Following. The term "following," when used by way of reference to any section, shall be construed to mean next following that in which such reference is made. 
    Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to corporations, etc., as well as to males. 
    Health department. The term "health department" means the City of Buena Vista health department or as designated. 
    In the city. The term "in the city" means any territory or jurisdiction of which for the exercise of its regulatory power has been conferred on the city by public or private law. 
    Joint authority. Terms purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise expressly stated. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one person or thing; and a term importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Occupant or tenant. The term "occupant" or "tenant," applied to a building or land, means any person who holds a written or oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Officers, employees, departments, committees, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, employee, department, committee, board, commission or other agency, without further qualification, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the term "of the City of Buena Vista, Virginia." A reference to a specific officer shall include that officer's duly authorized deputies and agents. 
    Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are specified in this Code relating to the time within which an act shall or shall not be performed by any person, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the city. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation, organization or any other group acting as a unit. 
    Preceding. The term "preceding," when used by way of reference to any section, means next preceding that in which such reference is made. 
    Property. The term "property" means real, personal or mixed property. 
    Public grounds. The term "public grounds" means the parks and all public lands owned by the city and those parts of public places which do not form travelled parts of streets as defined in this section. 
    Shall. The term "shall" shall be mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write, his name being written near it and being witnessed by a person who writes his own name as a witness. 
    State Code. References to the "State Code" or the "Code of Virginia" means the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
    State, commonwealth. The term "state" or "commonwealth" means the State of Virginia. 
    Street. The term "street" includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and means the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. It shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
    Swear, sworn. The term "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the term "affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes typewriting, printing on paper and any other mode of representing terms and letters. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2; Code 1981, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Similar rules of construction and definitions, Code of Virginia, § 1-200 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchterms to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(Code 1967, § 1-5; Code 1981, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to sections of State Code, Code of Virginia, § 1-217. 
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
    Whenever reference is made to a section by number only (e.g., "section 1-1"), without further qualification, it shall be construed as referring to that section of this Code. All references to chapters, articles, divisions or sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1967, § 1-2; Code 1981, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
    Reference and editor's notes following certain chapters, articles, divisions or sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions of Code construed as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the Buena Vista City Code adopted September 24, 1981, and all ordinances adopted subsequent thereto and included herein, shall be construed as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1967, § 1-4; Code 1981, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-8. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  Any ordinance granting any franchise or right; 
(3)  Any ordinance appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to business licenses or an annual budget; 
(4)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement or assessments therefor; 
(6)  The land development regulations as contained in part III of this Code, or any amendment thereto, and including amendments to the zoning map and ordinances zoning or rezoning specific property; 
(7)  Any ordinance relating to cemeteries; 
(8)  Any ordinance adopting or amending a park land use plan or a comprehensive plan or master plan for the city, or relating to floodplains; 
(9)  Any ordinance relating to the salaries of the city officers or employees, personnel policies, retirement plans or other benefits; 
(10)  Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance regarding motor vehicle or traffic regulations for specific streets; 
(12)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; or 
(13)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the office of the clerk of the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeal of ordinance or resolution which repealed another. 
    When an ordinance or resolution which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance or resolution shall not be revived without express terms to that effect. 
(Code 1981, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the terms "this ordinance" or terms of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1981, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Authority to supplement Code, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
Sec. 1-12. - Copies of Code and supplements to be available for public inspection. 
    At least one copy of this Code and of every supplement thereto shall be kept in the office of the clerk of the city council and shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
(Code 1981, § 1-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
Sec. 1-13. - Extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(a)  The city council declares as its legislative intent of the past and for the future that all ordinances enacted making it a criminal offense to do certain things were enacted not only to regulate conduct within the corporate limits of the city but likewise to regulate conduct in all parks, playgrounds, play fields, recreational facilities, cemeteries, airports, schools and other public property of the city whether located within the corporate limits or not, which legislation has been and will in the future be passed pursuant to section 2.420 of the Charter of the city. 
(b)  This section is adopted as clarification of the purpose of criminal ordinances enacted by the city council for the express purpose of giving jurisdiction to the general district court and the circuit court of the city for trial of all violations of, and offenses against, the ordinances of the city committed within one mile of the corporate limits in all parks, playgrounds, play fields, recreational facilities, cemeteries, airports, schools and other public property of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 1-10; Ord. No. 74-6, 10-24-1974) 
Charter reference- Jurisdiction of city, § 2.420. 
Sec. 1-14. - Classification of and penalties for violations; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor or an offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor or an offense, and no specific class of misdemeanor or penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, however, that such penalty shall not exceed the penalty prescribed by general law for a like offense. 
(b)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city or any rule or regulation promulgated by any officer or agency of the city, under authority duly vested in such officer or agency, it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a Class 1, 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Class 1 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $2,500.00, or by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(2)  Class 2 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by confinement in jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(3)  Class 3 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(4)  Class 4 misdemeanor: By a fine of not more than $250.00. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, each day any violation of this Code or any such ordinance, rule, regulation or order continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Wherever authorized by law, the penalties provided in this section shall apply to violations occurring inside or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 10-1; Code 1981, § 1-11) 
State Law reference- Power of city to prescribe punishment for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1429; classification of misdemeanors and punishment therefor, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-9, 18.2-11; authority of city to provide penalties for violation of ordinances and provisions similar to subsection (c) of this section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1429; authority of court trying case, upon conviction, to require bond conditioned that the person convicted will not violate the ordinance for the breach of which he was convicted for a period of not more than one year, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1430; injunctive relief for continuing violations of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1432. 
Sec. 1-15. - Assessment of costs or fees. 
    The judge of the general district court of the city shall, in all cases involving violations of the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city or the collection of taxes or assessments due and owing to the city, or the collection of any other debts due and owing to the city, assess the same costs or fees in connection with the trial of such cases, as are provided by the laws of the state, so made and provided. 
(Code 1967, § 10-2; Code 1981, § 1-12) 
State Law reference- District court fees, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-354. 
Sec. 1-16. - Liability of corporations, etc., and agents for violations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment, as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization, for the violation by it of any provision of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order of any such person. 
(Code 1981, § 1-13) 
Sec. 1-17. - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1967, § 1-3; Code 1981, § 1-14) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Form of government, § 1.2; powers of the city, art. 2; administration and government, art. 3; financial administration, art. 4; administration of justice, art. 5. 
State Law reference- General powers of cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1100 et seq.; local government officers, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1500 et seq.; extending police power of city beyond corporate limits, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1725. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Signing and sealing of deeds, contracts, etc. 
    Except where otherwise provided, when any deed, contract or other instrument has been authorized or accepted by the city council by ordinance or resolution, adopted and approved in the manner prescribed by law, and the execution of such instrument on behalf of the city requires the signature of the city, the treasurer and the finance officer are hereby authorized to sign such deed, contract or other instrument in the name and on behalf of the city. Except as otherwise provided, in all cases when it is necessary by law or custom that the corporate seal of the city be affixed to any such deed, contract or other instrument, the clerk of the city council is authorized to affix the corporate seal of the city to such deed, contract or other instrument and to attest such corporate seal so affixed. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2; Code 1981, § 2-1) 
Charter reference- City manager authorized to act as purchasing agent, § 3.914; bids and purchases, § 4.2. 
Sec. 2-2. - Execution of checks. 
    Except as otherwise provided, all checks drawn against any account of the city shall be signed by the treasurer or deputy treasurer and the city manager or finance officer. 
(Code 1967, § 2-59; Code 1981, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-3. - Holidays. 
(a)  Except for employees of the police department, the city shall follow the state holiday schedule. 
(b)  In the event any such holiday shall fall on Sunday, such holiday shall be observed the Monday next succeeding such holiday. 
(Code 1967, § 2-1; Code 1981, § 2-3) 
State Law reference- Legal holidays, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3300. 
Sec. 2-4. - Returned check charge. 
    The city shall charge a return check fee of $50.00 per check plus any fees incurred by the city. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2006) 
State Law reference- Authority to impose fee for returned checks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-106. 
Secs. 2-5-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Council, §§ 3.3-3.9. 
State Law reference- Governing bodies generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1400 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - One office to be held at a time. 
    Councilmembers not to hold more than one office, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1534, 15.2-1535. 
Sec. 2-27. - Removal from office. 
    By the affirmative vote of two-thirds of its entire membership, the city council may remove a member from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office, commission of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or intoxication or other incapacity when required to serve the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-21) 
Secs. 2-28-2-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Council meetings and rules of procedure, § 3.9. 
State Law reference- Open meetings, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq. 

Sec. 2-58. - Regular. 
    The city council shall meet in regular session on the first and third Thursdays of each month at 6:00 p.m.; provided, however, that the city council may by resolution adopted at any previous regular or special meeting dispense with any specific regular meeting. The city council's place of meeting shall be the city council chamber at and in the city hall or at any other place designated by resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-4; Code 1981, § 2-31) 
Sec. 2-59. - Special. 
    Pursuant to Charter § 3.9, special meetings of the city council may be called by the mayor or any four members of the city council. The clerk of the city council shall prepare a notice of the special session stating time, place and specific statement of items of business to be transacted, and this notice shall be served personally upon each member of the city council and the city manager, or left at their usual places of residence, at least two hours before the time of meeting. It shall also be the duty of the clerk of the city council to make diligent effort to notify each member of the city council in person, either by telephone or otherwise, of such a special session. 
(Code 1967, § 2-5; Code 1981, § 2-32) 
State Law reference- Notice of meetings, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3707. 
Sec. 2-60. - Seating arrangement. 
    City councilmembers shall occupy the respective seats in the city council chamber assigned to them by the mayor, but any two or more members may exchange seats by joining in a written notice to the mayor to that effect. 
(Code 1967, § 2-14; Code 1981, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-61. - Absent members. 
    In the event that a number less than a quorum shall convene at a regular or special meeting of the city council, any member of the city council present may cause to be issued a subpoena, directed to the city sheriff, requiring the attendance of any member so absent. The city sheriff shall forthwith serve such subpoena and compel the attendance of the absent member. 
(Code 1967, § 2-13; Code 1981, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-62. - Control and direction of clerk, etc. 
    The clerk of the city council and other officers and employees of the city council shall be under the direction of the chair during sessions of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-16; Code 1981, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-63. - Department heads, etc. 
    The head of any department or any officer or employee of the city, when requested by the city manager, shall attend any regular, adjourned or special meeting and confer with the city council on all matters relating to the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-8; Code 1981, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-64. - Decorum and order. 
    The presiding officer of the city council shall preserve decorum and decide on questions of order, subject to appeal to the city council. If a member transgresses the provisions of this article, the presiding officer shall call him to order. 
(Code 1967, § 2-19; Code 1981, § 2-37) 
Sec. 2-65. - Penalty for disorderly behavior or absence. 
    The city council may fine its members in an amount not exceeding $100.00 for disorderly behavior and for absence without just cause from any regular or special meeting. 
(Code 1967, § 2-20; Code 1981, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-66. - Unsigned communications. 
    Unsigned or anonymous communications shall not be introduced in council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-42; Code 1981, § 2-39) 
Sec. 2-67. - Leaving council chamber. 
    No member of the city council shall leave the city council chamber while in regular meeting without permission from the presiding officer. 
(Code 1967, § 2-27; Code 1981, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-68. - Admission of non-city officers within bar. 
    No person except members of the city council and the officers named in this article and persons invited by the presiding officer of the city council or by the vote of council shall be admitted within the bar of the city council chamber. 
(Code 1967, § 2-15; Code 1981, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-69. - Addressing council. 
    Persons other than members of the city council and city officers shall not be permitted to address the city council, except upon introduction by the presiding officer. 
(Code 1967, § 2-22; Code 1981, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-70. - Speaking to councilmember. 
    If any person, other than a city officer desires to speak to a member of council while council is in session, the person shall first be recognized by the presiding officer and if the member is agreeable to the request, the member shall leave his seat and retire to the rear of the city council chamber or elsewhere until the conversation is finished. 
(Code 1967, § 2-28; Code 1981, § 2-43) 
Sec. 2-71. - Executive sessions. 
    No executive session of the city council shall be held except in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1967, § 2-11; Code 1981, § 2-44) 
State Law reference- Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq.; closed meetings authorized, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3711. 
Secs. 2-72-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COMMITTEES 

Sec. 2-101. - Appointment. 
    The mayor may appoint from time to time such special or select committees, consisting of at least one councilmember, and shall designate the chair thereof, as in his discretion he deems desirable or as may be desired by the city council, to expedite the handling of the business and affairs of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 2-44; Code 1981, § 2-51) 
Sec. 2-102. - Meetings. 
    It shall be the duty of the chair of each special committee to give notice as provided in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3707 of the time and place of meeting of such committee and to all members of the city council, the clerk of the city council, the city manager and all other persons known to be interested, in favor of or opposed to the particular matters proposed to be considered. 
(Code 1967, § 2-46; Code 1981, § 2-52) 
State Law reference- Public notice of meetings, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3707. 
Sec. 2-103. - Employees. 
    No committee of the city council shall have the power of employing any person for, or on behalf of, the city, or incur any expense, unless specially authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-50; Code 1981, § 2-53) 
Sec. 2-104. - Secretary. 
    The clerk of the city council shall act as secretary to special committees and shall keep a record of the attendance and business transacted at their meetings. 
(Code 1967, § 2-49; Code 1981, § 2-54) 
Sec. 2-105. - Relief from further consideration. 
    At a city council meeting, upon motion, the city council may, by a majority vote relieve a special committee of further consideration of a matter referred to it. 
(Code 1967, § 2-48; Code 1981, § 2-55) 
Sec. 2-106. - Reports. 
    Reports of special committees shall be in writing, agreed to in committee assembled and shall not be presented unless signed by a majority of the committee. Copies of the report shall be available to each member. Documents referred to the committee shall be returned with the report. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the introduction of minority reports. 
(Code 1967, § 2-47; Code 1981, § 2-56) 
Secs. 2-107-2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RULES OF PROCEDURE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Council meetings and rules of procedure, § 3.9. 

Sec. 2-126. - Order of business. 
    Unless the city council, by a vote of at least two-thirds of the members present, shall suspend the rules and change the order, the business of all regular meetings of the city council shall be transacted in the following order: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Pledge of Allegiance. 
(3)  Approval of minutes of previous meeting. 
(4)  Recognition/communication from visitors. 
(5)  Report of: 
a.  Mayor. 
b.  City manager. 
c.  City attorney. 
(6)  Old business. 
(7)  New business. 
(Code 1967, § 2-17; Code 1981, § 2-66) 
Sec. 2-127. - Opening of meetings. 
    The mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the city council to meet and shall immediately call the members to order. 
(Code 1967, § 2-12; Code 1981, § 2-67) 
Sec. 2-128. - Reading and approval of minutes. 
    At each regular meeting of the city council, the minutes of the preceding regular meeting and any special meeting shall be presented for approval. If no objection is made to the minutes, the minutes shall be approved. 
(Code 1967, § 2-18; Code 1981, § 2-68) 
Sec. 2-129. - Election of officers. 
    A majority of all members elected to the city council shall be required to elect a vice-mayor, clerk of the city council, city manager and the city attorney. 
(Code 1967, § 2-9; Code 1981, § 2-69) 
Sec. 2-130. - Parliamentary guide. 
    At a meeting of the city council, in the absence of a rule to govern a point or procedure, reference shall be had to Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Code 1967, § 2-45; Code 1981, § 2-71) 
Sec. 2-131. - Personal privilege. 
    The right of a member to address the city council on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which his integrity, character or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned. 
(Code 1967, § 2-23; Code 1981, § 2-72) 
Sec. 2-132. - Continuance. 
    Any session of the city council may be continued or adjourned from day to day, or for more than one day, but no continuance or adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting thereafter. 
(Code 1967, § 2-6; Code 1981, § 2-73) 
Secs. 2-133-2-162. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MOTIONS 

Sec. 2-163. - Statement; writing. 
    When a motion is made and seconded at a meeting of the city council, it shall be stated by the chair before debate and any member may demand that it be put in writing. 
(Code 1967, § 2-34; Code 1981, § 2-81) 
Sec. 2-164. - Withdrawal. 
    A motion may not be withdrawn by the mover without the consent of the member seconding it and the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-34; Code 1981, § 2-82) 
Sec. 2-165. - When a question is before council. 
(a)  At a city council meeting, when a question is before the city council, no motion shall be entertained except: 
(1)  To adjourn; 
(2)  To lay on the table; 
(3)  For the previous question; 
(4)  To postpone to a certain day; 
(5)  To refer; 
(6)  To amend; 
(7)  To postpone indefinitely. 
(b)  These motions shall have precedence in the order indicated. 
(c)  Any such motion, except a motion to amend, shall be put to a vote without debate. 
(Code 1967, § 2-35; Code 1981, § 2-83) 
Sec. 2-166. - Amendments to amendments. 
    At a city council meeting, a motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be introduced. An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order, but an amendment relating to a different matter shall not be in order. 
(Code 1967, § 2-39; Code 1981, § 2-84) 
Sec. 2-167. - To lay on the table. 
    At a city council meeting, a motion to lay on the table shall preclude all amendments or debate of the subject under consideration. If such motion shall prevail, the consideration of the subject may be resumed only upon motion of a member of the city council voting with the majority and with the consent of two-thirds of the members present and voting. 
(Code 1967, § 2-36; Code 1981, § 2-85) 
Sec. 2-168. - To postpone. 
    At a city council meeting, all motions to postpone, except motions to postpone indefinitely, may be amended as to time and if a motion to postpone indefinitely is carried, the principal question shall be declared lost. 
(Code 1967, § 2-40; Code 1981, § 2-86) 
Sec. 2-169. - Subjects of debate. 
    When recognized by the chair, a member of the city council shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoid personalities and refrain from impugning the motives of any other member's argument or vote. 
(Code 1967, § 2-21; Code 1981, § 2-87) 
Sec. 2-170. - Limitation of debate. 
    No member of the city council shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any one subject until every other member choosing to speak thereon shall have spoken, and no such member shall speak more than twice upon any one subject, nor for a longer time than ten minutes without permission of council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-25; Code 1981, § 2-88) 
Sec. 2-171. - Division of question. 
    At a city council meeting, if a question contains two or more divisible propositions, the presiding officer may, and upon request of a member shall, divide the same. 
(Code 1967, § 2-37; Code 1981, § 2-89) 
Sec. 2-172. - Tie vote. 
    At a meeting of the city council, in case of a tie in votes on any proposal, the proposal shall be considered lost. 
(Code 1967, § 2-43; Code 1981, § 2-90) 
Sec. 2-173. - Reconsideration. 
    At a meeting of the city council, any member of the city council who voted with the majority may move a reconsideration of any action on the same for the next succeeding meeting; provided, however, that a resolution authorizing or relating to any contract may be reconsidered at any time before the final execution thereof. A motion to reconsider shall require the same number of votes as is required to adopt an ordinance or resolution. After a motion for reconsideration has once been acted on, no other motion for a reconsideration thereof shall be made without unanimous consent. 
(Code 1967, § 2-41; Code 1981, § 2-91) 
Sec. 2-174. - Appeal from ruling of chair. 
    Any member of the city council may appeal to the city council from a ruling of the presiding officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member making the appeal may briefly state his reason for the same, and the presiding officer may briefly explain his ruling; but there shall be no debate on the appeal and no other member shall participate in the discussion. The presiding officer shall then put the question, "Shall the decision of the chair be sustained?" and, if a majority of the members present vote "aye," the ruling of the chair is sustained; otherwise, it is overruled. 
(Code 1967, § 2-24; Code 1981, § 2-92) 
Secs. 2-175-2-201. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ORDINANCES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Ordinances, §§ 3.901-3.905. 

Sec. 2-202. - Filing with clerk. 
    Every ordinance, resolution and document to come before the city council for consideration shall be filed with the clerk of the city council before noon of the day on which the city council meets. 
(Code 1967, § 2-29; Code 1981, § 2-101) 
Sec. 2-203. - Titles prepared. 
    It shall be the duty of the clerk of the city council to have ready for delivery by 3:00 p.m. of the preceding Tuesday before the city council meeting on Thursday, a brief statement setting forth a full descriptive title of all ordinances, resolutions and documents to come before the city council on Thursday. 
(Code 1967, § 2-30; Code 1981, § 2-102) 
Sec. 2-204. - Copies. 
    The clerk of the city council shall prepare copies of all proposed ordinances for distribution to all city councilmembers at the meeting at which the ordinance is to be introduced. Whenever any city councilmember is absent from such meeting, the clerk shall arrange to have copies delivered to them. 
(Code 1967, § 2-31; Code 1981, § 2-103) 
Sec. 2-205. - Introduction. 
    Ordinances shall be introduced to the city council by the mayor, and shall be in written form. 
(Code 1967, § 2-32; Code 1981, § 2-104) 
Sec. 2-206. - First reading. 
    The first reading of an ordinance shall be for information. If there are objections to it, the question shall be: "Shall the proposal be rejected?" 
(Code 1967, § 2-33; Code 1981, § 2-105) 
Sec. 2-207. - Amendment. 
    At a city council meeting, it shall be in order to amend an ordinance at any time. If an ordinance, after its second reading, is amended, it shall be read as the first reading thereof and laid over for further and final consideration. 
(Code 1967, § 2-38; Code 1981, § 2-106) 
Sec. 2-208. - Dissent or protest. 
    Any member of the city council shall have the right to express dissent from or protest against any ordinance or resolution of council and have the reason therefor entered upon the minutes. Such dissent or protest shall be filed in writing couched in respectful language, and presented to the city council not later than the next regular meeting following the date of passage of the ordinance or resolution objected to. 
(Code 1967, § 2-26; Code 1981, § 2-107) 
Secs. 2-209-2-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-240. - Purchasing agent. 
    The purchasing agent may purchase for use by the city such materials and supplies as may be, within the scope of the current budgets, required for operation. The intent of Charter, section 4.2, shall be complied with. 
(Code 1967, § 2-53; Code 1981, § 2-119) 
Charter reference- Bids and purchases, § 4.2. 
Secs. 2-241-2-258. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment of city manager, § 3.907; powers and duties of city manager, §§ 3.907-3.917. 

Sec. 2-259. - Specific function. 
    The city manager shall be the administrator of personnel. 
(Code 1967, § 2-51; Code 1981, § 2-126) 
Sec. 2-260. - Pay increases. 
    The city manager may make merit increases in the pay of any employee, from time to time and during any fiscal year, by and with concurrence of the city auditor, in those instances where the city manager is of the opinion that such increase is merited and departmental appropriations are not exceeded. Whenever such an increase would exceed existing departmental appropriations, a request for necessary appropriations will be made in the customary manner. 
(Code 1967, § 2-52; Code 1981, § 2-127) 
Sec. 2-261. - Sale of personal property. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager when authorized or instructed to do so, to sell materials or personal property of the city as authorized by the city council or by the head of any department. He shall keep an accurate account of such sales in his office. Such material or property may be sold either at public or private sale. 
(Code 1967, § 2-58; Code 1981, § 2-154) 
Secs. 2-262-2-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference- City attorney, § 3.923; powers and duties, §§ 3.924-3.927. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to employ counsel to provide defense in certain actions, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1521, 15.2-1521. 

Sec. 2-286. - Attend council meetings. 
    The city attorney shall attend all meetings of the city council, unless excused by the mayor. 
(Code 1967, § 2-7; Code 1981, § 2-139) 
Sec. 2-287. - Expenses. 
    From time to time, the city attorney shall present for payment any actual outlay or expense which the performance of his duties has entailed. 
(Code 1967, § 2-54; Code 1981, § 2-140) 
Secs. 2-288-2-307. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINANCE DIRECTOR 

Sec. 2-308. - Custody of books. 
    In any situation in which it is practicable, the books or financial accounts of any department or office of the city government shall be kept in the office of the finance director. 
(Code 1967, § 2-56; Code 1981, § 2-141) 
Sec. 2-309. - Accounts, records, statements and reports generally. 
    The finance director shall require proper fiscal accounts and records to be kept, statements and reports to be made to his office by the several departments, officers and employees of the city and shall control and audit the same. The form and system of all such accounts, bookkeeping and financial reporting shall be prescribed or approved by the city auditor and it shall be the duty of all city officers and employees to use such systems of accounting, bookkeeping and reporting as the finance director may direct. 
(Code 1967, § 2-55; Code 1981, § 2-153) 
State Law reference- Fiscal year of cities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2500. 
Sec. 2-310. - Salary and payroll checks. 
    The finance director shall issue salary and payroll checks, whether the officers or employees are paid monthly, semimonthly, every two weeks or weekly. It shall be the duty of the several heads of the departments of the city government to supply finance director with information necessary to the proper preparation of the payrolls. 
(Code 1967, § 2-57; Code 1981, § 2-155) 
Secs. 2-311-2-338. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CLERK OF THE CITY COUNCIL[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- Clerk of the council, § 3.918. 

Sec. 2-339. - Filing and publication duties. 
    The clerk of the city council shall file and preserve all papers which may come into his hands as clerk, and shall attest and publish, as clerk, all ordinances or other papers or proceedings required by the city council to be published. 
(Code 1967, § 2-61; Code 1981, § 2-167) 
Sec. 2-340. - Attendance at city council meetings. 
    The clerk of the city council shall attend every meeting of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-60; Code 1981, § 2-168) 
Sec. 2-341. - Additional duties. 
    In addition to the duties required of him by the Charter, the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city, the clerk of the city council shall perform such other and further duties in the meeting as may be ordered by the mayor, council or city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 2-64; Code 1981, § 2-169) 
Sec. 2-342. - Examination of books and papers. 
    The books and papers of the clerk of the city council shall, at all times, be subject to examination by the city manager or any member of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 2-63; Code 1981, § 2-170) 
Sec. 2-343. - Officers' reports to council. 
    The clerk of the city council shall transmit to the city council, monthly, the reports of city departments. 
(Code 1967, § 2-62; Code 1981, § 2-171) 
Secs. 2-344-2-374. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-375-2-391. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JOINT INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-392. - Established. 
(a)  Contingent upon the passage of a substantively similar ordinance by the county and the city of Lexington, the city hereby creates a joint IDA to be knows as the "Industrial Development Authority of the County of Rockbridge and the Cities of Lexington and Buena Vista" ("authority"). 
(b)  The authority shall be a political subdivision of the commonwealth and shall have all those public and corporate powers set forth in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4900 et seq., as amended, that are not inconsistent with the terms of the agreement, as the agreement may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 5-23-1996) 
Secs. 2-393-2-412. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FEES AND FUNDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-413-2-437. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COURT COSTS 

Sec. 2-438. - Costs. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 53.1-120, as amended, a fee of $10.00 shall be assessed as part of the fees taxed as costs in each criminal or traffic case in the circuit or the district court for the city, in which the defendant is convicted for violation of any statute or ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-23-1997; Ord. of 7-24-1997; Ord. of 5-10-2007) 
State Law reference- Authority to assess costs courthouse or jail facilities, Code of Virginia, § 17.1-281; authority to levy fee for court facilities, Code of Virginia, § 53.1-120. 
Sec. 2-439. - Fees for the construction, renovation or maintenance of the courthouse. 
    A fee of $3.00 shall be assessed as part of the costs in each civil, criminal or traffic case to be used solely for the construction, renovation or maintenance of the courthouse. The fee shall not be assessed in any civil action if the amount in controversy is $500.00 or less. The additional fee may only be assessed by localities that, on or after January 1, 2009, operated a courthouse not in compliance with the current safety and security guidelines contained in the Virginia Courthouse Facility guidelines and the courthouse cannot be feasibly renovated to correct the noncompliance. 
(Ord. of 6-18-2009) 
State Law reference- Additional assessment for courthouse, Code of Virginia, § 17.1-281D. 
Sec. 2-440. - Fees. 
    In all criminal convictions resulting in prosecution in the courts of the city, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 53.1-131.1, there shall be assessed as costs related to the conviction and disposition thereof made as follows: 
(1)  The heretofore provided assessments made by the courts to defray costs of weekend and nonconsecutive days in jail are to be remitted to the treasurer of the city. This is authorized pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 53.1-131.1. 
(2)  A sheriff's processing fee ("jail admission fee") shall be imposed in an amount of $25.00 on any individual admitted to jail following conviction. This jail admission fee is to be placed into an account, Code 234. 
(3)  An assessment for courthouse and courtroom security personnel shall be made pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 53.1-120. The assessment shall be in the amount of $5.00 in each criminal or traffic conviction in the district or circuit court. The assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court and remitted to the local treasurer and held by the treasurer subject to appropriation by the city council to the sheriff's office for the funding of courthouse security personnel. 
(Ord. of 8-8-2002) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy fee to defray costs for weekend and nonconsecutive day confinement, Code of Virginia, § 53.1-131.1. 
Sec. 2-441. - Additional fee for criminal and traffic cases. 
    An additional $5.00 fee shall be made a part of the cost for each criminal and/or traffic case within the district or circuit court cases for the City of Buena Vista and that in accordance with the state law, this fee shall be collected by the clerks of the court and remitted to the treasurer for the City of Buena Vista to use as directed by city council to fund the software, hardware and associated equipment costs for the implementation and maintenance of an electronic summons system. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, 10-6-2016) 
Secs. 2-442-2-463. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GARBAGE, WATER AND SEWER FEE RELIEF PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-464. - Purpose. 
    Certain elderly and disabled residents of the city, due to their financial status are excessively burdened with the garbage, water and sewer fees, and therefore in order to promote the health and welfare of all citizens of the city, the city hereby adopts the garbage, water and sewer fee relief program set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2004) 
Sec. 2-465. - Individuals eligible to apply for fee exemption. 
    In order to qualify you must either: 
(1)  Qualify under the real estate relief for the elderly and disabled in accordance with division 2 of article II of chapter 16; 
(2)  Are not less than 65 years of age; or 
(3)  A person permanently and totally disabled. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2004) 
Sec. 2-466. - Financial qualifications. 
    In order to qualify: 
(1)  An individual and his or her relatives living in the same dwelling shall not have a combined total income (from all sources) during the immediately preceding calendar year exceeding $25,000.00; and 
(2)  The net combined financial worth of the individual applying, and his or her spouse, as of December 31 of the immediately preceding calendar year shall not exceed $65,000.00. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2004) 
Sec. 2-467. - Fee relief. 
    The fee relief granted shall be based on the following gross income scale: 
Income Level 
(in dollars) Reduction 
(in percent) 0.00-6,000.00 80 6,001.00-12,000.00 60 12,001.00-18,000.00 40 18,001.00-25,000.00 20  
(Ord. of 9-9-2004) 
Sec. 2-468. - Disability. 
    Any person claiming exemption under disability shall provide a certification from the Social Security Administration, the Veteran's Affair or the Railroad Retirement Board, or if said person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two medical doctors who are either licensed to practice medicine in the Commonwealth or a military officer on active duty who practices medicine with the United States Armed Services, to the effect that the person is permanently and totally disabled as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217, as amended, however a certification pursuant to 42 USC 423(d) by the Social Security Administration so long as the person remains eligible for such social security benefits shall be deemed to satisfy such definition in the aforesaid Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217. The affidavit of at least one of the doctors shall be based upon a physical examination of the person by such doctor. The affidavit of one of the doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the Civil Service Commission, which is relevant to the standard for determining permanent and total disability as defined in the aforesaid Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2004) 
Sec. 2-469. - Administration of program. 
    This exemption shall be administered by the commissioner of revenue for the city. The commissioner of revenue is hereby authorized and empowered to make such inquiry of persons seeking such exemption in conformance with the provisions of this article, including the requiring of answering under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemptions as specified by this article. The commissioner of revenue may require the production of certified income tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income and/or financial worth. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2004) 
Sec. 2-470. - Claims. 
(a)  Annually, and not later than November 15 of each year, the person or persons claiming this exemption must file a garbage, water/sewer fee relief application with the commissioner of revenue for the city. 
(b)  The application shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the commissioner of revenue, the names of the related persons occupying the applicant's dwelling, their gross combined income and a total combined net worth of the applicant and his or her spouse. The application shall also state whether the person or persons claiming the exemption claim the age or disability exemption or qualify under the real estate relief provisions of division 2 of article II of chapter 16. 
(c)  If after an audit or investigation, the commissioner of revenue determines the persons are qualified for this exemption, it shall be so certified to the utility department, who shall deduct the amount of exemption from the claimant's garbage, water and sewer bill. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2004) 
Sec. 2-471. - Change in status. 
    Changes in respect to income, financial worth, or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which the application is filed and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided for in this article shall nullify any relief granted for the garbage, water/sewer fees for the then-current year and the year immediately following. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2004) 
Sec. 2-472. - Violations. 
    Any person or persons falsely claiming an exemption under this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2004) 
Sec. 2-473. - Application. 
    The following is an application form for the fee relief program: 
Garbage, Water and Sewer Fee Relief Application No.  ____________  
The Buena Vista City Council, effective January 1, 2005, has enacted an ordinance for the exemption of fees for certain individuals not less than 65 years of age or of a person permanently and totally disabled. The financial qualifications are as follows: 
1. In order to qualify, an individual and his or her relatives living in the same dwelling shall not have a total combined income (from all sources) during the immediately preceding calendar year exceeding $25,000.00. 2. The net combined financial worth of the individual applying and his or her spouse as of December 31 of the immediately preceding calendar year shall not exceed $65,000.00.  
The fee relief granted shall be based on the following income level: 
Name of applicant _____Address _____ 
I (we), having attained the age of 65 years or are permanently and totally disabled, I (we) live at the address noted above as my (our) sole residence, do apply for the fee relief above described and make oath that my (our) household income and financial worth is not in excess of the limitations above provided. 
Applicant _____By  ____________ Date of Birth _____Telephone _____Account Number _____ 
Applicant qualifies for the following percentage fee relief  ____________ 
_____
Commissioner of the Revenue Date  ____________  
(Ord. of 9-9-2004) 
Secs. 2-474-2-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC-PRIVATE EDUCATION FACILITIES INFRASTRUCTURE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Public-private education facilities and infrastructure act, Code of Virginia, § 56-575.1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-500. - Introduction. 
(a)  The Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, Code of Virginia, §§ 56-575.1 to 56-575.16 as amended, (the "PPEA"), grants a public entity the authority to create public-private partnerships for the development of a wide range of projects for public use ("qualifying projects") if the public entity determines that there is a need for a project and that private involvement may provide the project to the public in a timely or cost-effective fashion. The term "public entity" as defined in Code of Virginia, § 56-575.1 of the PPEA includes, inter alia, any political subdivision of the commonwealth. 
(b)  In order for a project to come under the PPEA, it must meet the definition of the term "qualifying project," which is broadly defined in the PPEA to include public buildings and facilities of all types. 
(c)  Code of Virginia, § 56-575.3:1 provides that a responsible public entity ("RPE"), one which has the power to develop or operate a qualifying project, may not consider any proposal by a private entity for approval of the qualifying project pursuant to the PPEA until the RPE has adopted and made publicly available, guidelines that are sufficient to enable the RPE to comply with the PPEA. Accordingly, these guidelines (the "guidelines") are hereby adopted by the city council as the governing body of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2008, § I) 
Sec. 2-501. - General provisions. 
(a)  Proposals. 
(1)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 56-575.4, a proposal to provide a qualifying project to a RPE may be either solicited from private entities by the public entity (solicited bid/proposal) or delivered to the public entity by a private entity on an unsolicited basis (unsolicited proposal). In either case, any such proposal shall be clearly identified as a PPEA proposal. 
(2)  The requirements for any particular solicited bid/proposal shall be as specified in the solicitation by the city for that particular proposal and shall be consistent with all applicable provisions of the PPEA. 
(3)  Any unsolicited proposal shall be submitted to the city by delivering six complete copies, together with the required initial review fee as provided in section 2-503(4), to the Office of City Manager, 2039 Sycamore Avenue, Buena Vista, Virginia 24416. Other requirements for an unsolicited proposal are set forth in section 2-503. A working group may be designated by city council to review and evaluate all unsolicited proposals. 
(4)  The city may require that any proposal be clarified. Such clarification may include but is not limited to submission of additional documentation, responses to specific questions, and interviews with potential project participants. 
(b)  Affected local jurisdictions. 
(1)  The term "affected local jurisdiction" includes any county, city or town in which all or a portion of a qualifying project is located. 
(2)  Any private entity submitting a solicited bid/proposal or an unsolicited proposal to the city as the RPE for a qualifying project must provide any other affected local jurisdiction with a copy of the proposal by certified mail, express delivery, or hand delivery within five business days of submission of the proposal to the city. Each affected local jurisdiction that is not a RPE for the respective qualifying project shall, within 60 days from receipt of the copy of the proposal, submit written comments to the RPE and indicate whether the proposed qualifying project is compatible with the affected jurisdiction's local comprehensive plan, local infrastructure development plans, capital improvements budget, or other government spending plan. Comments received within the 60-day period shall be given consideration by the RPE, prior to entering into a comprehensive agreement pursuant to the PPEA with the private entity. However, the city may begin or continue its evaluation of any such proposal during the 60-day period for the receipt of comments from affected local jurisdictions. 
(c)  State Freedom of Information Act. 
(1)  Any confidential and proprietary information provided to a RPE by a private entity pursuant to the PPEA shall be subject to disclosure under the state Freedom of Information Act ("FOIA") except as provided by Code of Virginia, § 56-575.4(G) of the PPEA. 
(2)  In order to prevent the release of any confidential and proprietary information that otherwise could be held in confidence pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 56-575.4(G), the private entity submitting the information must: 
a.  Invoke the exclusion from FOIA when the data or materials are submitted to the city or before such submission; 
b.  Identify the data and materials for which protection from disclosure is sought; and 
c.  State why the exclusion from disclosure is necessary. 
A private entity may request and receive a written determination from the city as to the anticipated scope of protection prior to submitting the proposal. The city is authorized and obligated to protect only confidential proprietary information, and thus will not protect any portion of a proposal from disclosure if the entire proposal has been designated confidential by the private entity without reasonably differentiating between the proprietary and nonproprietary information contained therein. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a request from a private entity that designated portions of a proposal be protected from disclosure as confidential and proprietary, the city will determine whether such protection is appropriate under applicable law and, if appropriate, the scope of such appropriate protection, and shall communicate its determination to the private entity. If the determination regarding protection or the scope thereof differs from the private entity's request, then the city will accord the private entity a reasonable opportunity to clarify and justify its request. Upon a final determination by the city to accord less protection than requested by the private entity, the private entity will be given an opportunity to withdraw its proposal. A proposal so withdrawn will be treated in the same manner as a proposal not accepted for publication and conceptual-phase consideration as provided in section 2-503(1)a. 
(d)  Use of public funds. State constitutional and statutory requirements as they apply to appropriation and expenditure of public funds apply to any interim or comprehensive agreement entered into under the PPEA. Accordingly, the processes and procedural requirements associated with the expenditure or obligation of public funds shall be incorporated into planning for any PPEA project or projects. 
(e)  Applicability of other laws. Nothing in the PPEA shall affect the duty of the city to comply with all other applicable law not in conflict with the PPEA. The applicability of the Virginia Public Procurement Act (the "VPPA") is as set forth in the PPEA. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2008, § II) 
Sec. 2-502. - Solicited bid/proposals. 
(a)  The procedures applicable to any particular solicited bid/proposal should specify, but not necessarily be limited to, information and documents that must accompany the solicited bid/proposal and the factors that will be used to evaluate the submitted solicited bid/proposal. All procedures shall be consistent with the requirements of the PPEA and any other applicable law. All such solicitations shall be by issuance of a written invitation to bid (IFB) or request for proposal (RFP) within the meaning of those terms as used in the city's procedure for procurement. Any proposal submitted pursuant to the PPEA that is not received in response to an IFB or RFP shall be an unsolicited proposal under these guidelines, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Proposals received in response to a notice of the prior receipt of another unsolicited proposal as required by the PPEA and provided for in section 2-503(1)b; and 
(2)  Proposals received in response to publicity by the city concerning particular needs when the city has not issued a corresponding IFB or RFP, even if the city otherwise has encouraged the submission of proposals pursuant to the PPEA that address those needs. 
(b)  Conceptual proposals submitted in response to an IFB or RFP from the city, shall be posted by the city within ten working days after acceptance of such proposal. Posting shall be on the city's website or by publication, in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which the contract is to be performed, of a summary of the proposals and the location where copies of the proposals are available for public inspection. Nothing shall be construed to prohibit the posting of the conceptual proposals by additional means deemed appropriate by the city so as to provide maximum notice to the public of the opportunity to inspect the proposals. In addition, one copy of the proposal shall be made available for public inspection. Trade secrets, financial records or other records of the private entity excluded from disclosure shall not be required to be posted, except as otherwise agreed to by the city and the private entity. 
(c)  The provisions set forth in subsection (b) of this section, relating to posting of conceptual proposals shall apply to accepted proposals regardless of whether the process of bargaining will result in an interim or a comprehensive agreement. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2008, § III) 
Sec. 2-503. - Unsolicited proposals. 
    The process for evaluating an unsolicited proposal, which is described in detail below, consists of four steps. Briefly summarized, upon receipt of an unsolicited proposal the city's first step will be to determine whether to accept it for consideration at the conceptual stage. If so, then in step two, the city will give public notice of the unsolicited proposal. In step three, the city will proceed with a review at the conceptual stage of the original unsolicited proposal and/or any proposal received in response to the public notice and accepted for consideration at the conceptual stage. Step four is an in-depth review at the detailed stage of the original unsolicited proposal and/or any proposal received in response to the public notice and accepted for consideration at the detailed state. However, the city may discontinue its evaluation of any proposal at any time. Furthermore, if the city determines that it is in the city's interest to do so with respect to any unsolicited proposal, the city may eliminate review at the conceptual stage and proceed directly to a review at the detailed stage. 
(1)  Decision to accept and consider unsolicited proposal; notice. 
a.  Upon receipt from a private entity of any unsolicited proposal accompanied by payment of any required fees, the city will determine whether to accept the unsolicited proposal for publication and conceptual-phase consideration, as described below. If the city determines not to accept the proposal at this stage it will return the proposal, and the accompanying documents and initial review fee to the private entity. 
b.  If the city chooses to accept an unsolicited proposal for publication and conceptual-phase consideration, it shall give public notice of the proposal in accordance with the PPEA, including specific information and documentation to be released regarding the nature, timing and scope of the qualifying project, and shall specify a period of time not less than 45 days during which it will receive competing unsolicited proposals pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 56-575.4(A) of the PPEA. Although not required by the PPEA, at the discretion of the city such notice may be given consistent with the requirements for public notice as set forth in the city procedure for procurement. During the 45-day period for receiving competing unsolicited proposals, the city may continue to evaluate the original unsolicited proposal. 
(2)  Posting requirements. 
a.  Conceptual unsolicited proposals shall be posted by the RPE within ten working days after acceptance of such proposals. Posting shall be on the RPE's website or by publication, in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which the contract is to be performed, of a summary of the proposals and the location where copies of the proposals are available for public inspection. 
b.  In addition, the notice should be advertised in the state business opportunities publication and on the commonwealth's electronic procurement website. 
c.  In addition to the posting requirements, one copy of the proposals shall be made available for public inspection. Trade secrets, financial records or other records of the private entity excluded from disclosure under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3705.6.11 shall not be required to be posted, except as otherwise agreed to by the RPE and the private entity. 
d.  In addition to the posting requirement, at least 30 days prior to entering into an interim or comprehensive agreement, the city shall hold a public hearing on the unsolicited proposal. After the public hearing is held, no additional posting shall be required. 
e.  Nothing shall be construed to prohibit the posting of the conceptual proposals by additional means deemed appropriate by the city so as to provide maximum notice to the public of the opportunity to inspect the proposals. 
f.  The above provisions relating to posting of conceptual proposals shall apply to accepted proposals regardless of whether the process of bargaining will result in an interim or a comprehensive agreement. 
(3)  Contents of initial submission. 
a.  An unsolicited proposal must contain information on the private entity's qualifications and experience, project characteristics, project financing, anticipated public reaction, and project benefit and compatibility, and any additional information as the city may reasonably request to comply with the requirements of the PPEA. The information should be adequate to enable the city to evaluate the practicality and sufficiency of the proposal. The private entity may request that the city consider a two-step proposal process, consisting of an initial conceptual submission to be followed by a more detailed submission. 
b.  Unsolicited proposals should provide a concise description of the private entity's capability to complete the proposed qualifying project and the benefits to be derived from the project by the city. Project benefits to be considered may occur during the construction, renovation, expansion, or improvement phase and during the lifecycle of the project. Proposals also should include a comprehensive scope of work and a financial plan for the project, containing enough detail to allow an analysis by the city of the financial feasibility of the proposed project, including but not limited to: 
1.  The identity of any parties expected to provide financing for the project; and 
2.  A statement indicating whether the private entity intends to request that the city provide resources for financing the project and the nature and extent of any such resources. 
c.  The city may require additional submission to clarify information previously provided or to address other areas of concern to the city. 
(4)  Review fees. 
a.  A review fee will be charged a private entity submitting an unsolicited proposal to the city, to cover the city's costs of processing, reviewing, and evaluating the proposal, including the cost to compare it to any competing proposals. Such costs include but are not limited to city staff time, the cost of any materials or supplies expended, and the cost of any outside advisors or consultants, including but not limited to attorneys, consultants, financial and technical advisors, used by the city in its sole discretion to assist in processing, reviewing, or evaluating the proposal. Such fees generally shall be in the amount necessary to completely cover all of the city's costs. 
b.  Such fees shall be imposed based on the reasonably anticipated costs to the city in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  Initial fee. Payment of an initial fee must accompany the submission of the unsolicited proposal to the city in order for the city to proceed with its review. The initial fee shall be 2.5 percent of the reasonably anticipated total cost of the proposed qualifying project, but shall be no less than $2,500.00 nor more than $50,000.00, regardless of the anticipated total cost. 
2.  Additional fees. Additional fees shall be imposed on and paid by the private entity throughout the processing, review, and evaluation of the unsolicited proposal if, and as, the city reasonably anticipates incurring costs in excess of the initial fee paid by the private entity. The city will notify the private entity of the amount of such additional fees, as and when, it anticipates incurring such costs. Prompt payment of such additional fees is required before the city will continue to process, review, and evaluate the proposal. 
3.  Reimbursement of excess fees paid. In the event the total fees paid by the private entity exceed the city's total costs incurred in processing, reviewing, and evaluating the proposal, the city shall reimburse the difference. Otherwise, the city shall retain all fees paid. 
(5)  Initial review at the conceptual stage. 
a.  Only proposals complying with the requirements of the PPEA and these guidelines, that contain sufficient information for a meaningful evaluation, and that are provided in an appropriate format, as described below, will be considered by the city for further review at the conceptual stage. 
b.  The city will determine at this initial stage of review whether it will proceed using procurement through competitive sealed bidding as defined in the VPPA or guidelines developed by the city that are consistent with procurement of other than professional services through competitive negotiation as defined in the VPPA. 
c.  After reviewing an unsolicited proposal and any competing unsolicited proposals submitted during the notice period, the city may determine: 
1.  Not to proceed further with any proposal; 
2.  To proceed to the detailed phase of review with the original proposal; 
3.  To proceed to the detailed phase with a competing proposal; 
4.  To proceed to the detailed phase with multiple proposals; or 
5.  To request modifications or amendments to any proposals. 
The city at all times retains the right to reject any proposal at any time for any reason whatsoever. 
d.  Format for submission at the conceptual stage. Unsolicited proposals at the conceptual stage shall contain the following information in the following format, plus such additional information as the city may request: 
e.  Qualifications and experience. 
1.  Identify the legal structure of the firm or consortium of firms making the proposal. Identify the organizational structure for the project, the management approach and how each partner and major subcontractor in the structure fits into the overall team. 
2.  Describe the experience of the firm or consortium of firms making the proposal and the key principals involved in the proposed project including experience with projects of comparable size and complexity. Describe the length of time in business, business experience, public sector experience and other engagements of the firm or consortium of firms. Include the identity of any firms that will provide design, construction and completion guarantees and warranties, and a description of such guarantees and warranties. Provide resumes of the key individuals who will be involved in the project. 
3.  Provide the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of persons within the firm or consortium of firms who may be contacted for further information. 
4.  Provide a current or most recently audited financial statement of the firm and each partner with an equity interest of 20 percent or greater. 
5.  Identify any persons known to the private entity who would be obligated to disqualify themselves from participation in any transaction arising from or in connection to the project pursuant to the State and Local Government Conflict of Interest Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100 et seq. 
f.  Project characteristics. 
1.  Provide a description of the project, including the conceptual design. Describe the proposed project in sufficient detail so that type and intent of the project, the location, and the communities that may be affected are clearly identified. 
2.  Identify and fully describe any work to be performed by the city or any other public entity. 
3.  Include a list of all federal, state and local permits and approvals required for the project and a schedule for obtaining such permits and approvals. 
4.  Identify any anticipated adverse social, economic, and environmental impacts of the project. Specify the strategies or actions to mitigate known impacts of the project. 
5.  Identify the projected positive social, economic and environmental impacts of the project. 
6.  Identify the proposed schedule for the work on the project, including the estimated time for completion. 
7.  Propose allocation of risk and liability for work completed beyond the agreement's completion date, the assurances for timely completion of the project. 
8.  State assumptions related to ownership, legal liability, law enforcement and operation of the project and the existence of any restrictions on the public entity's use of the project. 
9.  Provide information relative to phased or partial openings of the proposed project prior to completion of the entire work. 
10.  Describe any architectural, building, engineering, or other applicable standards that the proposed project will meet. 
11.  List any other assumptions relief on for the project to be successful. 
12.  List any contingencies that must occur for the project to be successful. 
g.  Project financing. 
1.  Provide a preliminary estimate and estimating methodology of the cost of the work by phase, segment, or both. 
2.  Submit a plan for the development, financing and operation of the project showing the anticipated schedule on which funds will be required. Describe the anticipated costs of and proposed sources and uses for such funds including any anticipated debt service costs. The operational plan should include appropriate staffing levels and associated costs. Include supporting due diligence studies, analyses or reports. 
3.  Include a list and discussion of assumptions underlying all major elements of the plan. 
4.  Identify all anticipated risk factors and methods for dealing with these factors. 
5.  Identify any local, state or federal resources that the private entity contemplates requesting for the project. Describe the total commitment, if any, expected from governmental sources (identify each such source) and the timing of any anticipated commitment. Such disclosure should include any direct or indirect guarantee or pledges of the city's credit or revenue. 
6.  Identify any third parties that the private entity contemplates will provide financing for the project, and describe the nature, timing, amounts, and terms and conditions for each such commitment. 
7.  Identify any aspect of the project that could disqualify the project from obtaining tax-exempt financing. 
h.  Project benefit and compatibility. 
1.  Describe the anticipated benefits to the community, region or state, including anticipated benefits to the economic condition of the city, and identify who will benefit from the project and how they will benefit. 
2.  Identify any anticipated public support or opposition, as well as any anticipated government support or opposition, for the project. 
3.  Explain the strategy and plans that will be carried out to involve and inform the general public, business community, and governmental agencies in areas affected by the project. 
4.  Describe the anticipated significant benefits to the community, region or state, including anticipated benefits to the economic condition of the city and whether the project is critical to attracting or maintaining competitive industries and businesses to the city or surrounding region. 
5.  Describe compatibility with the city's comprehensive plan, infrastructure development plans, capital improvements budget, or other government spending plan. 
(6)  Format for submissions at the detailed stage. If the city decides to proceed to the detailed phase of review with one or more unsolicited proposals, then the following information must be provided by the private entity unless waived by the city: 
a.  A topographical map (1:2,000 or other appropriate scale) depicting the location of the proposed project; 
b.  A description of the qualifying project, including the conceptual design of such facility or facilities or a conceptual plan for the provision of services or technology infrastructure, and a schedule for the initiation of and completion of the qualifying project to include the proposed major responsibilities and timeline for activities performed by both the city and private entity. 
c.  A statement setting forth the method by which the private entity proposes to secure necessary property interests required for the qualifying project. The statement to include the names and addresses, if known, of the current owners of the subject property as well as a list of any property the private entity intends to request the city condemn. 
d.  A detailed listing of all firms that will provide specific design, construction and completion guarantees and warranties, and a brief description of such guarantees and warranties; 
e.  A total lifecycle cost-analysis specifying: 
1.  Methodology and assumptions of the project or projects and the proposed project start date; 
2.  Anticipated commitment of all parties; 
3.  Equity, debt and other financing mechanisms; and 
4.  A schedule of project revenues and project costs. 
The lifecycle cost-analysis should include, but not be limited to, a detailed analysis of the projected return, rate of return, or both, expected useful life of facility and estimated annual operating expenses; 
f.  A detailed statement setting forth usage of the project, as well as user fees, lease payments, and other service payments over the term of the interim or comprehensive agreements and the methodology and circumstances for changes to such user fees, lease payment, or other service payments over time; 
g.  Identification of any known government support or opposition, or general public support or opposition for the project. Government or public support should be demonstrated through resolution of official bodies, minutes of meetings, letters or other official communications; 
h.  Demonstration of consistency with appropriate local comprehensive or infrastructure development plans or indication of the steps required for acceptance into such plans; 
i.  Information relating to the current plans for development of facilities or technology infrastructure to be used by the city that are similar to the qualifying project being proposed by the private entity, if any, of each affected local jurisdiction; 
j.  Identification of any known conflicts of interest or other limitations that may impact the city's consideration of the proposal, including the identification of any persons known to the private entity who would be obligated to disqualify themselves from participation in any transaction arising from or in connection to the project pursuant to the State and Local Government Conflict of Interest Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3100 et seq.; 
k.  Detailed analysis of the financial feasibility of the proposed project, including: 
1.  Its impact on similar facilities operated or planned by the city; 
2.  A detailed description of the private entity's plans for financing the qualifying project; 
3.  The sources of the private entity's funds and identification of any dedicated revenue source or proposed debt or equity investment on behalf of the private entity; 
4.  A comparison of that plan with financing alternatives that may be available to the city; and 
5.  All underlying data supporting any conclusions reached in the analysis or selection by the private entity of the financing plans proposed for the qualifying project; 
l.  The names and addresses of the person who may be contacted for further information concerning the request; 
m.  A list of all permits and approvals required for the qualifying project from local, state, or federal agencies and a projected schedule for obtaining such permits and approvals; 
n.  A list of public utility facilities, if any, that will be crossed by the qualifying project and a statement of the plans of the private entity to accommodate such crossings; and 
o.  Additional material and information as the city may request. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2008, § IV) 
Sec. 2-504. - Proposal evaluation and selection criteria. 
    Some or all of the following matters may be considered in the evaluation and selection of PPEA proposals. However, the city retains the right at all times to reject any proposal at any time for any reason whatsoever. The provisions of the PPEA relating to posting of proposals shall apply to accepted proposals regardless of whether the process of bargaining will result in an interim or comprehensive agreement. 
(1)  Qualifications and experience. Factors to be considered in either phase of the city's review to determine whether the private entity possesses the requisite qualifications and experience may include but are not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Experience with similar projects; 
b.  Demonstration of ability to perform work; 
c.  Leadership structure; 
d.  Project manager's experience; 
e.  Management approach; 
f.  Financial condition; and 
g.  Project ownership 
(2)  Project characteristics. Factors to be considered in determining the project characteristics may include but are not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Project definition; 
b.  Proposed project schedule; 
c.  Operation of the project; 
d.  Technology; technical feasibility 
e.  Conformity to laws, regulations and standards; 
f.  Environmental impacts; 
g.  Condemnation impacts; 
h.  State and local permits; and 
i.  Maintenance of the project. 
(3)  Project financing. Factors to be considered in determining whether the proposed project financing allows adequate access to the necessary capital to finance the project may include but are not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Cost and cost benefit to the city; 
b.  Financing and the impact on the debt or debt burden of the city; 
c.  Financial plan; 
d.  Estimated cost; 
e.  Lifecycle cost-analysis; 
f.  The identity, credit history, and past performance of any third party that will provide financing for the project and the nature and timing of their commitment; and 
g.  Such other items as the city deems appropriate. 
(4)  Project benefit and compatibility. Factors to be considered in determining the proposed project's compatibility with the appropriate local or regional comprehensive or development plans may include but are not necessarily limited to: 
a.  Community benefits; 
b.  Community support or opposition, or both; 
c.  Public involvement strategy; 
d.  Compatibility with existing and planned facilities; and 
e.  Compatibility with local, regional and state economic development efforts. 
(5)  Timelines. Guidelines for determining applicable timelines are as follows: 
a.  For solicited proposals, the timeline for selecting proposals and negotiating an agreement will be consistent with the terms and conditions set forth in the request for proposals. 
b.  For unsolicited proposals, an estimated timeline will be developed and distributed within 60 days of receipt of the proposal. The timeline will be subject to revision, as required. 
c.  Accelerated selection, review, and documentation timelines shall be permitted for proposals involving a qualifying facility that the city deems a priority. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2008, § V) 
Sec. 2-505. - Additional review procedures. 
(a)  Public-private partnership oversight advisory committee. The city, as an institution of the Commonwealth shall establish criteria to trigger establishment of an advisory oversight committee consisting of representatives of the city and the appropriating body to review the terms of the proposed interim or comprehensive agreements. The criteria should include, but not be limited to, the scope, total cost and duration of the proposed project, and whether the project involves or impacts multiple public entities. 
(b)  Appropriating body. If the RPE for appropriating or authorizing funding to pay for a qualifying project is different from the RPE reviewing or approving the project, then the RPE reviewing or approving the project should establish a mechanism for that appropriating body to review any proposed interim or comprehensive agreement prior to execution. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2008, § VI) 
Sec. 2-506. - Interim and comprehensive agreements. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Approval by the city shall be subject to the private entity's entering into an interim or comprehensive agreement with the city. 
(2)  In connection with the city's approval of the qualifying project, the city shall establish a date for the commencement of activities related to the qualifying project. The city may extend such date from time to time. 
(3)  Prior to entering into the negotiation of an interim or comprehensive agreement, the city, as an institution of the commonwealth, shall submit copies of detailed proposals to the public-private partnership oversight advisory committee. 
(4)  Any proposed comprehensive agreement for a qualifying project where the RPE is an agency or institution of the commonwealth that: 
a.  Creates state tax-supported debt; 
b.  Requires a level of appropriation significantly beyond the appropriation received by the RPE in the most recent appropriation act; or 
c.  Significantly alters the commonwealth's discretion to change the level of services of the funding for such services over time; 
d.  Shall be reviewed by the appropriating body prior to execution. 
(5)  Once the negotiation phase for the development of an interim or comprehensive agreement is complete, but before an interim agreement or a comprehensive agreement is entered into, the city shall make available the proposed agreement by posting same on the city's website or by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which the contract is to be performed. In addition, at least one copy of the proposals shall be made available for public inspection, excluding those records otherwise excluded from disclosure as set forth in subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(6)  Once an interim or comprehensive agreement has been entered into, the city shall make procurement records available for public inspection, upon request. Procurement records shall not include trade secrets of the private entity, or financial records, including balance sheets or financial statements of the private entity, not generally available to the public through regulatory disclosure or otherwise. 
(7)  Cost estimates relating to a proposed procurement transaction prepared by or for the city shall not be open to public inspection and any inspection of procurement transaction records under the PPEA shall be subject to reasonable restrictions to ensure the security and integrity of the records. 
(b)  Comprehensive agreements. Prior to developing or operating any qualifying project, the selected private entity shall enter into a comprehensive agreement with the city as provided by the PPEA. Any such comprehensive agreement and any amendment thereto, must be approved by the council before it is entered into on behalf of the city. As provided by the PPEA, the terms of the comprehensive agreement shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Delivery of maintenance, performance and payment bonds or letters of credit, in connection with any development or operation of the qualifying project, in the forms and amounts satisfactory to the city and in compliance with Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4337, as amended, for those components of the qualifying project that involve construction; 
(2)  Review and approval of plans and specifications for the qualifying project by the city if the plans and specifications conform to standards acceptable to the city; 
(3)  The right of the city to inspect the qualifying project; 
(4)  Maintenance of a policy or policies of liability insurance (copies of which shall be filed with the city accompanied by proofs of coverage) or self-insurance, each in form and amount satisfactory to the city and reasonably sufficient to insure coverage of tort liability to the public and employees and to enable the continued operation of the qualifying project; 
(5)  Monitoring of the practices of the private entity by the city to ensure proper maintenance of the qualifying project; 
(6)  Reimbursement to be paid to the city for services provided by the city; 
(7)  Filing by the private entity of appropriate financial statements on a periodic basis; 
(8)  Policies and guidelines governing the rights and responsibilities of the city and the private entity in the event that the comprehensive agreement is terminated or there is a material default by the private entity, including the conditions governing assumption of the duties and responsibilities of the private entity by the city and the transfer or purchase of property or other interests of the private entity by the city; 
(9)  Provide for such user fees, lease payments, or service payments, if any, as may be established from time to time by agreement of the parties, which shall be the same for persons using the facilities under like conditions and shall not materially discourage use of the qualifying project. Classification according to reasonable categories for assessment of user fees may be made. The execution of the comprehensive agreement or any amendment thereto shall constitute conclusive evidence that the user fees, lease payments or service payments provided for comply with the requirements of the PPEA; 
(10)  A copy of any service contract shall be filed with the city and a schedule of the current user fees or lease payments shall be made available by the private entity to any member of the public upon request; 
(11)  The terms and conditions under which the city may contribute financial resources, if any, for the qualifying project; 
(12)  The comprehensive agreement shall incorporate the duties of the private entity under the PPEA and may contain such other terms and conditions that the city determines serve the public purpose of the PPEA; and 
(13)  Other requirements of the PPEA or other applicable law. 
Any changes in the terms of the comprehensive agreement as may be agreed upon by the parties from time to time, shall be added to the comprehensive agreement only by written amendment. 
(c)  Interim agreements. Prior to or in connection with the negotiation of the comprehensive agreement, the city may enter into an interim agreement with the private entity proposing the development or operation of the qualifying project. Such interim agreement may: 
(1)  Permit the private entity to commence activities for which it may be compensated relating to the proposed qualifying project, including, but not limited to, project planning and development, design and engineering, environmental analysis and mitigation, survey, and ascertaining the availability of financing for the proposed facility or facilities; 
(2)  Establish the process and timing of the negotiation of the comprehensive agreement; and 
(3)  Contain any other provisions related to any aspect of the development or operation of a qualifying project that the parties may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2008, § VII) 
Secs. 2-507-2-535. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PERSONNEL[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference- City manager, § 3.906; clerk of the council, § 3.918; city attorney, § 3.923; fire department, § 3.929; elected officials, § 3.930; oath required, § 3.931; city treasurer, § 3.932; commissioner of the revenue, § 3.941; sheriff, § 3.942; clerk of the circuit court, § 3.944; police department, § 5.907 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal grievance procedures, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1506 et seq.; employment conditions of certain personnel, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1605 et seq.; municipal retirement systems, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1510. 

Sec. 2-536. - Equal employment opportunity; compensation; retirement. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance providing for equal employment opportunity, or any ordinance prescribing the salaries, wages or other compensation of city officers and employees, or any ordinance providing for the establishment of a pay plan, or any ordinance relating to a retirement system for officers and employees of the city and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 19-1) 
Sec. 2-537. - Affirmative action plan. 
    It is the policy of the city to provide equal opportunity in employment for all qualified persons, to prohibit discrimination in employment because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, age or national origin, and to provide the full realization of equal employment opportunity through a positive, continuing program in each department. 
(1)  Administration. The city shall designate an equal employment opportunity coordinator to assume the overall program coordination with the following duties and responsibilities: 
a.  Assisting each department in developing a supplemental affirmative action plan and statement for its area of operations which is consistent with the overall plan of the jurisdiction. 
b.  Conducting studies of the EEO program to determine deficiencies and assess progress toward goals. 
c.  Giving, or arranging for, specialized advice and counseling to supervisors and employees to resolve complaints informally. 
d.  Provide monitoring of the program to ensure compliance with all regulations and take corrective action for noncompliance and deficiencies. 
e.  Assign managers and supervisors with responsibilities for implementation and management of the affirmative action plan. 
(2)  Recruitment. 
a.  Job opportunities shall be announced in the following manner: 
1.  Newspapers, acquiring as much publicity as possible but using paid advertising if necessary. 
2.  Radio, using time available as a public service. 
3.  Notify local state employment commission of available positions. 
4.  Notify organizations serving minority groups or women of available positions. 
5.  Place signs at the work sites. 
b.  The statement "An Equal Opportunity Employer" should be printed on outgoing correspondence, all recruiting literature and advertising. 
(3)  Hiring procedures. 
a.  Selection shall be made on a nondiscriminatory basis to obtain qualified employees. 
b.  Job analyses should be conducted to determine the knowledge, skills and abilities and other qualifications required. 
c.  Monitoring the placement of employees to ensure the assignment of work and work place on a nondiscriminatory basis shall be conducted by the EEO coordinator or designated official. 
d.  All applications must be retained in the files and reasons for selection or rejection must be noted. 
(4)  Personnel actions. 
a.  Grievance procedures. 
1.  The system for processing grievances and appeals, as defined in the city personnel manual, shall be used. 
2.  Information on the grievance procedures shall be available to all employees. 
b.  Employee benefits. All policies and practices related to employee benefits shall be available on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
c.  Transfers. Records should indicate the reasons given by supervisors and employees for transfers (voluntary and involuntary) to assure that no discriminatory situation exists. 
d.  Terminations. Exit interviews should be conducted to ascertain whether real or imagined discrimination was a factor in their termination. 
e.  Working conditions. Assignments of work place and working conditions shall be made on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
f.  Employee communication. Employees shall be given opportunities to discuss individual problems informally and to obtain needed advice and counseling with confidentiality. Supervisors and/or the EEO coordinator should be easily accessible to employees for counseling and discussions. 
(5)  Training. Training opportunities designed to develop skills needed to improve current performance, to qualify for higher level positions, shall be provided to all employees on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
(Code 1981, § 19-2; Ord. of 12-10-1987) 
Secs. 2-538-2-567. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - POLICE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Charter reference- Police department, art. 5A. 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of police force, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1704; police and public order generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1700 et seq. 

Sec. 2-568. - Preservation of order at places of public entertainment. 
(a)  Where a charge is made for admission to a place of public entertainment and the character of the entertainment is such, in the opinion of the chief of police, as to make it advisable to have one or more policemen present to maintain order, the city manager may appoint extra policemen or direct the chief of police to assign regular or retired police officers, to preserve order at such place of public entertainment. 
(b)  A fee fixed by the city manager shall be charged for the service provided in this section. All such fees shall be accounted for to the chief of police and paid over by the chief of police as directed by the city manager. Such fees shall be paid before any required permit or license is issued by the commissioner of the revenue. At the end of each month, all fees earned by regular police officers for services rendered after regular hours and all fees earned by extra policemen or retired police officers shall be paid to the officers earning such fees as directed by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 21-2; Code 1981, § 21-1) 
State Law reference- Preservation of peace and good order, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1700. 
Sec. 2-569. - Receipt of fees. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or by law, the salary paid to police officers by the city shall be in lieu of all fees, and no police officer shall be allowed a fee or allowed to accept any fee for his services in contributing to the conviction of any person, either under the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city or under the state law. 
(Code 1967, § 21-1; Code 1981, § 21-2) 
State Law reference- Salary and witness fees, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1710; reimbursement of legal fees and expenses, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1711. 
Sec. 2-570. - Refusal to aid officer. 
    If any person, on being required by any peace officer, shall refuse or neglect to assist him: 
(1)  In the execution of his office in a criminal case; 
(2)  In the preservation of the peace; 
(3)  In the apprehending or securing of any person for a breach of the peace; or 
(4)  In any case of escape or rescue; 
he shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 21-4; Code 1981, § 21-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-463. 
Sec. 2-571. - Unauthorized wearing of uniform or badge. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to wear a police uniform or badge. 
(Code 1967, § 21-3; Code 1981, § 21-4) 
Charter reference- Uniforms and badges, § 5.910. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-175. 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate alcoholic beverages, § 2.419. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-100 et seq. 

Sec. 4-1. - Hours of sale. 
    The hours for the sale of beer and wine shall be in conformity with the state alcoholic beverage control board and Code of Virginia, § 4.1-129. 
(Code 1981, § 4-1; Ord. of 7-12-1979; Ord. of 8-20-2009) 
State Law reference- Authority for to adopt regulations regarding hours of sale, etc., Code of Virginia, § 4.1-129. 
Sec. 4-2. - Drinking alcoholic beverages, or tendering to another, in public place. 
(a)  No person shall take a drink of alcoholic beverages or shall offer a drink thereof to another, whether accepted or not, at or in any public place. Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  This section shall not prevent any person from drinking alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another in any rooms or areas approved by the state alcoholic beverage control board in a licensed establishment, provided such establishment or the person who operates the same is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at retail for on-premises consumption and the alcoholic beverages drunk or offered were purchased therein. 
(c)  This section shall not prevent any person from drinking alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another in any room or area approved by the state alcoholic beverage control board at an event for which a banquet license or mixed beverage special events license has been granted. Nor shall this section prevent, upon authorization of the licensee, any person from drinking his own lawfully acquired alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another in approved areas and locations at events for which a coliseum or stadium license has been granted. 
(d)  This section shall not prevent any person from drinking alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another on a chartered boat being used for the transportation of passengers for compensation which is not licensed by the board and which does not sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1967, § 4-3; Code 1981, § 4-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-308. 
Sec. 4-3. - Drinking or possessing alcoholic beverage on school grounds. 
(a)  No person shall possess or drink any alcoholic beverage in or upon the grounds of any public elementary or secondary school during school hours or school or student activities. 
(b)  In addition, no person shall drink and no organization shall serve any alcoholic beverage in or upon the grounds of any public elementary or secondary school after school hours or school or student activities, except for religious congregations using wine for sacramental purposes only. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-309. 
Sec. 4-4. - Drunkenness. 
    No person shall be intoxicated in public whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature. Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. In any area in which there is located a court-approved detoxification center, a law enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Code 1967, § 4-2; Code 1981, § 4-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388. 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate care and control of animals, §§ 2.401, 2.404, 2.410, 2.411. 
State Law reference- General authority of city with respect to animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6500 et seq.; offenses regarding animals, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-403.1-18.2-403.4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following words and terms shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meaning indicated in this section: 
    Adequate shelter. 
(1)  The term "adequate shelter" means provision of and access to shelter that is: 
a.  Suitable for the species, age, condition, size and space for each animal; 
b.  Safe and protects each animal from injury, rain, sleet, snow, hail, direct sunlight, the adverse effects of heat and cold, physical suffering and impairment of health, is properly lighted, is properly cleaned; 
c.  Enables each animal to be clean and dry, except when detrimental to the species; and 
d.  For dogs and cats, provides a solid surface resting platform, pad, format or similar device that is large enough for the animal to lie on in a normal manner and can be maintained in a sanitary manner type of each animal; providing adequate space for each animal; 
(2)  The term "adequate shelter" does not mean shelter which: 
a.  Has wire, grid or slat floors that permit the animals' feet to pass through the openings; 
b.  Sags under the animals' weight; or 
c.  Otherwise does not protect the animals' feet or toes from injury. 
    Animal means any nonhuman vertebrate species except fish. For the purposes of Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6522, the term "animal" means any species susceptible to rabies. For the purposes of Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6570, the term "animal" means any nonhuman vertebrate species including fish except those fish captured and killed or disposed of in a reasonable and customary manner. 
    Animal control officer means a person appointed as an animal control officer or deputy animal control officer as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6555 . 
    At large means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or his agent, either by a leash, cord or chain, not exceeding eight feet in length, retractable or nonretractable, or off the premises of the lot owner and not accompanied by and under the complete and immediate control of a person competent to control the animal. 
    Dog means both the male and female sexes of the species. 
    Farm means any parcel of land three acres in size or larger, devoted to the production for sale of plants or animals or to production of plant or animal products useful to man. 
    Owner means any person having a right of property in a dog and any person who keeps or harbors a dog or has it in their care, or who acts as its custodian, and any person who permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him for a period of 30 days. 
    Pound means a facility, conforming to the policy and purpose of Code of Virginia, § 3.1-896.40, operated by the city, or its agent, for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals. 
    Properly cleaned means that: 
(1)  All feces shall be removed regularly on a daily or weekly basis so as not to cause an unhealthy condition for dog/animal; 
(2)  Animal pens shall be cleaned and lime or like substance shall be spread around animal pens to keep flies, rats, vermin and odor from emitting to the nuisance of neighbors; 
(3)  Carcasses, debris, food waste and excrement are removed from the primary enclosure with sufficient frequency to minimize the animals' contact with the contaminants mentioned in this definition; 
(4)  The primary enclosure is sanitized with sufficient frequency to minimize odors and the hazards of disease; and 
(5)  The primary enclosure is cleaned so as to prevent the animals confined therein from being directly or indirectly sprayed with the stream of water, or directly or indirectly exposed to hazardous chemicals or disinfectants. 
    Unlicensed dog means any dog over four months old without a license tag attached. 
    Vicious or dangerous animals means any dog which, without provocation, attacks or threatens to attack human beings or their property on more than one occasion. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-1) 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6500. 
Sec. 6-2. - Poultry. 
(a)  Any person desiring to keep poultry in the city may do so if the pen where such poultry are kept, and the premises thereof, are kept and maintained in a sanitary condition and in such manner as not to constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow poultry to run at large in the city. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-2) 
Sec. 6-3. - Hogs, sheep and goats. 
    No person shall keep any hog, sheep or goat in the city 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-3) 
Sec. 6-4. - Dangerous or vicious animals. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous dog means a canine or canine crossbreed that has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal that is a dog or cat, or killed a companion animal that is a dog or cat. When a dog attacks or bites a companion animal that is a dog or cat, the attacking or biting dog shall not be deemed dangerous: 
(1)  If no serious physical injury as determined by a licensed veterinarian has occurred to the dog or cat as a result of the attack or bite; 
(2)  If both animals are owned by the same person; 
(3)  If such attack occurs on the property of the attacking or biting dog's owner or custodian; or 
(4)  For other good cause as determined by the court. 
No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog as a result of biting, attacking or inflicting injury on a dog or cat while engaged with an owner or custodian as part of lawful hunting or participating in an organized, lawful dog handling event. No dog that has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person shall be found to be a dangerous dog if the court determines, based on the totality of the evidence before it, that the dog is not dangerous or a threat to the community. 
    Vicious dog means a canine or canine crossbreed that has killed a person; inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or continued to exhibit the behavior that resulted in a previous finding by a court or, on or before July 1, 2006, by an animal control officer as authorized by this section, that it is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
(b)  Procedure for declaring a dog to be dangerous or vicious; keeping of dangerous dog; destruction of vicious dog. 
(1)  Any animal control officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within the city is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate of the city for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. The animal control officer shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. If the animal control officer determines that the owner or custodian can confine the animal in a manner that protects the public safety, he may permit the owner or custodian to confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. 
(2)  If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of this chapter. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6562. 
(c)  Licensure of dangerous dog. The owner of any animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall, within ten days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the animal control officer for a fee of $50.00 in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. The local animal control officer shall also provide the owner with a uniformly designed tag, which identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. All certificates obtained pursuant to this subsection shall be renewed annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. The animal control officer shall provide a copy of the dangerous dog registration certificate and verification of compliance to the state veterinarian. 
(d)  Renewals. All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons 18 years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence of the animal's current rabies vaccination, if applicable, that the animal has been neutered or spayed and that the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the proper enclosure is constructed. In addition, owners who apply for certificates or renewals thereof under this section shall not be issued a certificate or renewal thereof unless they present satisfactory evidence that their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property and the animal has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation. All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons who present satisfactory evidence that the owner has liability insurance coverage, to the value of at least $100,000.00, that covers animal bites. The owner may obtain and maintain a bond in surety, in lieu of liability insurance, to the value of at least $100,000.00. 
(e)  Keeping of dangerous dogs; conditions. While on the property of its owner, an animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults, or other animals. The structure shall be designed to provide the animal with shelter from the elements of nature. When off its owner's property, an animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(f)  Notification. The owner of any dog found to be dangerous shall register the animal with the commonwealth dangerous dog registry, as established under Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6542, within 45 days of such a finding by any appropriate court. The owner shall also cause the local animal control officer to be promptly notified of: 
(1)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners; 
(2)  All of the means necessary to locate the owner and the dog at any time; 
(3)  Any complaints or incidents of attack by the dog upon any person or cat or dog; 
(4)  Any claims made or lawsuits brought as a result of any attack; 
(5)  Tattoo or chip identification information or both; 
(6)  Proof of insurance or surety bond; and 
(7)  The death of the dog. 
After the animal has been found by a court to be a dangerous dog, the animal's owner shall immediately, upon learning of same, notify the local animal control authority if the animal is loose or unconfined; bites a person or attacks another animal; is sold, given away, or has been moved to a different address. 
(g)  Minor owners. If the owner of an animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section. 
(h)  Violations. The owner of any animal, which has been found by a court to be a dangerous dog, who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of these, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Any owner or custodian of a canine or canine crossbreed or other animal is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor if the canine or canine crossbreed previously declared a dangerous dog pursuant to this section, when such declaration arose out of a separate and distinct incident, bites a human being or attacks a human being causing bodily injury. 
(i)  Exceptions. 
(1)  No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the canine or canine crossbreed's owner or custodian, or provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the canine or canine crossbreed or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal at other times. 
(2)  No canine or canine crossbreed which, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person or its owner's property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(3)  No police dog which was engaged in the performance of its duties as such at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous or vicious dog. 
(4)  No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor shall the local governing body prohibit the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed. 
(j)  Collection and distribution of fees. All fees collected pursuant to this chapter, less the costs incurred by the animal control authority in producing and distributing the certificates and tags required by this chapter, shall be paid into a special dedicated fund in the treasury of the city for the purpose of paying the expenses of any training course required under Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6557. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-4) 
State Law reference- Vicious or dangerous dogs, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6540. 
Sec. 6-5. - Animals as property. 
    Animals of any kind belonging to a person are to be considered personal property under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-5) 
State Law reference- Dogs and cats deemed personal property, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6585. 
Sec. 6-6. - Allowing animals to damage property. 
(a)  No person shall suffer or permit any animal belonging to him or under his control to go upon the land of any other person and damage or destroy any garden, shrubs, grass or other property thereof. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person owning property which is damaged or destroyed by any violation described in the subsection (a) of this section may enter his complaint by a warrant issued against the owner or custodian of the animal involved and the complaint shall be heard by the court as all other complaints under criminal warrants are heard. Upon a second conviction within the period of one year of any offense under this section involving the same animal, the court may order the owner or custodian of such animal to remove it form the city within a period of two weeks, and, upon the failure of such owner or custodian to comply with this order, such animal shall be seized by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
(c)  Any person who is the owner, as defined by section 6-1, of any animal shall promptly remove and properly dispose of all feces left by such animal on any public property or on any private property not owned by such person or not lawfully occupied by such person. Violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-6) 
Sec. 6-7. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Any person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor who: 
(1)  Overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, ill-treats, abandons, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with the bona fide scientific or medical experimentation or who cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates or kills any animal, whether belonging to himself or another, or deprives any animal of necessary sustenance, food, drink or shelter, or causes any of the things set forth in this subsection, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another; 
(2)  Willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal; or 
(3)  Shall carry or cause to be carried in or upon any vehicle or vessel or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering. 
(b)  Any person who shall abandon any dog, cat or other domesticated animal in any public place including the right-of-way of any public highway, road or street or on the property of another shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor; but nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-7) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-144. 
Sec. 6-8. - Dead animals. 
(a)  When the owner of any animal or grown fowl which has died knows of such death, such owner shall forthwith have its body sanitarily disposed of, cremated or buried. If, after notice, the owner fails to do so, the animal control officer or other officer shall bury or cremate the companion animal, and he may recover on behalf of the local jurisdiction from the owner his cost for this service or any judge of a general district court, after notice to the owner if he can be ascertained, shall cause any such dead animal or fowl to be sanitarily disposed of, cremated or buried by an officer or other person designated for the purpose. Such officer or other person shall be entitled to recover from the owner of every such animal so cremated or buried a fee of $5.00 and of the owner of every such fowl so cremated or buried a fee of $1.00, to be recovered in the same manner as officers' fees are recovered, free from all exemptions in favor of such owner. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require the burial or cremation of the whole or portions of any animal or fowl which is to be used for food or in any commercial manner. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-8) 
State Law reference- Disposal of dead animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6554. 
Sec. 6-9. - Maintaining and cleaning shelter. 
(a)  The owner must provide access to shelter that is suitable for the species, age, condition, size and space for each animal; is safe and protects each animal from injury, rain, sleet, snow, hail, direct sunlight, the adverse effects of heat and cold, physical suffering and impairment of health; is properly lighted; is properly cleaned; enables each animal to be clean and dry, and for dogs and cats, provides a solid surface resting platform, pad, format or similar device that is large enough for the animal to lie on in a normal manner and can be maintained in a sanitary manner. 
(b)  Shelter must be cleaned regularly on a daily or weekly basis so as not to cause an unhealthy condition for dog/animal. Further, animal pens shall be cleaned and lime or like substance shall be spread around animal pens to keep flies, rats, vermin and odor from emitting to the nuisance of neighbors. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-9) 
Sec. 6-10. - Animals in unattended vehicles. 
(a)  Any person who confines an animal in an unattended, enclosed vehicle where the outside temperature is 80 degrees or greater, and the interior of the vehicle is not equipped with a supplemental fan that is operating at the time of such confinement, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person, who confines an animal in an unattended, enclosed vehicle so as to cause the animal to suffer heat stress, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  The animal control officer or other officer shall have the authority to remove any animal found in an enclosed vehicle that appears to be suffering from heat stress. The animal shall be provided immediate veterinary care. The animal owner or custodian shall be responsible for all expenses incurred during the removal of the animal, its subsequent treatment, and impoundment. 
(d)  In the event that the person responsible for the violation cannot be ascertained, the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by the Code of Virginia, tit. 46.2, ch. 6, as amended, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such registered owner was the person who committed the violation. 
(e)  Officers shall not be held criminally or civilly liable for actions taken reasonably and in good faith in carrying out the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit any other protections afforded to companion animals under this or any other provision. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § 5-10, 4-19-2012) 
Secs. 6-11-6-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.2-6524-3.2-6569. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-39. - Penalty. 
    Any violation of this article for which a specific penalty is not provided shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-21) 
Sec. 6-40. - License required. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hearing dog means a dog trained to alert its owner by touch to sounds of danger and sounds to which the owner should respond. 
    Service dog means a dog trained to accompany its owner for the purpose of carrying items, retrieving objects, pulling a wheelchair or other such activities of service or support. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog four months old or over, in the city unless such dog is licensed as required by this article. 
(c)  No license tax shall be levied on any dog that is trained and serves as a guide dog for a blind person, that is trained and serves as a hearing dog for a deaf or hearing impaired person or that is trained and serves as a service dog for a mobility-impaired person. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-22) 
State Law reference- License required, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6524. 
Sec. 6-41. - License tax imposed. 
    Each calendar year, the license tax on dogs within the city shall be payable at the office of the city treasurer. The city council will determine by resolution the amount of the license for dogs. The amount is on file in the city offices and will be reviewed from time to time and set by the city council. The categories are: 
(1)  For a neutered or spayed dog. 
(2)  For all other dogs. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-23) 
Sec. 6-42. - When license due and payable. 
    The license tax under this division shall be due and payable not later than 30 days after a dog has reached the age of four months, or not later than 30 days after an owner acquires a dog four months of age or older and each year thereafter. Licensing periods for individual dogs may be equal to and may run concurrently with the rabies vaccination effective period 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-24) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6530. 
Sec. 6-43. - Tag. 
    Dog receipts shall be carefully preserved by the licensees and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by any animal control officer or other officer. Dog license tags shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian and worn by such dog. It shall be unlawful for the owner to permit any dog four months or older to run or roam at large, whether licensed or not. The owner of the dog may remove the collar and license tag required by this section when the dog: 
(1)  Is engaged in lawful hunting; 
(2)  Is engaged in competing in a dog show; 
(3)  Has a skin condition, which would be exacerbated by wearing the collar; 
(4)  Is confined; 
(5)  Is under immediate control of its owner. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6531. 
Sec. 6-44. - Effect of dog or cat not wearing a license tag as evidence. 
    Any dog not wearing a collar bearing a valid license tag shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed, and in any proceedings under this chapter the burden of proof of the fact that such dog has been licensed, or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time, shall be on the owner of the dog. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6531. 
Sec. 6-45. - Duplicate license tags. 
    If a dog license tag is lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the treasurer or his agent who issued the original license for a duplicate license tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the treasurer or his agent that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, he shall issue a duplicate license tag that the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog. The treasurer or his agent shall endorse the number of the duplicate and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for a duplicate tag for any dog shall be on file in the city offices. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6532. 
Sec. 6-46. - Female dogs in heat. 
    No person shall permit any female dog in heat to remain upon his premises to the annoyance of the neighborhood. To this end, such dog shall be kept confined. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-26) 
Secs. 6-47-6-66. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOUNDMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Confinement and disposition of animals, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.2-6546-3.2-6548; seizure and impoundment of certain animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6569. 

Sec. 6-67. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Enforcement officer means and includes any police officer and the director of public health of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-36) 
Sec. 6-68. - Permitting dog to run at large. 
    No person shall permit any dog owned or kept by him to go at large within the city, whether licensed or not. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-38) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit dogs running at large, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6538. 
Sec. 6-69. - Duty of enforcement officer finding dog at large. 
    It shall be the duty of an enforcement officer who may find any dog that is running at large, has been abandoned or has been cruelly treated forthwith to take the dog into custody and dispose of such dog as provided in this division. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-39) 
Sec. 6-70. - Notice of hearing. 
    If the owner or keeper of a dog taken into custody under section 6-69 is known and can be readily located by the enforcement officer, the enforcement officer shall notify such person in writing to appear at a time and place specified in the summons or notice for a hearing on the alleged violation, such time to be at a regular session of the appropriate court. Such officer shall thereupon, and upon the giving of such person of his written promise to appear at such time and place, forthwith release the dog to the owner or custodian. Should the owner or custodian refuse to give such written promise to appear, the enforcement officer shall dispose of the dog as provided in section 6-74. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-40) 
Sec. 6-71. - Period of impoundment; notice to owner. 
(a)  If the owner or keeper of a dog taken into custody under this division cannot be readily located by the enforcement officer, the dog shall be impounded at the local SPCA. 
(b)  If such dog has upon it the name and address of the owner or any information whereby the owner thereof can be reasonably ascertained, such owner shall be notified by registered or certified letter sent within 24 hours after such seizure. If the owner's name and address cannot be reasonably ascertained, no notice shall be necessary. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-41) 
State Law reference- Confinement period, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546C. 
Sec. 6-72. - Failure to appear in answer to summons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to fail to appear in answer to any summons or notice issued under section 6-70 or 6-71 and any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor, in addition to the punishment, if any, imposed for the change for which the summons was issued. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-42) 
Sec. 6-73. - Redemption. 
    In all cases under section 6-71, the owner or keeper may, upon proof of ownership, redeem a dog as provided in the rules and regulations of the SPCA. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-43) 
Sec. 6-74. - Disposition of unredeemed dogs. 
    If, at the end of the period referred to in section 6-73, the dog in question shall not have been redeemed, such dog may be euthanized in accordance with the methods approved by the state veterinarian or disposed of by the methods set forth in this section. No pound shall release more than two animals or a family of animals during any 30-day period to any one person under subsection (2), (3) or (4) of this section. 
(1)  Release to any humane society, animal shelter, or other releasing agency within the Commonwealth, provided that each humane society, animal shelter, or other releasing agency obtains a signed statement from each of its directors, operators, staff, or animal caregivers specifying that each individual has never been convicted of animal cruelty, neglect, or abandonment and updates such statements as changes occur; 
(2)  Adoption by a resident of the county or city where the pound is operated and who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such animal, provided that such resident has read and signed a statement specifying that he has never been convicted of animal cruelty, neglect, or abandonment; 
(3)  Adoption by a resident of an adjacent political subdivision of the commonwealth, if the resident has read and signed a statement specifying that he has never been convicted of animal cruelty, neglect, or abandonment; 
(4)  Adoption by any other person, provided that such person has read and signed a statement specifying that he has never been convicted of animal cruelty, neglect, or abandonment, and provided that no dog or cat may be adopted by any person who is not a resident of the county or city where the pound is operated, or of an adjacent political subdivision, unless the dog or cat is first sterilized, and the pound may require that the sterilization be done at the expense of the person adopting the dog or cat; or 
(5)  Release for the purposes of adoption or euthanasia only, to an animal shelter, or any other releasing agency located in and lawfully operating under the laws of another state, provided that such animal shelter, or other releasing agency: 
a.  Maintains records that would comply with Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6557; 
b.  Requires that adopted dogs and cats be sterilized; 
c.  Obtains a signed statement from each of its directors, operators, staff and animal caregivers specifying that each individual has never been convicted of animal cruelty, neglect, or abandonment, and updates such statement as changes occur; and 
d.  Has provided to the pound, animal shelter or other releasing agency within the commonwealth a statement signed by an authorized representative specifying the entity's compliance with subsections (5)a through (5)c of this section, and the provisions of adequate care and performance of humane euthanasia, as necessary in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-44) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546. 
Secs. 6-75-6-91. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RABIES CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies inoculation, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6521. 

Sec. 6-92. - Inoculation required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, hold, or harbor any dog or domesticated cat over the age of four months within the city unless such dog or cat has been vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with a rabies vaccine licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture within a period of 36 months or with a killed rabies vaccine approved by the state department of health within a period of 12 months. If, however, the requirement of vaccination or inoculation threatens the physical well-being of such dog, then the owner of such dog shall have a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian certifying the animal suffers from an underlying medical condition that is likely to result in a life-threatening condition in response to vaccination and such exemption would not risk public health and safety, and the owner shall keep such dog in quarantine until the dog is inoculated or vaccinated. 
(b)  Any person transporting a dog into the city from some other jurisdiction shall comply with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section within 30 days subsequent to bringing such dog into the city. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-56) 
Sec. 6-93. - Certificate of inoculation; collar tag. 
    At the time of vaccination pursuant to section 6-92, a suitable and distinctive collar tag and certificate of inoculation setting forth the type of vaccine used shall be issued to the dog owner. The collar tag shall be affixed to the dog's collar and shall be worn at all times when the dog is not on the owner's property. Any dog not wearing a current collar tag as required by this section shall prima facie be deemed not to have been vaccinated in accordance with section 6-92; provided, however, that if any person summoned to appear before a court for owning or keeping a dog in violation of section 6-92 shall present to the court a proper collar tag, he shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-57) 
Sec. 6-94. - Contents of certificate of inoculation. 
    The certificate of inoculation under this division shall show: 
(1)  The date of inoculation; 
(2)  The sex and breed of dog; 
(3)  The dog's weight; 
(4)  The dog's color and marks; 
(5)  The rabies tag number; 
(6)  The owner; 
(7)  The amount and kind of vaccine injection; and 
(8)  The method of injection. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-58) 
Sec. 6-95. - Prerequisite to license. 
(a)  Any person making application for a dog license shall be required to present to the official who issues such license an unexpired certificate of inoculation properly executed and signed by a currently licensed veterinarian, certifying that the dog has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 6-92 or is exempted as set forth in such section. 
(b)  Such unexpired certificate of inoculation as required in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 6-92 shall be presented before the dog license is issued. Upon the issuance of such license, the official who is issuing the license shall make a notation of the date of issuance of the license on the certificate in question and return the certificate of inoculation to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-59) 
Sec. 6-96. - Presentation of certificate of inoculation for wrong dog. 
    No person shall present a certificate of inoculation for a dog other than that for which it was issued. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-60) 
Sec. 6-97. - Impounding; return to owner. 
    Any dog found in the city not vaccinated and identified or exempted as described in this division shall be impounded by the game warden or any person particularly designated by the city manager and such dog shall be held for a minimum period of five days. The dog may be returned to its owner upon proof of ownership, vaccination of the dog, payment of cost of impounding the dog, at the rate fixed by the city council from time to time and payment of any fine assessed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-61) 
Sec. 6-98. - Disposition of dogs not claimed by owner. 
    At the expiration of the five-day period referred to in the preceding section, any dog not claimed by its owner, as therein provided, may be disposed of as provided in section 6-74. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-62) 
Sec. 6-99. - Rabid dogs. 
(a)  Dogs showing active signs of rabies or suspected of having rabies shall be confined under competent observation for such a time as may be necessary to determine a diagnosis. If confinement is impossible or impracticable, such dog shall be humanely euthanized. 
(b)  Any dog or cat showing active signs of rabies or suspected of having rabies that is not known to have exposed a person, companion animal, or livestock to rabies shall be confined under competent observation for such a time as may be necessary to determine a diagnosis. If, in the discretion of the local health director, confinement is impossible or impracticable, such dog or cat shall be euthanized by one of the methods approved by the state veterinarian as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546. The disposition of other animals showing active signs of rabies shall be determined by the local health director and may include euthanasia and testing. 
(c)  Every person having knowledge of the existence of an animal that is suspected to be rabid and that may have exposed a person, companion animal, or livestock to rabies shall report immediately to the local health department the existence of such animal, the place where seen, the owner's name, if known, and the signs suggesting rabies. 
(d)  Any dog or cat, for which no proof of current rabies vaccination is available, and that may have been exposed to rabies through a bite, or through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane, by an animal suspected to be rabid, shall be isolated in a pound, kennel or enclosure approved by the local health department for a period not to exceed six months at the expense of the owner or custodian in a manner and by a date certain as determined by the local health director. A rabies vaccination shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian prior to release. Inactivated rabies vaccine may be administered at the beginning of isolation. Any dog or cat so bitten, or exposed to rabies through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane with proof of current vaccination, shall be revaccinated by a licensed veterinarian immediately following the exposure and shall be confined to the premises of the owner or custodian, or other site as may be approved by the local health department at the expense of the owner or custodian, for a period of 45 days. If the local health director determines that isolation is not feasible or maintained, such dog or cat shall be euthanized by one of the methods approved by the state veterinarian as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546. The disposition of such dogs or cats not so confined shall be at the discretion of the local health director. 
(e)  At the discretion of the local health director, any animal that may have exposed a person shall be confined under competent observation for ten days at the expense of the owner or custodian, unless the animal develops active signs of rabies, expires, or is euthanized before that time. A seriously injured or sick animal may be euthanized as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546. 
(f)  When any suspected rabid animal, other than a dog or cat, exposes or may have exposed a person to rabies through a bite, or through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane, decisions regarding the disposition of that animal shall be at the discretion of a local health director and may include euthanasia as provided in Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546, or as directed by the state agency with jurisdiction over that species. When any animal, other than a dog or cat, is exposed or may have been exposed to rabies through a bite, or through saliva or central nervous system tissue, in a fresh open wound or mucous membrane, by an animal suspected to be rabid, decisions regarding the disposition of that newly exposed animal shall be at the discretion of a local health director. 
(g)  When any animal may have exposed a person to rabies and subsequently expires due to illness or euthanasia, either within an observation period, where applicable, or as part of a public health investigation, its head or brain shall be sent to the state division of consolidated laboratory services of the department of general services or be tested as directed by the local health department. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-63) 
Sec. 6-100. - Report of death or escape of dog. 
(a)  If any dog shall die or escape from the custody of a confinement area during the period of quarantine as provided in section 6-99, this fact shall immediately be reported to the director of public health and the owner. 
(b)  No person whose duty it is to make such report as to death or escape of a dog so confined shall fail promptly to notify the director of public health and the owner of the death or escape of such dog. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-64) 
Secs. 6-101-6-128. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BIRD SANCTUARY 

Sec. 6-129. - Designation. 
    The entire area embraced within corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-76) 
Sec. 6-130. - Signs. 
    Signs stating that the city is a bird sanctuary may be erected in the city, provided that the type of signs and locations thereof are first approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-77) 
Sec. 6-131. - Trapping, hunting, molesting, etc., birds or wild fowl. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to trap, hunt, wound, shoot, or molest in any manner or attempt to trap, hunt, wound, shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild foul; provided, however, that if starlings, sparrows, pigeons or similar birds or wild animals become a nuisance or menace to health or property, then the city council may, at a regular meeting, upon a recommendation of the chief of police and the health department or the Buena Vista Council of Garden Clubs, after reasonable notice of not less than three days to the health department and the president of the Buena Vista Council of Garden Clubs of the time and place of such meeting, order such birds to be destroyed, if no other satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance. Any such destruction ordered by the city council shall be carried out under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(b)  The following shall be unlawful except as exempted in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  To hunt or kill any wild bird or wild fowl, including any nuisance species, with a fun, firearm, or other weapon in the city limits; 
(2)  To set a trap within the city limits where it would be likely to injure persons, dogs, cats or fowl; 
(3)  To set a body-gripping trap or any steel leg trap with teeth set upon its jaws, baited with any lure or scent likely to attract a dog, cat or fowl. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-78) 
Secs. 6-132-6-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HORSES AND PONIES 

Sec. 6-161. - Keeping. 
    No horse or pony shall be kept within the city limits except when such horse or pony is stabled in a structure under the following conditions and specifications: 
(1)  The structure shall ensure that the ground space within the structure is dry at all times and will prevent the precipitation from falling on the animal when stabled in the structure. The structure shall be enclosed on at least three sides. 
(2)  The structure shall be constructed to conform with properties located in the immediate area. 
(3)  The structure shall contain adequate floor space for stabling the horse or pony kept in the structure. 
(4)  A building permit shall be obtained for the construction of such stable, which stable must be inspected by the building inspector to verify its conformity. Upon verification, a certificate of approval shall be tendered to the owner. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-91) 
Sec. 6-162. - Registration. 
    No pony or horse shall be kept in the city unless such horse or pony is registered with the police department. No registration shall be had until the owner or custodian submits a certificate of approval for the stable where such horse or pony is to be kept. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-92) 
Sec. 6-163. - Running at large, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a horse or pony to roam at large and unattended within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of a horse or pony to allow or permit such horse or pony to go on any city or private property without first obtaining written permission from the owner of such property. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-93) 
Sec. 6-164. - Riding. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or pony on any street or alley of the city at any gait other than a walking gait. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or pony on any street or alley in the city between the hours of sunrise and sunset. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse or pony within two blocks of the intersection of Magnolia Avenue and Twenty-first Street in the city, except in a city-sponsored parade (i.e., Labor Day Parade, Christmas Parade, etc.). 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000, § 5-94) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate buildings, § 2.405. 
State Law reference- Power to regulate the construction of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2279; authority to require removal or repair of buildings and structures, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-906-15.2-909, 15.2-1115; power to regulate the light, ventilation, sanitation, use and occupancy of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1117; public buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1638 et seq.; limitation of prosecutions of building code violations, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-8; Virginia Industrialized Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq.; Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq.; effect of building code on other building regulations, Code of Virginia, § 36-98; enforcement of building code, appeals from decisions of local building department, inspection of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 36-105; voluntary apprenticeship, Code of Virginia, § 40.1-117 et seq.; contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-21. - Adopted; general construction standards. 
(a)  There are hereby adopted by reference for the city the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as adopted and promulgated by the state board of housing and community development. Such code shall take effect on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and shall control all matters concerning the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures, and all other functions which pertain to the installation of systems vital to all buildings and structures and their service equipment, as defined by such code, and shall apply to existing and proposed buildings and structures in the city. 
(b)  All construction, alteration or repair of buildings or structures, or the installation of plumbing, piping, wiring, mechanical or electrical equipment in or upon such buildings, structures or premises, shall be reasonably safe to persons and property and in conformity with the provisions of this article, the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and all orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof. Conformity of construction or installations of equipment with regulations set forth in the state code adopted by this section shall be prima facie evidence that construction or installations are reasonably safe to persons and property. 
(Code 1967, § 6-10; Code 1981, § 6-16) 
State Law reference- Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq. 
Sec. 8-22. - Permit fees. 
    Permit fees under this article shall be as prescribed from time to time by resolution of the city council and are on file in the city offices. 
(Code 1967, §§ 6-21, 6-12; Code 1981, §§ 6-21, 6-22) 
Sec. 8-23. - Foundations for manufactured homes. 
    Permanent foundation for manufactured homes may include any of the following types of foundations selected by the owner, dealer or contractors: 
(1)  Concrete foundations or permanent wood foundation systems constructed in compliance with ANSI A225.1 manufactured home installation standard. 
(2)  Foundation systems for manufactured homes over basements. 
(3)  Any other foundation system approved as a permanent foundation by the building inspector in accordance with USBC which does not conflict with this section. 
(Code 1981, § 6-24; Ord. of 7-26-1990) 
Secs. 8-24-8-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING INSPECTOR 

Sec. 8-50. - Appointment; supervisory responsibility. 
    The building inspection department shall have a building official or inspector, who shall be appointed by the city manager. The building official or inspector in concurrence with the city manager shall be responsible for the organization and daily operation of the department. 
(Code 1967, §§ 6-3, 6-11; Code 1981, § 6-31) 
Sec. 8-51. - Duties generally. 
    The building inspector shall devote his whole time to the duties of his office. He shall receive applications required by this article, issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine premises for which permits have been issued under the building code, adopted by this article, and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that construction is prosecuted safely. He shall enforce all provisions of such building code. He shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in such building code and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction or to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 6-4; Code 1981, § 6-32) 
Sec. 8-52. - Inspections. 
    Inspections required under the provisions of the building code, adopted by this article, shall be made by the building inspector or his duly appointed assistant. The building inspector may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of such building code shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible officer of such service. 
(Code 1967, § 6-5; Code 1981, § 6-33) 
Sec. 8-53. - Regulations. 
    The building inspector shall make such rules and regulations as to construction work and materials used in connection therewith, not in conflict with the laws of the state and the building code, adopted by this article, as may be deemed necessary. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 6-6; Code 1981, § 6-34) 
Sec. 8-54. - Right of entry. 
    The building inspector, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Code 1967, § 6-7; Code 1981, § 6-35) 
Sec. 8-55. - Records. 
(a)  The building inspector shall keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, of reports rendered and of notices or orders issued. He shall retain on file copies of required plans and all documents relating to building work so long as any part of the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence. 
(b)  All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building inspector without his written consent. 
(Code 1967, § 6-8; Code 1981, § 6-36) 
Sec. 8-56. - Reports. 
    The building inspector shall make written reports to his immediate superior once each month, or oftener if requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued, orders promulgated and rules and regulations established. 
(Code 1967, § 6-9; Code 1981, § 6-37) 
Sec. 8-57. - Term. 
    The building inspector shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 6-3; Code 1981, § 6-38) 
Secs. 8-58-8-136. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Inspection of rental property, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-137. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this article shall be to implement an inspection program for residential rental properties pursuant to the authority provided for in Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1, as amended. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-121) 
Sec. 8-138. - Findings. 
(a)  The city council finds that within the rental inspection districts, established and described in section 8-162, each of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There is a need to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the occupants of the dwelling units inside the rental inspection district, established and described in section 8-162; 
(2)  That such residential rental dwelling units within the rental inspection district are either blighted or in the process of deteriorating, or in need of inspection by the building inspector's office to prevent deterioration, taking into account the number, age and condition of the residential dwelling units inside the rental inspection district; and 
(3)  The inspection of residential rental dwelling units inside the rental inspection district is necessary to maintain safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for occupants and other residents living in the rental inspection district. 
(b)  The city council further finds that, for each of the individual residential rental dwelling units described in section 8-162, one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  There is a need to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the occupants of that individual dwelling unit; 
(2)  The individual dwelling unit is either blighted or in the process of deteriorating; or 
(3)  There is evidence of violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for occupants living in such individual dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-122) 
Sec. 8-139. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Building code means the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or structure or part thereof that is used for a home or residence by one or more persons who maintain a household. 
    Managing agent means any person having the authority, singly or in combination with another, to enter into an agreement for occupancy of property subject to this chapter. 
    Multifamily dwelling development. 
(1)  The term "multifamily dwelling development" means any single building, lot or two or more adjacent buildings or lots under common ownership, which contains three or more residential rental dwelling units, occupied for valuable consideration. 
(2)  The term "multifamily dwelling development" does not include mobile homes under common ownership in a mobile home park or subdivision, and such term does not include single-family dwellings, family homes with accessory apartments, two-family dwellings or townhouses under common ownership. 
    Occupant means any person who is not an owner of the dwelling unit or residential rental dwelling unit, who on a regular basis, spends nights at the dwelling unit or residential rental dwelling unit. A person is considered an occupant regardless of whether he or she spends the majority of nights at a residence, if the times he or she does stay overnight are regular and recurrent. In addition, a person shall be considered an occupant if his clothing or other daily living supplies are maintained at the residence. 
    Owner means the person shown on the current real estate assessment books, current real estate assessment records, or the current fee simple title holder of the property if ownership has changed since tax assessment records were last updated. 
    Residential rental dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that is leased or rented to one or more tenants, month to month, or for any period in excess of 30 days, including but not limited to condominiums, manufactured homes, mobile homes, efficiencies, single-family detached homes, duplex homes, townhomes, or multifamily homes, apartments and/or condominiums. The term "apartments" includes, but is not limited to, second story or higher, apartment rentals in the downtown or business districts. However, a dwelling unit occupied in part by the owner shall not be construed to be a residential rental dwelling unit unless a tenant occupies a part of the dwelling unit which has its own cooking and sleeping areas, and a bathroom. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-123) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1. 
Secs. 8-140-8-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RENTAL INSPECTION DISTRICTS 

Sec. 8-162. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all residential rental dwelling units within a rental inspection district established by city council and to individual residential rental dwelling units outside the designated rental inspection districts, when so designated, made subject to this article as provided by Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1(B)(3). 
(b)  The initial rental inspection district shall be districts one and two as shown on the "Rental Inspection District 2009" map attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived, and these districts are hereby established and made subject to the provisions of this article. Maps detailing this rental inspection district shall be available in the building inspector's office and on the city's website. 
(c)  The city council may establish additional rental inspection districts or make individual residential rental dwelling units outside the inspection district subject to this article after notice and a public hearing thereon, as provided by Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-124) 
State Law reference- Rental inspection districts, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1(B). 
Secs. 8-163-8-192. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT AND FEES 

Sec. 8-193. - Notification. 
(a)  The building inspector's office shall make reasonable efforts to notify owners of residential rental dwelling units in the rental inspection district, or their designated managing agent, and any individual residential rental dwelling units subject to this article outside the rental inspection district, in writing, via personal delivery or first class mail, of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and provide information, the owner's responsibilities, and an explanation and effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  Within 60 days of the transfer of ownership or a change in the managing agent of any residential rental dwelling unit within a rental inspection district subject to this article, the owner of any residential rental dwelling unit within a residential inspection district shall notify the building inspector's office, in writing via first class mail, if the dwelling unit is used for residential rental purposes. Such notice shall be submitted on a form provided by the building inspector's office, provided in conjunction with the notice in subsection (a) of this section, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The address and brief description of the rental dwelling unit; 
(2)  The name, street address and telephone number of the property owner; 
(3)  The name, street address and telephone number of the managing agent, if any; and 
(4)  The number of people occupying each dwelling unit and family status of the occupants. 
(c)  If the building inspector's office has reason to believe that an owner has failed to comply with subsection (b) of this section, the building inspector's office shall mail written notice to the owner advising of a 15-day deadline to comply. The penalty for the willful failure of an owner of a dwelling unit who is using the dwelling unit for residential rental purposes, to comply with the written notification requirement after the building inspector's office has sent notice pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, shall be a civil penalty of $50.00. For purposes of this section, the term "notice" means sent by regular first class mail to the last known address of the owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall be deemed in compliance with this requirement. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-125) 
State Law reference- Notification, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1 C. 
Sec. 8-194. - Rental certificate of compliance required. 
    No owner or managing agent shall rent or offer to rent a residential rental dwelling unit within a rental inspection district or an individual residential rental dwelling unit that is subject to this article, without a rental certificate of compliance, issued after a satisfactory inspection of the property by the building inspector's office or designee. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-126) 
Sec. 8-195. - Inspections-Generally. 
(a)  The building inspector or designee shall have the right to inspect any residential rental dwelling unit within a rental inspection district or other individual residential rental dwelling unit subject to this article at any reasonable time, in order to carry out an inspection required by this article. The owner, managing agent, occupant or other person in charge of the dwelling unit shall permit the building inspector, or designee, access to any residential rental dwelling unit within a rental inspection district or any individual residential rental dwelling unit subject to this article for the purpose of conducting an inspection authorized by this article. In the event of a complaint that a violation of the building code exists that is an immediate and imminent threat to the health or safety of the owner or occupant of a residential rental dwelling unit or a nearby residential rental dwelling unit, and the owner or occupant of the residential rental dwelling unit that is the subject of the complaint refuses to permit the inspection, the building inspector or designee may present sworn testimony to a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction and request an inspection warrant to enable the building inspector or designee, access to the residential rental dwelling unit for the purpose of determining whether violations of the building code exist. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit an inspection of any residential rental dwelling unit within a rental inspection district or individual residential rental dwelling unit subject to this article for a violation of the building code, pursuant to a complaint. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-127) 
Sec. 8-196. - Same-Initial. 
(a)  Upon the establishment of a rental inspection district and compliance with the notification requirements set forth in section 8-193, the building inspector or his designee may proceed to inspect any residential rental dwelling unit subject to this article, to determine if the dwelling unit is being used as a residential rental property and for compliance with the provisions of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the occupants of the dwelling unit. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, if a multifamily development has more than ten dwelling units, the building inspector or designee, shall inspect not less than two and not more than ten percent of the dwelling units in the multifamily development, which includes all of the multifamily buildings which are part of the multifamily development. If upon inspection it is determined that there are violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the occupants of the multifamily development, the building inspector or designee, shall inspect as many dwelling units as necessary within the multifamily development to enforce the building code. 
(c)  If one or more violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the occupants of the residential rental dwelling unit are found, a 30-day temporary certificate of compliance shall be issued, together with a date by which the violations shall be remedied. If at the followup inspection, the violations have been remedied by the date specified, a four-year certificate of exemption shall be issued. 
(d)  If the violations have not been remedied within the time specified, a 30-day extension of the temporary certificate of compliance shall be issued, as deemed reasonably necessary to allow for correction of the violations, together with a date by which the violations shall be remedied. If at the followup inspection the violations are remedied by the date specified, a one-year certificate of compliance shall be issued and the residential rental dwelling unit shall be subject to annual inspections for a period of two years. If after two annual inspections for which no violations are noted, a four-year certificate of exemption shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-128) 
State Law reference- Initial inspections, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1(E). 
Sec. 8-197. - Same-Followup. 
    Upon the initial or periodic inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit subject to this article, the owner shall permit the building inspector's office to conduct such followup inspections of the dwelling unit as the building inspector's office deems necessary, until such time as the dwelling unit is brought into compliance with the provisions of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the occupants of the dwelling units. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-130) 
State Law reference- Followup inspections, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1(F). 
Sec. 8-198. - Same-Periodic. 
    Except as provided in sections 8-196(b) and 8-197, following the initial inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit subject to this article, the building inspector's office may inspect any residential rental dwelling unit, subject to this article, not otherwise exempt from this article, no more than once per calendar year. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-131) 
State Law reference- Periodic inspections, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1(F). 
Sec. 8-199. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Upon the initial or periodic inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit subject to this article and provided there are no violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the occupants of such residential rental dwelling unit, the building inspector's office shall issue to the owner of such residential rental dwelling unit, a certificate of exemption from the inspection requirements of this article for a period of four years from the date the certificate is issued. 
(b)  Upon the sale of a residential rental dwelling unit, the building inspector's office may perform an inspection subsequent to each sale. 
(c)  If a residential rental dwelling unit has been issued a certificate of occupancy within the last four years, the building inspector's office shall issue a certificate of exemption for four years from the date of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  If a residential rental dwelling unit that has received a certificate of exemption becomes in violation of the building code during the exemption period, the building inspector's office shall revoke the exemption previously granted. Prior to revocation, the building inspector's office shall send written notice to the owner or managing agent, via first class mail, specifying the nature of the violations and the date upon which the revocation of the certificate of exemption shall become effective. Proof of mailing to the last known address of the owner or managing agent shall be sufficient evidence that notice was received. 
(e)  Issuance of a certificate of exemption shall not serve to exempt an owner, managing agent, or occupant from compliance with all applicable statutes, laws and ordinances, including the building code. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-129) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1(G). 
Sec. 8-200. - Fees. 
(a)  There shall be no fee for the initial inspection required by this article, or for the first followup inspection following a determination by the building inspector's office upon conducting the initial inspection, that there are violations of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the occupants of the dwelling units. 
(b)  If all violations are not corrected at the time of the first followup inspection, then the fee for any subsequent followup inspections for the initial violations shall be $50.00 per dwelling unit. 
(c)  There shall be no fee for periodic inspections authorized by this article. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-132) 
State Law reference- Fees, Code of Virginia, § 36-105.1:1(H). 
Secs. 8-201-8-223. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - APPEALS, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 8-224. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any owner, managing agent or occupant aggrieved by any determination or decision of the building inspector's office made pursuant to this article shall have the right to appeal such determination or decision to the city manager within 14 calendar days of the receipt of such determination or decision being appealed. Notice of such appeal shall be in writing, on forms provided by the building inspector's office and contain the name and address of the owner, the name and address of the person appealing, if the applicant is not the owner, and the grounds for the appeal. A copy of the building inspector's decision shall be submitted with the application for appeal. Failure to submit an application for appeal within the time permitted shall constitute acceptance of the building inspector's decision. 
(b)  Any owner, managing agent or occupant aggrieved by any determination or decision of the city manager made pursuant to this article, shall have the right to appeal such determination or decision to the city's board of building code appeals within 14 calendar days of the receipt of such determination or decision by the city manager. 
(c)  Any owner, managing agent or occupant aggrieved by any determination or decision of the city's board of building code appeals made pursuant to this article, shall have the right to appeal such determination or decision in accordance with the building code. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit, impair, alter or extend the rights and remedies of persons in their relationship of landlord and tenant as such rights and remedies exist under applicable law. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve or exempt any person from otherwise complying with all applicable laws, ordinances, standards and regulations pertaining to the condition of the buildings and other structures. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the authority of the building inspector's office to perform housing inspections in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-133) 
Sec. 8-225. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any owner of a dwelling unit who fails to comply with the written notification requirement after the building inspector's office has sent notice pursuant to section 8-193(a), shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50.00, assessed 30 days from the date the notice is due. For purposes of this subsection, the term "notice" means sent by regular first class mail to the last known address of the owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall be deemed in compliance with this requirement. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or any other person, firm or corporation to violate any provision of this article. Any violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any owner or any other person, firm or corporation convicted of such a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00. Each day the violation continues after conviction or the court-ordered abatement period has expired, shall constitute a separate offense. If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with this article. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six months of the date of the conviction. Each day during which the violation continues after the court-ordered abatement period has ended shall constitute a separate offense. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five years after a first offense under this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five to ten years of a first offense under this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten years of an offense under this article after having been at least twice previously convicted shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten days and a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $5,000.00, either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten years of an offense under this article shall be suspended. Any prosecution under this subsection shall be commenced within two years as provided in Code of Virginia, § 19.2-8. 
(c)  The remedies set forth in this section are not exclusive for noncompliance with the provisions of this article and the building inspector's office may take such further action as permitted by applicable law, in order to obtain compliance with the provisions of this article, including but not limited to, injunctive relief as provided for in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1432 and inspection warrants as provided for in Code of Virginia, § 36-105(C)(3). 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 6-134) 
State Law reference- Limitation on prosecution, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-8; violations, penalty, Code of Virginia § 36-106. 
Secs. 8-226-8-243. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Disposal of trash, cutting of grass and weeds, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901; control of noxious weeds, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-902; junk, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-903; inoperable vehicles, etc., Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-904, 15.2-905; dilapidated buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-906; repair of defacement of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-908. 

Sec. 8-244. - Adopted by reference. 
    A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the clerk of the city council being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the city for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-245. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 1) 
Sec. 8-245. - Revisions. 
    The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Buena Vista, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 103.5. The fees, if any, for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be indicated in the following schedule: See schedule A. 
Schedule A. Fee Schedule. (None as of 4-16-2009). 
Section 302.4. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of ten inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants, and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of the property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. 
Section 304.14. Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to December 1, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized, in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16-mesh per inch (16-mesh per 25 mm), every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Section 602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 15 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design Temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be indicated in appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 
2.  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30 degrees Fahrenheit (1 degree Celsius) a minimum temperature of 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) shall be maintained. 
Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 2) 
Sec. 8-246. - Provisions construed as continuing. 
    Nothing in this article or in the property maintenance code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article. 
(Ord. of 4-16-2009, § 5) 
Secs. 8-247-8-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DERELICT BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-271. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building official means the city building inspector or designee. 
    Derelict building means a residential or nonresidential building or structure, whether or not construction has been completed, that might endanger the public's health, safety or welfare, and for a continuous period in excess of six months has been: 
(1)  Unoccupied; 
(2)  Boarded up; and 
(3)  Not lawfully connected to electric service from a utility service provider, or not lawfully connected to any water or sewer service from a utility service provider. 
    Person means any individual, firm, owner, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, governmental body, municipal corporation, executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, agent, occupant or other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 6-122, 9-15-2011) 
Secs. 8-272-8-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NOTICE, TAX ABATEMENT AND FEES 

Sec. 8-291. - Notice of declaration of derelict building. 
(a)  Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the building official that there exists upon land in the city any derelict building, he shall notify the owner of the derelict building that the owner must submit a work plan within 90 calendar days to either demolish the derelict building or renovate the derelict building so that lawful use and occupancy of the building or structure is possible. 
(b)  The notice of declaration of derelict building shall be sent by certified mail to the owner at the address in the real estate tax assessment records. If the owner's address on the real estate tax assessment records is the address of the derelict building, the building official may also post a copy of the notice on the derelict building. 
(c)  The notice of declaration of derelict building shall also constitute legal notice under article I of this chapter. 
(d)  Any person sent a notice of declaration of derelict building pursuant to this section who shall fail to comply with the time specified for submitting a work plan shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit an owner from requesting that his building or structure be evaluated for a declaration of derelict building. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 6-124, 9-15-2011) 
Sec. 8-292. - Work plan-Submittal by owner; approval by building official. 
(a)  The work plan required to be submitted by the owner shall be on a form prescribed by the building official. The work plan must provide a proposed time within which the plan must be commenced and completed. The work plan may include one or more adjacent properties of the owner, whether or not all have been declared to contain a derelict building. The contents of the plan and the proposed schedule shall be subject to approval by the building official and shall be deemed noncompliant until such plan is approved. 
(b)  Once the building official approves the work plan, the contents of the work plan and the schedule for commencement and completion of the work plan shall be binding on the owner. Failure to comply with the contents of the approved work plan or the dates for commencement and completion shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any approval granted by the building official under this section shall not relieve the owner of property located in any historic district from complying with the approval requirements established by relevant provisions of the zoning ordinance as set forth in part III, land development regulations, before any permit can be issued or any demolition/renovation work can commence. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 6-125, 9-15-2011) 
Sec. 8-293. - Same-Completion; permit fee refund. 
(a)  If the approved work plan calls for demolition of the derelict building, upon submittal of proof of demolition within the prescribed time period, the owner shall be given a refund of the demolition permit fees. 
(b)  If the approved work plan calls for renovation of the derelict building, upon submittal of proof of renovation in the prescribed time period, the owner of the derelict building shall be given a refund of 50 percent of the building permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 6-126, 9-15-2011) 
Sec. 8-294. - Tax abatement. 
(a)  Prior to commencement of an approved work plan to demolish or renovate a derelict building, the owner may request the real estate assessor to make an assessment of the derelict building. 
(b)  After demolition, at the request of the owner, the real estate assessor shall reflect the reduction in the assessment as a result of the removal of the derelict building. 
(c)  After renovation, at the request of the owner, the real estate assessor shall reflect the fair market value of the renovation improvements in the real estate tax assessment records. The real estate tax in an amount equal to the increase in the fair market value of the renovations shall be abated for a period of 15 years, and is transferable with the property. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the tax abatement process is not available for any property which either is a registered state landmark or is determined by the state department of historic resources to contribute to the significance of a registered historic district. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 6-127, 9-15-2011) 
Secs. 8-295-8-321. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 8-322. - Violations. 
    Unless otherwise specified, any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a new and separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 6-121, 9-15-2011) 
Sec. 8-323. - Enforcement. 
    The city building official is hereby vested with the authority to require the abatement of derelict buildings pursuant to the provisions of this article and other applicable codes, laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 6-128, 9-15-2011) 
Sec. 8-324. - Additional remedies of the city. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the city may proceed to make repairs, secure the derelict building, demolish the derelict building, abate the nuisance, or exercise any and all other remedies, pursuant to Code of Virginia, title 15.2, the Uniform Statewide Building Code, and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-10, § 6-128, 9-15-2011) 
Secs. 8-325-8-351. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS 

Sec. 8-352. - Unsafe signs; notice; removal or repair; penalty for failure to remove. 
(a)  When any sign becomes insecure, in danger of falling, being blown apart by winds, or otherwise unsafe, the building inspector shall issue to the owner of such sign, or the person or firm maintaining same, a written notice stating the unsafe condition. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a written notice, the party responsible for such sign shall be given ten days to remove or repair such sign. 
(c)  If, at the end of this period, the party responsible for said unsafe sign has neither repaired nor removed said sign, the sign will be removed by the city. 
(d)  Such failure to repair or remove said sign by the end of the prescribed period, causing removal of said sign by the city, shall constitute a misdemeanor for which the responsible party shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $250.00. 
(Code 1981, § 3-21; Ord. of 2-11-1982, § 1) 
Sec. 8-353. - Particular use signs to be removed if use ceases. 
(a)  Any nontemporary sign pertaining to a particular use shall be deemed accessory to that use, and if such use ceases, shall be removed along with all structures supporting it, not more than 60 days after that use's cessation, with the exceptions that: 
(1)  Real estate "sold" signs shall be removed 30 days after their placement on the property; 
(2)  Temporary signs, such as official notices and those related to temporary uses, such as fairs, carnivals, holiday celebrations, promotional events for charities or businesses, etc., shall be removed within five days of the event to which they pertain; 
(3)  Yard sale signs, and signs of a related nature, shall be removed within 24 hours of the closure of the event which they advertise. 
(b)  The building inspector shall enforce this section as follows, on detection of any violation of subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  For nontemporary signs, on detection of a sign and/or its supporting structure which remains on display after the prescribed 60-day period, the building inspector shall issue written notice, to the party in violation, to remove said sign and/or supporting structure within 30 days of the date of notice; 
(2)  For real estate "sold" signs, temporary signs and yard sale signs, the building inspector is authorized, if such action is reasonably simple, to personally remove and dispose of such signs in violation of subsection (a) of this section. If removal of such signs is dangerous or complex, or if such signs are of significant monetary value, according to the building inspector's discretion, a written notice shall be issued to the pertinent party, by the building inspector, ordering removal within seven days of the issuance of this notice. 
(c)  After the expiration of the relevant notification period, an individual or firm failing to remove a sign in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and fined $5.00 per day for each day said sign and/or any part of its supporting structure remains standing. 
(Code 1981, § 3-22; Ord. of 2-11-1982, § 2) 
Sec. 8-354. - Unsightly signs; procedure for remedy; penalty for noncompliance. 
    In order that the condition of signs within the city be maintained at an acceptable level of visual appearance, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  Action of zoning administrator. Upon detection of a sign exhibiting what he deems a noticeably unsightly appearance (i.e., noticeably deteriorating paint or structure; weeds, vines or tree limbs cluttering view; plastic, wood, or metal letters out of place or fallen off; warped facing or supporting structure; etc.), the zoning administrator shall write a letter of advisement to the party responsible for the sign stating: 
a.  Obvious visual deficiencies of the sign; 
b.  What needs to be done to correct these deficiencies; 
c.  A time limit of 30 days within which to correct such deficiencies; 
d.  Explanation of the appeal process. 
(2)  Appeal process. If the owner or lessee responsible for said sign's appearance finds the letter of advisement unreasonable, he or she has the right to appeal for a hearing with the board of zoning appeals, providing that a letter of appeal is made within 30 days of receipt of the zoning administrator's letter of advisement. A party may appeal on the grounds of financial hardship or unreasonableness of what has been prescribed by the zoning administrator. On receipt of said party's appeal, the board of zoning appeals shall set a duly advertised public hearing to decide on the matter. After hearing the case, the board of zoning appeals shall either: 
a.  Uphold the zoning administrator's original ruling and require said party to make prescribed corrections within a minimum of 30 days of the hearing; 
b.  Modify the original ruling, and require that modified corrections be made within a minimum of 30 days of the hearing; 
c.  Completely remand the original ruling, absolving the said party of any requirement for action. 
(3)  Penalty for noncompliance. Any party remaining in noncompliance after the expiration of the relevant time periods allotted in this section shall be fined $100.00 per week for each week said sign remains in noncompliance. 
(Code 1981, § 3-23; Ord. of 2-11-1982, § 3) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to license businesses, professions and occupations, § 2.204. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate businesses, etc., Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-911-15.2-914; general grant of power to secure the general welfare of the citizens, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1102; businesses, professions, occupations, Code of Virginia, § 54.-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND JEWELS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate pawnshops, secondhand dealers, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1114; precious metals dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4100 et seq. 

Sec. 10-19. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article is enacted to secure and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(b)  It is hereby declared that the business of purchasing or otherwise dealing in antique, used or scrap jewelry and precious metals, where the said purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remodeling or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk is a business affecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-16; Ord. of 1-8-1981, § 3-1) 
Sec. 10-20. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
    Coin means any piece of gold, silver or other metal fashioned into a prescribed shape, weight and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of a government with certain marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money. 
    Dealer. 
(1)  The term "dealer" means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association engaged at any location in the city in the business of purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems, removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by the person, firm, partnership, or corporation; or buying, acquiring or selling precious metals or gems removed from manufactured articles, and shall include merchants whose business is itinerant in the city. The term "dealer" includes employers and principals on whose behalf the purchase was made and all employees and agents who personally make such purchases. 
(2)  The term "dealer" does not include persons engaged in the following: 
a.  Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers, manufacturers, or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories, provided that the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this article. 
b.  Purchases of precious metals or gems from a qualified fiduciary who is disposing of the assets of an estate being administered by the fiduciary. 
c.  Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold by the retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for trade-in. 
d.  Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if such activities are within his normal course of business. 
e.  Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail merchants, wholesalers, dealers, or by mail originating outside the commonwealth. 
f.  Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and processing nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a byproduct. 
    Gems or jewels means any item containing or having any precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry or ornamentation. 
    Precious metals includes, but is not limited to, any item containing as part of its composition, in any degree, gold, silver, platinum or platinum alloys, except coins, and also includes all other metals customarily denoted as precious metals by the jewelry trade. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-17; Ord. of 1-8-1981, § 3-2) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4101. 
Sec. 10-21. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense punishable as provided in section 1-14. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction of a dealer for violation of any provision of this article, the chief of police may revoke the dealer's license for one full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory for two full years from the date the conviction becomes final upon a second conviction. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-26; Ord. of 1-8-1981, § 3-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4110. 
Sec. 10-22. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any dealer to purchase precious metals or gems for which precious metals or gems are received, without first obtaining a license from the chief of police of the city as provided herein, and without complying with all other provisions of this article. Possession of a license issued in another jurisdiction shall not relieve a dealer of the obligation to obtain the license required herein. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-18; Ord. of 1-8-1981, § 3-3) 
State Law reference- Permit required, etc., Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108. 
Sec. 10-23. - License application; fee. 
(a)  Application for the license required under this article shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the chief of police, which application shall contain: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, any aliases if any, address, age, date of birth, sex and fingerprints, and the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer, if different from the applicant; 
(2)  The precise location of the place of business of the dealer's place of business; and 
(3)  The date or dates of operation for which the license is requested. 
(b)  The application further shall require that the applicant list convictions during the past seven years, if any, of felonies or crimes of moral turpitude of the applicant or the applicant's employer or officers, if different from the applicant. Attached to such application shall be a certified check or money order in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of the license, plus a processing fee which fees are on file in the city offices. 
(c)  The chief of police shall act upon such application within a period of 24 hours after its receipt, unless such 24-hour period terminates on a nonbusiness day, in which case action will be taken prior to 11:00 a.m. of the next full business day. The application may be denied for failure to comply with any of the requirements in submitting the application. The application may be denied if the applicant has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven years prior to the date of application. The application shall be denied if the applicant has been denied a permit or license or has had a permit or license revoked under any ordinance similar in substance to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Before a license may be issued, the dealer must have all weighing devices used in his business inspected and approved by local or state weights and measures officials and present written evidence of such approval to the chief of police. 
(e)  This license shall be valid for one year from the date issued and may be renewed in the same manner as such license was initially obtained with an annual license fee of $200.00. No license shall be transferable. 
(f)  If the business of the dealer is not operated without interruption, with Saturdays, Sundays and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the chief of police of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of a dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in his application for a license. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-19; Ord. of 1-8-1981, § 3-4) 
State Law reference- Permit required, etc., Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108. 
Sec. 10-24. - Bond or letter of credit required of dealers. 
(a)  Every dealer shall secure a license as required by section 10-23, and each dealer at the time of obtaining such license shall enter into a recognizance to the city secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this city, in the penal sum of $10,000.00, conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this article. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in the city a letter of credit in favor of the city for $10,000.00. 
(b)  A single bond upon an employer or principal may be written or a single letter of credit issued to cover all employees and all transactions occurring at a single location. 
(code 1981, § 11.5-19, Ord. of 1-8-1981, § 3-4) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4101. 
Sec. 10-25. - License display; nonassignability. 
    The license issued under this article shall be publicly displayed by the dealer. The license is personal to the dealer to whom it was issued and is not assignable. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-20; Ord. of 1-8-1981, § 3-5) 
Sec. 10-26. - Retention of purchases for a minimum period required. 
(a)  The dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of ten calendar days from the date on which a copy of the bill of sale is received by the chief of police. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter, or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the county, city or town in which the purchase was made. 
(b)  If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of ten calendar days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-21; Ord. of 1-8-1981, § 3-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4104. 
Sec. 10-27. - Record of disposition. 
    Each dealer shall maintain for at least 24 months an accurate and legible record of the name and address of the person, firm, or corporation to which he sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the waiting period required by section 10-26. This record shall also show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased the item. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4105. 
Sec. 10-28. - Dealer records and reports. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each purchase of precious metals or gems. The record of each purchase shall be retained by the dealer for at least 24 months and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  A complete description of all precious metals or gems purchased from each seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight or carat of any gem, and the price paid for each item; 
(2)  The date, time and place of receiving the items purchased; 
(3)  The full name, residence address, work place, home and work telephone numbers, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, hair and eye color, and other identifying marks of the seller; 
(4)  Verification of the identification of the seller by the exhibition of a government-issued identification card such as a driver's license or military identification card. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon; and 
(5)  A statement of ownership from the seller. 
(b)  The information required by subsections (a)(1) through (3) of this section shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer, and a copy shall be mailed or delivered within 24 hours of the time of purchase to the chief of police. 
(c)  The record of the dealer shall be carefully preserved without alteration and shall be open at all times during regular business hours to the inspection of the chief of police, any police officer of the city, the sheriff of the county, any member of the state police, and any other properly identified police officer. Every dealer or his employee shall admit such officer to the place of business during regular business hours. The dealer or his employee shall permit the officer to examine all records required by this article and any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen and search for and take into possession any article known to him to be missing or known or believed by him to have been stolen. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-22; Ord. of 1-8-1981, § 3-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 54.1-4101, 54.1-4101.1. 
Sec. 10-29. - Dealer to verify identification of seller prior to purchase. 
    The dealer shall ascertain the identity of the seller by ascertaining the seller's name, address and age of each seller by requiring the seller to verify same by some form of identification issued by a governmental agency, which contains a picture or photograph of the seller. No purchase shall be made from any seller unable to verify identification as specified in this section and at least one other corroborating means of identification, and obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-23; Ord. of 1-8-1981, § 3-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4102. 
Sec. 10-30. - Prohibited purchases. 
(a)  When person under the age of 18 years. No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  When ownership in doubt. No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any person whom the dealer believes, or has reason to believe, is not the owner of the items offered for sale unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-24; Ord. of 1-8-1981, § 3-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4103. 
Sec. 10-31. - Action against and availability of bond proceeds. 
    Any person aggrieved by the misconduct of any dealer or dealer's violation of any of the provisions of this article, may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against the dealer and his surety. Any person who shall recover a final judgment against such dealer, may maintain an action in his own name upon the bond and surety. Recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the judgment which is unsatisfied by the dealer 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-25; Ord. of 1-8-1981, § 3-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4107. 
Sec. 10-32. - Waivers and other exemptions from article. 
(a)  The chief of police, or his designee, may waive by written notice implementation of any one or more of the provisions of this article, except section 10-30, for particular numismatic, gem, or antique exhibitions or craft shows sponsored by nonprofit organizations, provided that the purpose of the exhibitions is nonprofit in nature, notwithstanding the fact that there may be casual purchases and trades made at such exhibitions. 
(b)  The provisions of this article dealing with the subject matter of this article shall not apply to the sale or purchase of coins. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any bank, branch thereof, trust company or bank holding company, or any wholly owned subsidiary thereof, engaged in buying and selling gold and silver bullion. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4109. 
Secs. 10-33-10-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GAMBLING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Gambling, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-53-10-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GAMBLING ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 10-78. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gambling device. 
(1)  The term "gambling device" means any: 
a.  Device, machine, paraphernalia, equipment or other thing, including books, records and other papers, which is actually used in an illegal gambling operation or activity; and 
b.  Machine, apparatus, implement, instrument, contrivance, board or other thing, including but not limited to those dependent upon the insertion of a coin or other object for their operation, which operates, either completely automatically or with the aid of some physical act by the player or operator, in such a manner that, depending upon elements of chance, it may eject something of value or determine the prize or other thing of value to which the player is entitled; provided, however, that the return to the user of nothing more than additional chances or the right to use such machine is not deemed something of value within the meaning of this definition. 
Such devices are no less gambling devices if they indicate beforehand the definite result of one or more operations but not all the operations. Nor are they any less a gambling device because, apart from their use or adaptability as such, they may also sell or deliver something of value on a basis other than chance. 
(2)  The term "gambling device" does not include machines that only sell, or entitle the user to, items of merchandise of equivalent value that may differ from each other in composition, size, shape or color. 
    Illegal gambling means the making, placing or receipt, of any bet or wager in this city of money or other thing of value, made in exchange for a chance to win a prize, stake or other consideration or thing of value, dependent upon the result of any game, contest or any other event the outcome of which is uncertain or a matter of chance, whether such game, contest or event occurs or is to occur inside or outside the limits of this city, shall constitute illegal gambling. 
(Code 1967, §§ 12-1, 12-6; Code 1981, § 10-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325. 
Sec. 10-79. - Illegal gambling generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who illegally gambles shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. If an association or pool of persons illegally gamble, each person therein shall be guilty of illegal gambling. 
(b)  However, if any person makes, places or receives any bet or wager of money or other thing of value on a horse race in the commonwealth, whether the race is inside or outside the limits of the commonwealth at any place or through any means other than: 
(1)  At a racetrack licensed by the state racing commission pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 59.1-364 et seq.; or 
(2)  At a satellite facility or through advance deposit account wagering, as those terms are defined in Code of Virginia, § 59.1-365, licensed by the state racing commission pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 59.1-364 et seq., such person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
For the purposes of this subsection (b), venue shall be in any county or city in which any act was performed in furtherance of any course of conduct constituting illegal gambling. 
(Code 1967, § 12-1; Code 1981, § 10-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-326. 
Sec. 10-80. - Permitting continuance of gambling. 
    If the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person in control of any place or conveyance knows, or reasonably should know, that it is being used for illegal gambling, and permits such gambling to continue without having notified a law enforcement officer of the presence of such illegal gambling activity, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 12-2; Code 1981, § 10-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-329. 
Sec. 10-81. - Accessories to gambling activity. 
    Any person, other than those persons specified in other sections of this chapter, who knowingly aids, abets or assists in the operation of an illegal gambling activity, shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 12-3; Code 1981, § 10-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-330. 
Sec. 10-82. - Illegal possession, etc., of gambling device. 
    A person is guilty of illegal possession of a gambling device when he manufactures, sells, transports, rents, gives away, places or possesses, or conducts or negotiates any transaction affecting or designed to affect ownership, custody or use of any gambling device, believing or having reason to believe that the same is to be used in the advancement of unlawful gambling activity. Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, §§ 12-4, 12-5; Code 1981, § 10-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-331. 
Sec. 10-83. - Certain acts not deemed consideration. 
    In any prosecution under this chapter, no consideration shall be deemed to have passed or been given because of any person's attendance upon the premises of another; his execution, mailing or delivery of an entry blank; his answering of questions, verbally or in writing; his witnessing of a demonstration or other proceeding; or any one or more thereof, where no charge is made to, paid by or any purchase required of him in connection therewith. 
(Code 1967, § 12-9; Code 1981, § 10-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-332. 
Sec. 10-84. - Forfeiture of money, gambling devices, etc. 
    All money, gambling devices, office equipment and other personal property used in connection with an illegal gambling enterprise or activity, and all money, stakes and things of value received or proposed to be received by a winner in any illegal gambling transaction, which are lawfully seized by any law-enforcement officer or which shall lawfully come into his custody, shall be forfeited to the city by order of the court in which a conviction under this chapter is obtained. Such court shall order all money so forfeited to be paid over to the city, and by order shall make such disposition of other property so forfeited as the court deems proper, including award of such property of any state agency or charitable organization for lawful purposes, or in case of the sale thereof, the proceeds therefrom to be paid over to the city; provided, however, that such forfeiture shall not extinguish the rights of any person without knowledge of the illegal use of such property who is the lawful owner or who has a lien on the same which has been perfected in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1967, §§ 12-7, 12-10; Code 1981, § 10-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-386.30. 
Secs. 10-85-10-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BINGO AND RAFFLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Bingo, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.15 et seq. 

Sec. 10-112. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bingo means a specific game of chance played with individual cards having randomly numbered squares ranging from one to 75, in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers on such cards conforming to a predetermined pattern of numbers selected at random. Such cards shall have five vertical rows headed respectively by the letters B-I-N-G-O, with each row having five randomly numbered squares. 
    Instant bingo means a specific game of chance played by the random selection of one or more individually prepacked cards, with winners being determined by the preprinted appearance of the letters B-I-N-G-O in any prescribed order on the reverse side of such card. 
    Organization means any one of the following: 
(1)  A voluntary fire department or rescue squad or auxiliary unit thereof which has been recognized by an ordinance or resolution of the city as being a part of the safety program of the city; 
(2)  An organization operated exclusively for religious, charitable, community or educational purposes; 
(3)  An association of war veterans or auxiliary units thereof organized in the United States; or 
(4)  A fraternal association operating under the lodge system. 
    Raffle means a lottery in which the prize is won by a random drawing of the name or prearranged number of one or more persons purchasing chances. 
(Code 1967, § 12-11; Code 1981, § 10-21) 
Sec. 10-113. - Annual permit required; application fee; form of application. 
    Prior to the commencement of any bingo game or raffle by a qualified organization as defined in this article, such organization shall be required to obtain an annual permit from the city council or from a local official, designated by the city council. Such permit shall only be granted after a reasonable investigation has been conducted by such city or local official. Application for such annual permit shall be accompanied by a check in the amount of $25.00 payable as designated by the city council. Such application fee may be waived by the city council. Application for such annual permit shall be made on the form provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.2; provided, however, that such form may be expanded to include any other information desired by the city council. Such application shall be a matter of public record. 
(Code 1967, § 12-11; Code 1981, § 10-22) 
Sec. 10-114. - Consideration of permits. 
(a)  The city council will consider applications for permits after they have been submitted to the office of the city manager at least seven days prior to the next council meeting. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of any permit under this article, the organization must meet the requirements provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.3. 
(Code 1967, § 12-12; Code 1981, § 10-23) 
Secs. 10-115-10-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TEENAGE DANCE HALLS AND TEENAGE NIGHTCLUBS 

Sec. 10-142. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Teenage dance hall means any place in which dances that are attended primarily by teenagers are regularly held or conducted, whether admission thereto is by a set admission charge, by the donation of money or by no charge. 
    Teenage nightclub means any establishment in which primarily teenagers regularly gather, either to participate in dancing or to observe live entertainment, whether admission thereto is by a set admission charge, by the donation of money or by no charge. 
    Teenager or teenage person means a minor who is between the ages of 13 and 19 years of age. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-30; Ord. of 12-14-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 10-143. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating a teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub without first having procured a permit to do so in accordance with this article, which permit shall be obtained from the city manager on satisfactory evidence that the applicant is a proper person to receive the same. Such permit may be revoked at any time by the city manager upon a finding that the operation of the teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub contravenes public safety, peace, and order, becomes a public nuisance, disturbs the peace or upon the failure of the permit holder to comply with the requirements of this article. A permit to operate a teenage dance hall or teenager nightclub shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and valid until revoked. 
(b)  There shall be an appeal to the city council both from the action of the city manager in refusing to grant such a permit to the person applying therefor and from the action of the city manager in revoking such a permit after the granting of the same. Such appeal shall be by written application directed to city council and delivered to the city clerk within ten days from the refusal of the city manager to grant such permit or within ten days from his revocation of the same, as the case may be. In the event of an appeal to city council, the decision of the city manager shall not be reversed unless the city council is of the opinion that the city manager acted arbitrarily in the matter or without sufficient or satisfactory evidence. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-31; Ord. of 12-14-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 10-144. - Investigation. 
    Prior to the issuance of any permit to operate a teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub, a background investigation shall be conducted by the city police department on the applicant seeking to operate a teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub. All employees of said teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub shall likewise be required to have a police background investigation conducted on them. No applicant shall be issued a permit to operate a teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub and no person shall be employed by a teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub if such person has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude; any crime involving the sale, attempted sale or possession of any controlled substance with the intent to distribute; or any sexual offense or crime relating to obscenity. The names of all individuals who have been issued a permit to operate a teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub shall be maintained on file with the chief of police. Persons providing entertainment on a nonreoccurring basis such as musicians and DJs are not required to register pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-32; Ord. of 12-14-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 10-145. - Regulation of teenage dance halls or teenage nightclubs. 
    No teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub shall be operated except as follows: 
(1)  No teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub shall operate prior to 12:00 noon on any given day, nor shall it operate after 12:00 midnight on any given day. At 12:00 midnight the premises shall be vacated except for registered employees. 
(2)  Persons having reached the age of 21 years or over shall not be allowed to enter a teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub unless they are an employee or a parent or legal guardian of a person attending such teenage dance hall. 
(3)  The presence of persons under the influence of alcohol or other self-administered drugs, narcotics or controlled substances on the premises of said teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub, or the presence of alcohol, drugs, narcotics, controlled substances, or drug paraphernalia on the premises of said teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub shall be grounds for the automatic and immediate revocation of the permit to conduct or operate a teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub. Upon the discovery of alcohol, drug paraphernalia, narcotics, drugs, controlled substances or persons under the influence of any of the same on the premises of said teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub, the city manager, chief of police or his agent may cause all persons in the teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub to vacate the premises and may close the teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub. 
(4)  Any person issued a permit to conduct a teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub shall be given a copy of these regulations and shall sign for and acknowledge receipt of such copy. 
(5)  No individual to whom a permit to operate a teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub has been issued, nor any employee of said teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub shall in any way hinder any fire prevention or law enforcement officer who wishes to inspect the premises of said teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub at any time said teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub is open. 
(6)  The operator of any teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub shall provide adequate security to protect patrons from physical harm and to prohibit the entry upon the premises of alcohol, drugs, narcotics or other controlled substances and weapons as defined by Code of Virginia, § 18.2-309A, as amended. 
(7)  A copy of these regulations shall be posted in a prominent location inside the building or premises wherein a dance hall or teenage nightclub is operated. 
(8)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-33; Ord. of 12-14-1989, § 1) 
State Law reference- Furnishing certain weapons to minors, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-309. 
Sec. 10-146. - Operation in manner other than as is provided for in article to constitute nuisance; violation of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(a)  To conduct or to operate a teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub in any manner or mode other than as is provided in this article shall, in addition to being unlawful, constitute a public nuisance, and be abatable as such, and this remedy shall be considered a cumulative one, and enforceable by the city in a proper proceeding to be instituted by and in the discretion of the city manager. 
(b)  Violations of this article shall be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-34; Ord. of 12-14-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 10-147. - Construction of article with reference to disturbance of the peace, etc. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as permitting any person to so conduct or operate a teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub as unnecessarily to disturb the peace, comfort, and ordinary rest of the citizens residing in the neighborhood of such teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-35; Ord. of 12-14-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 10-148. - Permitting indecent behavior. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of or conducting any licensed teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub to permit any person or persons to engage in any indecent, lewd or lascivious behavior in any teenage dance hall or teenage nightclub. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-36; Ord. of 12-14-1989, § 1) 
Sec. 10-149. - Exceptions to article provisions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to dances that are held for benevolent or charitable purposes or to dances conducted under the auspices of governmental, religious, educational, benevolent, charitable or military organizations. 
(Code 1981, § 11.5-37; Ord. of 12-14-1989, § 1) 
Secs. 10-150-10-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to tax and license businesses, professions and occupations, § 2.204; authority to prohibit peddling on the streets, § 2.417. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate or prohibit peddling, itinerant vendors, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-913; fraud and deceit in sales, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1114; solicitation of charitable contributions, Code of Virginia, §§ 2.2-614.3, 57-48 et seq.; authority to license and tax peddlers, itinerant merchants, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717; authority to license and tax peddlers at wholesale, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3718. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-167. - Misrepresentations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to make any misrepresentation of himself, his product or otherwise, as an inducement to obtaining orders, sales or contributions. 
(Code 1967, § 26-5; Code 1981, § 18-1) 
State Law reference- Fraudulent offenses connected with sales, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-214 et seq. 
Secs. 10-168-10-187. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 10-188. - Door-to-door sales. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, vend or sell goods, wares or services on a door-to-door basis within the city, unless he shall first have obtained a permit from the chief of police to do so. The fee for such permit shall be 00in the amount allowed by state law for each year or fraction thereof. This section shall be construed to apply to persons who sell goods, wares or services, other than newspapers and fresh farm products of a perishable nature grown and produced by such persons for cash or who do not demand, accept or receive payment in advance of delivery or performance. 
(Code 1967, § 26-16; Code 1981, § 18-16) 
State Law reference- Maximum permit fee for door-to-door sales, exemptions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-913. 
Sec. 10-189. - Street sales. 
    No person shall peddle, sell, barter or trade upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city any vegetables, meats, fruits, goods or wares of any description, unless he shall have first obtained a permit. The fee for such permit shall be in the amount allowed by state law per year or fraction thereof. This section shall not be construed to require a permit of any person who offers for sale farm produce of a perishable nature grown and produced by him. 
(Code 1967, § 26-15; Code 1981, § 18-17) 
Charter reference- Authority to prohibit peddling on the streets, § 2.417. 
Sec. 10-190. - Application for certain permits. 
(a)  Any person desiring to secure a permit required by this division or division 3 of this article shall apply therefor, in writing, over his signature, to the city manager on forms provided by the city. Such application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the person by whom the applicant is employed. 
(3)  The length of service of the applicant with such employer. 
(4)  The place of residence and nature of the employment of the applicant during the last preceding year. 
(5)  The nature or character of the goods, wares, merchandise or services to be offered by the applicant. 
(6)  Prior criminal convictions, excluding traffic offenses, of the applicant, if any. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by such credentials and the identity of the applicant as may be reasonably required by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 18-18) 
Sec. 10-191. - Investigation of applicant. 
    On receiving an application for a permit under this article, the chief of police may make such investigation as he deems necessary before granting or denying the permit. 
(Code 1967, § 26-1; Code 1981, § 18-19) 
Sec. 10-192. - Certain permits. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this division or division 3 of this article, the applicant shall provide a current criminal background check obtained by the state police. If the city manager, or his designee, shall determine, after such investigation, that the person filing the application in question is of good character and proposes to engage in a lawful and legitimate commercial or professional enterprise, he shall, subject to the payment of any permit fee, issue the permit applied for. Such permit shall be issued on forms prepared for such purpose and shall set forth identification of the holder, shall state the company represented and contain any other pertinent information deemed desirable by the city manager, or his designee. 
(b)  Any of the following findings by the city manager, or his designee, shall constitute grounds for the denial of a permit required by this division or division 3 of this article: 
(1)  The applicant has not properly completed the permit application or that he has falsified such application in a material manner. 
(2)  The applicant has a criminal record which reveals a pattern of criminal misconduct involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  The applicant has a history of taking orders for goods, wares and merchandise which are not subsequently delivered in accordance with the terms of the order or which are not of the quality represented by the seller, city manager, police department or commissioner of revenue. 
(4)  The applicant consistently fails to cooperate with law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(Code 1981, § 18-20) 
Sec. 10-193. - Denial. 
    The chief of police shall deny any application for a permit under this article when, the person filing the application and the business or project in question, either or both, are or have become undesirable or offensive, or show possibilities of fraud, or appear detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the city and its residents. In the event any such request or application is denied by the chief of police, such denial may be appealed to the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 26-2; Code 1981, § 18-21) 
Sec. 10-194. - Revocation. 
    The chief of police may revoke a permit once granted under the provisions of this article when, in his opinion, the permittee and the business or project in question, either or both, are or have become undesirable or offensive, or show possibilities of fraud, or appear detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the city and its residents. In the event any permit is so revoked by the chief of police, such revocation may be appealed to the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 26-4; Code 1981, § 18-22) 
Sec. 10-195. - Expiration. 
    Permits granted under the provisions of this article shall expire on December 31 of the year in which granted. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on any activity regulated by this article after such expiration date unless a new permit has been obtained therefor. 
(Code 1967, § 26-3; Code 1981, § 18-23) 
Secs. 10-196-10-213. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOLICITATION OF PREPAID ORDERS 

Sec. 10-214. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Solicitor means any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in the city, selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for, goods, wares, merchandise, publications, plants or edibles or any article for future delivery or for services to be performed in the future or for making, manufacturing or repairing of any article or thing for future delivery, where such solicitors demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery or performance. 
(Code 1967, § 26-8; Code 1981, § 18-36) 
Sec. 10-215. - Permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a solicitor without first securing a permit from the chief of police to do so. 
(Code 1967, § 26-9; Code 1981, § 18-37) 
Sec. 10-216. - Same-Application. 
    Any person desiring a permit, as required by this article, shall make application therefor to the chief of police on a form to be provided, stating the name and address of the applicant, name and address of the person he represents and the kind of goods or services offered for sale. 
(Code 1967, § 26-10; Code 1981, § 18-38) 
Sec. 10-217. - Fee. 
    For each permit, as required by this article, the person securing the permit in question shall pay to the chief of police a fee in an amount allowed by state law for each year or fraction thereof. This fee shall be used for the purpose of helping to defray the costs of administering and enforcing this article. 
(Code 1967, § 26-12; Code 1981, § 18-40) 
Sec. 10-218. - Orders. 
    All orders taken by solicitors shall be in writing, in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount paid in advance. 
(Code 1967, § 26-13; Code 1981, § 18-41) 
Sec. 10-219. - Copy of order. 
    One copy of each order taken by a solicitor shall be given to the purchaser. 
(Code 1967, § 26-14; Code 1981, § 18-42) 
Secs. 10-220-10-249. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SOLICITATION FOR CONTRIBUTIONS, ETC.[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Charitable solicitation, Code of Virginia, § 57-48 et seq.; certain action by city prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-614.3. 

Sec. 10-250. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a permit, as required in this article, shall make application on forms provided by the city therefor to the chief of police. Such application shall disclose the authority of the applicant and all required information as to the purpose, authority and details of the proposed solicitation and shall, if required, be accompanied by written evidence of such authority. 
(Code 1967, § 26-7; Code 1981, § 18-57) 
Chapter 12 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Election of governing body, § 3.4. 
State Law reference- Elections, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-1 et seq.; establishment of election districts or precincts, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-307; polling places, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-310; election of certain municipal officers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-40.1; elections on issues of indebtedness, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-235.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLLING PLACES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Polling places, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-310. 

Sec. 12-19. - Voting places. 
    The voting places for the two precincts for the city are in the city municipal building. 
(Code 1967, §§ 8-3, 8-4; Code 1981, §§ 7-1, 7-2; Ord. No. 75-13, 8-28-1975) 
Secs. 12-20-12-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Wards, § 3.1; elections, § 3.4; 
State Law reference- Wards in cities, Code of Virginia, §§ 24.2-304.1-24.2-309. 

Sec. 12-42. - First ward. 
    The first ward shall comprise all of the territory within the corporate limits of the city situated south of the centerline of Twenty-second Street. 
(Code 1967, § 8-1; Code 1981, § 7-16) 
Sec. 12-43. - Second ward. 
    The second ward shall comprise all of the territory within the corporate limits of the city situated north of the centerline of Twenty-second Street. 
(Code 1967, § 8-2; Code 1981, § 7-17) 
Secs. 12-44-12-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTION DATE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Election date, § 3.4. 
State Law reference- Alternative election date, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-222.1. 

Sec. 12-75. - Mayor. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 24.2-222.1, as amended, the mayor and councilmembers whose term currently expire on June 30, 2012, shall have their term in office shortened by six months but shall continue in office until their successors have been elected at the November general election and have been qualified to serve. 
(Ord. No. 11-1, 2-17-2011) 
State Law reference- Alternative election date, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-222.1. 
Sec. 12-76. - School board members. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 24.2-223, as amended, the term of school board members shall also conform to the new election cycle. 
(Ord. No. 11-1, 2-17-2011) 
State Law reference- Alternative election date, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-222.1; election of school board members to coincide with election of the governing body, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-223. 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to prohibit, regulate and abate all nuisances, § 2.404 
State Law reference- Power of city to prevent injury or annoyance from anything dangerous, offensive or unhealthy and to cause any nuisance to be abated, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115; abatement of nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-900 et seq.; abating public nuisances generally, Code of Virginia, § 48-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS AND CIRCULARS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Litter Control Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1414 et seq.; untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-216. 

Sec. 14-19. - Throwing, etc., handbills in streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit in any of the streets of the city any small handbills, generally denominated "dodgers," for advertising purposes. 
(Code 1967, § 3-3; Code 1981, § 3-1) 
Sec. 14-20. - Affixing to trees or public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to paint any advertisement upon, or to post or otherwise affix any advertisement to, trees, traffic signs and public property or the city's bridges. All such advertisements shall be taken down or removed at once by the police or at their direction. 
(Code 1967, § 3-2; Code 1981, § 3-2) 
Sec. 14-21. - Placing material in vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed handbills, cards, posters or other advertising material on or in motor vehicles parked on the streets or parking lots of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 3-1; Code 1981, § 3-3) 
Secs. 14-22-14-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Erosion and Sediment Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq. 

Sec. 14-46. - Title, purpose and authority. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance of the City of Buena Vista." The purpose of this article is to prevent degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other natural resources of the city by establishing requirements for the control of soil erosion, sediment deposition and nonagricultural runoff and by establishing procedures whereby these requirements shall be administered and enforced. 
(b)  This article is authorized by the Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq., known as the "Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law." 
(Ord. of 11-26-1996(01), § 8-1; Ord. of 5-10-2007, § 8-1) 
Sec. 14-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agreement in lieu of a plan means a contract between the plan-approving authority and the owner that specifies conservation measures that must be implemented in the construction of a single-family residence; this contract may be executed by the plan-approving authority in lieu of a formal site plan. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan for approval or requesting the issuance of a permit, when required, authorizing land-disturbing activities to commence. 
    Board means the state soil and water conservation board. 
    Certified inspector means an employee or agent of a program authority who: 
(1)  Holds a certificate of competence from the state soil and water conservation board in the area of project inspection; or 
(2)  Is enrolled in the board's training program for project inspection and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
    Certified plan reviewer means an employee or agent of a program authority who: 
(1)  Holds a certificate of competence from the state soil and water conservation board in the area of plan review; 
(2)  Is enrolled in the board's training program for plan review and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment; or 
(3)  Is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400 et seq. 
    Certified program administrator means an employee or agent of a program authority who: 
(1)  Holds a certificate of competence from the state soil and water conservation board in the area of program administration; or 
(2)  Is enrolled in the state soil and water conservation board's training program for program administration and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
    City means the City of Buena Vista. 
    Clearing means any activity which removes the vegetative ground cover including, but not limited to, root mat removal or top soil removal. 
    Department means the state department of conservation and recreation. 
    Development means a tract of land developed or to be developed as a single unit under single ownership or unified control which is to be used for any business or industrial purpose or is to contain three or more residential dwelling units. 
    Director means the director of the department of conservation and recreation. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan or plan means a document containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or group of units of land. The term "erosion and sediment control plan" or "plan" may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and water plan inventory, and management information with needed interpretations and a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain all major conservation decisions and all information deemed necessary by the plan approving authority to assure that the entire unit or units of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives. 
    Erosion impact area. 
(1)  The term "erosion impact area" means an area of land not associated with current land-disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. 
(2)  The term "erosion impact area" does not apply to any lot or parcel of land of 10,000 square feet or less used for residential purposes. 
    Excavating means any digging, scooping or other methods of removing earth materials. 
    Filling means any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials. 
    Grading means any excavating or filling of earth material or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled conditions. 
    Land-disturbing activity. 
(1)  The term "land-disturbing activity" means any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands in the commonwealth, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
(2)  The term "land-disturbing activity" does not include: 
a.  Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work; 
b.  Individual service connections; 
c.  Installation, maintenance, or repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard-surfaced road, street or sidewalk provided the land-disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard-surfaced; 
d.  Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for land-disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system; 
e.  Surface or deep mining activities authorized under a permit issued by the department of mines, minerals and energy; 
f.  Exploration or drilling for oil and gas including the well site, roads, feeder lines and off-site disposal areas; 
g.  Tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, or livestock feedlot operations; including engineering operations and agricultural engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the Dam Safety Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-604 et seq., ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1100 et seq. or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1163B; 
h.  Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company; 
i.  Agricultural engineering operations including but not limited to the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the provisions of the Dam Safety Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-604 et seq., ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation; 
j.  Disturbed land areas of less than 10,000 square feet in size; 
k.  Installation of fence and sign posts or telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; 
l.  Shoreline erosion control projects on tidal waters when all of the land-disturbing activities are within the regulatory authority of and approved by local wetlands boards, the Marine Resources Commission or the United States Army Corps of Engineers; however, any associated land that is disturbed outside of this exempted area shall remain subject to this article; and 
m.  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and emergency repairs; however, if the land-disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, if the activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of the plan-approving authority. 
    Land disturbing permit means a permit issued by the city for the clearing, filling, excavating, grading, transporting of land or for any combination thereof or for any purpose set forth herein. 
    Local erosion and sediment control program or local control program means an outline of the various methods employed by the city to regulate land-disturbing activities and thereby minimize erosion and sedimentation in compliance with the state program and may include such items as local ordinances, policies and guidelines, technical materials, inspection, enforcement and evaluation. 
    Natural channel design concepts means the utilization of engineering analysis and fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating or recreating a stream that conveys its bankfill storm event within its banks and allows larger flows to access its bankfull bench and its floodplain. 
    Owner means the owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
    Peak flow rate means the maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a particular location. 
    Permittee means the person to whom the permit authorizing land-disturbing activities is issued or the person who certifies that the approved erosion and sediment control plan will be followed. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
    Plan-approving authority means the city-certified program administrator responsible for determining the adequacy of a plan submitted for land-disturbing activities on a unit or units of lands and for approving plans. 
    Program authority means the city which has adopted a soil erosion and sediment control program that has been approved by the board. 
    Responsible land disturber means an individual from the project or development team, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out a land-disturbing activity covered by an approved plan or agreement in lieu of a plan, who: 
(1)  Holds a responsible land disturber certificate of competence; 
(2)  Holds a current certificate of competence from the board in the areas of combined administration, program administration, inspection, or plan review; 
(3)  Holds a current contractor certificate of competence for erosion and sediment control; or 
(4)  Is licensed in the state as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400 et seq. 
    Runoff volume means the volume of water that runs off the land development project from a prescribed storm event. 
    Single-family residence means a noncommercial dwelling that is occupied exclusively by one family. 
    State erosion and sediment control program or state program means the program administered by the state soil and water conservation board pursuant to the Code of Virginia including regulations designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
    State waters means all waters on the surface and under the ground wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction. 
    Transporting means any moving of earth materials from one place to another place other than such movement incidental to grading, when such movement results in destroying the vegetative ground cover either by tracking or the buildup of earth materials to the extent that erosion and sedimentation will result from the soil or earth materials over which such transporting occurs. 
    Water quality volume means the volume equal to the first one-half inch of runoff multiplied by the impervious surface of the land development project. 
(Ord. of 11-26-1996(01), § 8-2; Ord. of 5-10-2007, § 8-2) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560. 
Sec. 14-48. - Penalties, injunctions, and other legal actions. 
(a)  Violators of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon a finding of the city district court, be assessed a civil penalty. The civil penalty for any one violation shall be not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00. Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $10,000.00, except that a series of violations arising from the commencement of land-disturbing activities without an approved plan for any site shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $10,000.00. (Note: The adoption of civil penalties according to this schedule shall be in lieu of criminal sanctions and shall preclude the prosecution of such violation as a misdemeanor under subsection (a) of this section. Refer to Code of Virginia, § 10.1-562K.) 
(c)  The city's certified program administrator or the owner of property which has sustained damage or which is in imminent danger of being damaged, may apply to the city circuit court to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this article, without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. However, an owner of property shall not apply for injunctive relief unless: 
(1)  He has notified in writing the person who has violated the local program, and the program authority, that a violation of the local program has caused, or creates a probability of causing, damage to his property; and 
(2)  Neither the person who has violated the local program nor the program authority has taken corrective action within 15 days to eliminate the conditions which have caused, or create the probability of causing, damage to his property. 
(d)  In addition to any criminal penalties provided under this article, any person who violates any provision of this article may be liable to the city in a civil action for damages. 
(e)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this section, any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation. A civil action for such violation or failure may be brought by the city. Any civil penalties assessed by a court shall be paid into the treasury of the city, except that where the violator is the locality itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(f)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any regulation or condition of a permit or any provision of this article, the city may provide for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed the limit specified in subsection (e) of this section. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under subsection (e) of this section. 
(g)  The commonwealth's attorney shall, upon request of the city or the permit issuing authority, take legal action to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(h)  Compliance with the provisions of this article shall be prima facie evidence in any legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion, siltation or sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met, and the complaining party must show negligence in order to recover any damages. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2007, § 8-7) 
State Law reference- Penalties, injunctions, etc., Code of Virginia, § 10.1-569. 
Sec. 14-49. - Local erosion and sediment control program. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 10.1-562, the city hereby adopts the regulations, references, guidelines, standards and specifications promulgated by the board for the effective control of soil erosion and sediment deposition to prevent the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other natural resources. Said regulations, references, guidelines, standards and specifications for erosion and sediment control are included in but not limited to the "Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations" and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended. 
(b)  Before adopting or revising regulations, the city shall give due notice and conduct a public hearing on the proposed or revised regulations, except that a public hearing shall not be required when the city is amending its program to conform to revisions in the state program; however, a public hearing shall be held if the city proposes or revises regulations that are more stringent than the state program. 
(c)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 10.1-561, any land-disturbing activity that provides for stormwater management intended to address any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or manmade channels shall satisfy the flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or manmade channels as stated in the most current state regulations for both stormwater and erosion and sediment control. 
(d)  Pursuant Code of Virginia, § 10.1-561.1, an erosion control plan shall not be approved until it is reviewed and approved by the city's certified plan reviewer. Inspections of land-disturbing activities shall be conducted by a certified inspector. The erosion and sediment control program of the city shall contain a certified program administrator, a certified plan reviewer, and a certified inspector, who may be the same person. 
(e)  The city hereby designates the certified program administrator as the plan-approving authority. 
(f)  The program and regulations provided for in this article shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the certified program administrator. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2007, § 8-3) 
State Law reference- Local erosion control program, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-562. 
Sec. 14-50. - Land-disturbing activities submission and approval of plans; contents of plans. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until he has been issued a land disturbance permit from the city's plan approving authority. This includes the submission of an approvable erosion and sediment control plan to the city's certified program administrator. Where land-disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one local control program, an erosion and sediment control plan, at the option of the applicant, may be submitted to the state soil and water conservation board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned. Where the land-disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence, an agreement in lieu of a plan may be substituted for an erosion and sediment control plan if approved by the city's plan-approving authority. 
(b)  The standards contained within the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended, are to be used by the applicant when making a submittal under the provisions of this article and in the preparation of an erosion and sediment control plan. The plan-approving authority, in considering the adequacy of a submitted plan, shall be guided by the same standards, regulations and guidelines. When the standards vary between the publications, the state regulations shall take precedence. 
(c)  The plan-approving authority shall review plans submitted to it and grant written approval within 45 days of the receipt of the plan if it determines that the plan meets the requirements of the state soil and water conservation board's regulations and if the person responsible for carrying out the plan certifies that he will properly perform the conservation measures included in the plan and will conform to the provisions of this article. In addition, as a prerequisite to engaging in the land-disturbing activities shown on the approved plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, to the program authority, as provided by Code of Virginia, § 10.1-561, the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity. Failure to provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence prior to engaging in land-disturbing activities may result in revocation of the approval of the plan and the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. However, the plan-approving authority may waive the certificate of competence requirement for an agreement in lieu of a plan for construction of a single-family residence. If a violation occurs during the land-disturbing activity, then the person responsible for carrying out the agreement in lieu of a plan shall correct the violation and provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, as provided by Code of Virginia, § 10.1-561, the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law. Failure to provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)  The plan shall be acted upon within 45 days from receipt thereof by either approving said plan in writing or by disapproving said plan in writing and giving specific reasons for its disapproval. When the plan is determined to be inadequate, the plan-approving authority shall specify such modifications, terms and conditions that will permit approval of the plan. If no action is taken within 45 days, the plan shall be deemed approved and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(e)  An approved plan may be changed by the plan-approving authority when the: 
(1)  Inspection reveals that the plan is inadequate to satisfy applicable regulations; or 
(2)  Person responsible for carrying out the plan finds that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of this article, are agreed to by the plan-approving authority and the person responsible for carrying out the plans. 
(f)  Variances. The plan-approving authority may waive or modify any of the standards that are deemed to be too restrictive for site conditions, by granting a variance. A variance may be granted under these conditions: 
(1)  At the time of plan submission, an applicant may request a variance to become part of the approved erosion and sediment control plan. The applicant shall explain the reasons for requesting variances in writing. Specific variances which are allowed by the plan-approving authority shall be documented in the plan. 
(2)  During construction, the person responsible for implementing the approved plan may request a variance in writing from the plan-approving authority. The plan-approving authority shall respond in writing either approving or disapproving such a request. If the plan-approving authority does not approve a variance within ten days of receipt of the request, the request shall be considered to be disapproved. Following disapproval, the applicant may resubmit a variance request with additional documentation. 
(g)  In order to prevent further erosion, the city may require approval of a plan for any land identified in the local program as an erosion impact area. 
(h)  When land-disturbing activity will be required of a contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the preparation, submission, and approval of an erosion and sediment control plan shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(i)  In accordance with the procedure set forth by Code of Virginia, § 10.1-563E, any person engaging, in more than one jurisdiction, in the creation and operation of wetland mitigation or stream restoration banks, which have been approved and are operated in accordance with applicable federal and state guidance, laws, or regulations for the establishment, use, and operation of wetlands mitigation or stream restoration banks, pursuant to a mitigation banking instrument signed by the state department of environmental quality, the Marine Resources Commission, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, may, at the option of that person, file general erosion and sediment control specifications for wetland mitigation banks annually with the state soil and water conservation board for review and approval consistent with guidelines established by the board. 
(j)  State agency projects are exempt from the provisions of this article except as provided for in the Code of Virginia, § 10.1-564. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2007, § 8-4) 
State Law reference- Land-disturbing activities plan, etc., Code of Virginia, § 10.1-563. 
Sec. 14-51. - Permits; fees; security for performance. 
(a)  Agencies authorized under any other law to issue grading, building, or other permits for activities involving land-disturbing activities may not issue any such permit unless the applicant submits with his application an approved erosion and sediment control plan and certification that the plan will be followed. 
(b)  No person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until he has acquired a land disturbing permit, unless the proposed land-disturbing activity is specifically exempt from the provisions of this article, and has paid the fees and posted the required bond or acceptable letter of credit or cashier's check. 
(c)  The fees are as stated in the city's current fee schedule which is on file in the city offices. 
(d)  No land-disturbing permit shall be issued until the applicant submits with his application an approved erosion and sediment control plan and certification that the plan will be followed. 
(e)  All applicants for permits shall provide to the city a performance bond, cash, cashier's check or an irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the city's plan approving authority to ensure that measures could be taken by the city at the applicant's expense should the applicant fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation measures required of him by the approved plan as a result of his land-disturbing activity. The amount of the bond or other security for performance shall not exceed the total of the estimated cost to initiate and maintain appropriate conservation action based on unit price for new public or private sector construction in the locality and a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs and inflation which shall not exceed 25 percent of the cost of the conservation action. Should it be necessary for the city to take such conservation action, the city may collect from the applicant any costs in excess of the amount of the surety held. 
(f)  Within 60 days of adequate stabilization, as determined by the city's certified program administrator in any project or section of a project, such bond, cashier's check or letter of credit, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be either refunded to the applicant or terminated, based upon the percentage of stabilization accomplished in the project or project section. These requirements are in addition to all other provisions relating to the issuance of permits and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements for such permits. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2007, § 8-5) 
State Law reference- Permits, security for performance, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-565. 
Sec. 14-52. - Monitoring, reports and inspections. 
(a)  The city may require the person responsible for carrying out the plan to monitor the land-disturbing activity. The person responsible for carrying out the plan will maintain records of these inspections and maintenance, to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
(b)  The city's certified program administrator shall periodically inspect the land-disturbing activity in accordance with 4VAC50-30-60 of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. The owner, permittee, or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be given notice of the inspection. It is understood that the required visits within a 48-hour rain event will be made and may not be scheduled. However, notification of such visits will be provided to the owner, permittee or other person as stated in section 14-51. If the city's certified program administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or in the plan certification, or by delivery at the site of the land-disturbing activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the specified time, the permit may be revoked and the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties provided by this article. 
(c)  Upon determination of a violation of this article, the city's certified program administrator may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in this article, issue an order requiring that all or part of the land-disturbing activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. If land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan, the city's certified program administrator may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in this article, issue an order requiring that all of the land-disturbing activities be stopped until an approved plan or any required permits are obtained. Where the alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth, or where the land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan or any required permits, such an order may be issued without regard to whether the permittee has been issued a notice to comply as specified in this article. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the permittee has failed to comply with such a notice to comply. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for a period of seven days from the date of service pending application by the enforcing authority or permit holder for appropriate relief to the circuit court of the city. If the alleged violator has not obtained an approved plan or any required permits within seven days from the date of service of the order, the city's certified program administrator may issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work on the site, other than corrective measures, be stopped until an approved plan and any required permits have been obtained. Such an order shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or the land records of the city. The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the circuit court of the city. Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey an order issued by the department of planning may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the circuit court of the city to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion and approval of corrective action or obtaining an approved plan or any required permits, the order shall immediately be lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city's certified program administrator from taking any other action authorized by this article. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2007, § 8-6) 
State Law reference- Monitoring, reports, inspections, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-566. 
Sec. 14-53. - Appeals and judicial review. 
(a)  Any applicant under the provision of this article who is aggrieved by any action of the city or its agent in disapproving plans submitted pursuant to this article shall have the right to apply for and receive a review of such action by the city council provided an appeal is filed within 30 days from the date of the action. Any applicant who seeks an appeal hearing before the city council shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled city council public hearing, provided that the city council and other involved parties have at least 30 days' prior notice. In reviewing the agent's actions, the city council shall consider evidence and opinions presented by the aggrieved applicant and agent. After considering the evidence and opinions, the city council may affirm, reverse or modify the action. The city council's decision shall be final, subject only to review by the city circuit court. 
(b)  Final decisions of the city under this article shall be subject to review by the city circuit court, provided an appeal is filed within 30 days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties, or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2007, § 8-8) 
Secs. 14-54-14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 13-01, adopted Jan. 24, 2013, replaced in its entirety Ch. 14, Noise, which had been codified as Art. IV, §§ 14-80-14-90, and derived from Ord. of 9-3-2009. In order to maintain the alphanumeric style of the Code, Ord. No. 13-01 provisions have been redesignated and the original ordinance sections have been retained in the history notes following each section. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate use of air cannons, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-918. 

Sec. 14-81. - Mission and policy. 
    The council for the City of Buena Vista hereby finds that excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, peace, safety and quality of life of its citizens; that the citizens of the city have the right to and should be ensured an environment that is substantially free of excessive sound that may jeopardize the public health, welfare, peace, safety and quality of life. It is therefore the policy of the city to prevent such excessive sound. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 14-1, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-82. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical injury or illness or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
    Emergency work. Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical injury or illness or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
    Motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce. Any vehicle for which regulations apply pursuant to Section 18 of the Federal Noise Control Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-574), as amended, pertaining to motor carriers engaged in interstate commerce. 
    Motorcycle. Any motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground and any four-wheeled vehicle weighing less than 500 pounds and equipped with an engine of less than six horsepower, excepting farm tractors. 
    Motor vehicle. Any self-propelled device or device designed for self-propulsion, upon or by which any person or property is or may be drawn or transported upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary wheels or tracks. 
    Noise. Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
    Public area. Any real property owned by the government, including, but not limited to, public rights-of-way, sidewalks, parks and buildings. 
    Residential dwelling. Any building or other structure in which one or more persons resides on a permanent or temporary basis, including, but not limited to, houses, apartments, condominiums, hotels and motels. 
    Restaurant. Any building or structure where in the normal course of business, food or drink is available for eating on the premises, in consideration for payment. For purposes of this chapter, the term restaurant includes, but is not limited to, bars, lounges, taverns, coffee shops and cafes. 
    Sound. An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristics of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
    Sound generation. Any conduct, activity or operation, whether human, mechanical, electronic other, and whether continuous, intermittent or sporadic, and whether stationary or ambulatory in nature, which produces or results in an audible sound. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 14-2, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-83. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The police department shall be responsible for enforcement of this chapter and may be assisted by other city departments when necessary. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 14-3, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-84. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The person operating or controlling a noise source shall be guilty of any violation caused by that source. If that cannot be determined, any owner, tenant, resident or manager physically present on the property where the violation is occurring is reputably presumed to be operating or controlling the noise source. 
(c)  In addition to and not in lieu of the penalties prescribed in this section, the city may apply to the circuit court for an injunction against the continuing violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and may seek any other remedy or relief authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 14-4, 1-24-2013) 
State Law reference- Civil penalties for noise ordinance violations, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-980. 
Sec. 14-85. - Exceptions. 
    No provisions of this chapter shall apply to: 
(1)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; 
(2)  The emission of sound in performance of emergency work; 
(3)  Activities sponsored by the city; 
(4)  Activities authorized by a permit issued by the city; or 
(5)  Activities for which the regulation of noise has been preempted by federal law. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 14-5, 1-24-2013) 
State Law reference- Application of noise regulations to certain sport shooting ranges, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-917; regulation of noise created by activities permitted by the state department of mines, minerals and energy, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-980; regulation of noise from motorcycle, mopeds, motorized scooters or motorized skateboards, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-919; noise regulations in farm wineries, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2288.3; aircraft noise, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2295. 
Sec. 14-86. - Maximum sound levels and residential dwellings. 
(a)  Nighttime. No person shall permit, operate or cause any source of sound to create a sound level that can be heard in another person's residential dwelling during the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  Daytime. No person shall permit, operate or cause any source of sound to create a sound level that can be heard in another person's residential dwelling during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following activities or sources of noise shall be exempt from the daytime prohibition set forth in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  Band performances or practices, athletic contests or practices and other school-sponsored activities on the grounds of public or private schools, colleges or universities. 
(2)  Athletic contests and other officially sanctioned activities in city parks or facilities. 
(3)  Activities related to the construction, repair, maintenance, remodeling or demolition, grading or other improvement of real property. 
(4)  Gardening, lawn care, tree maintenance or removal, and other landscaping activities. 
(5)  Agricultural activities. 
(6)  Church bells, carillons, or calls to worship by other sound-producing devices. 
(7)  Religious or political gatherings to the extent that those activities are protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(8)  Public transportation, refuse collection and sanitation services. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 14-6, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-87. - Motor vehicle maximum sound levels; amplified sound from vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated a public or private motor vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time in such a manner that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle or motorcycle, when measured at a distance of 50 feet or more. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section or chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to play or operate, or permit the playing, use or operation of, any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker or other electronic device used for amplification of sound, which is located within a motor vehicle being operated or parked on public or private property within the city, including any public or private street or alley, in such a manner as to be audible to the human ear at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle in which it is located. 
    The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles driven in a duly authorized parade, nor to motor vehicle alarms or other security devices, nor to the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 14-7, 1-24-2013) 
State Law reference- Sound levels emanating from vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1049. 
Sec. 14-88. - Specific prohibitions. 
    The following acts are declared to be violations of this chapter. This enumeration shall not be construed to limit, in any way, the general prohibitions contained in section 14-6: 
(a)  Vehicle horns, signaling devices and similar devices. Sounding any horn, signaling device, or similar device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any right-of-way or in any public space continuously or intermittently for more than ten consecutive seconds, except when the sounding of any such device is intended as a danger warning. 
(b)  Nonemergency signaling devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any amplified signal continuously or intermittently from any bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device intended primarily for nonemergency purposes from any one location for more than ten consecutive seconds in any hourly period; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to the sounding of such devices by religious uses or by public bodies or agencies for testing, traffic control or other public purposes. 
(c)  Emergency signaling devices, security, burglar and fire alarms, etc. Sounding or permitting the continuous or intermittent sounding outdoors of any emergency signaling device, or any security, burglar or fire alarm, siren, whistle or similar device, including without limitation any motor vehicle security alarm, siren, whistle or similar device, for a period in excess of ten minutes in any residential area and 15 minutes in any other area, except in response to a burglary, attempted burglary, fire or other emergency. 
(d)  Audio and audio-visual devices, musical instruments, etc. The playing of any television, boom box, stereo, phonograph, radio, tape player, compact disc player, MP3 player, video player, musical instrument, drum, or any other device that produces or amplifies sound, including any such device in a motor vehicle, where the sound is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s) or operator(s) of the device and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound and is plainly audible and discernible at a distance of 50 feet or more from the source of the sound; provided, however that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any outdoor performance, parade, gathering, dance, concert, show, sporting event, or other event sponsored by the city or for which the city has granted a permit. 
(e)  Noise-sensitive areas. The making of any unreasonably loud and raucous noise within 200 feet of any school, place of worship, court, hospital, nursing home, or assisted-living facility while the same is being used as such, that interferes with the workings of the institution. 
(f)  Construction equipment The operation of any bulldozer, crane, backhoe, front loader, pile driver, jackhammer, pneumatic drill, or other construction equipment between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except when operated in the course of emergency work or as authorized by the city manager. 
(g)  Barking or howling dogs , No person, whether as tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, in charge of or control of the property where such dog is kept, or owner of such dog, shall harbor or keep a dog within the city which frequently or for a continued duration, howls, barks or makes other excessive, continuous or untimely sounds which are audible on the property of the complainant in the city. For the purpose of this section, "excessive, continuous or untimely sounds" shall mean any howling, barking or other noise which continues for 20 consecutive minutes or more with no cessation of such sounds for time periods greater than five minutes during the 20 consecutive minutes. For purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply: "Person" shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, joint-stock company, corporation, association, trust, estate, or other legal entity; and "Owner" shall mean any person who: (i) has a right of property in a dog; (ii) keeps or harbors a dog; (iii) has a dog in his or her care; or (iv) acts as a custodian of a dog. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 14-8, 1-24-2013) 
Sec. 14-89. - Sound levels; restaurants. 
    No person shall permit, operate or cause any source of sound to create a sound level emanating from a restaurant during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. that is plainly audible and at a distance of 50 feet from any of the restaurant's external walls when measured from any property other than the property on which the restaurant is located. 
(Ord. No. 13-01, § 14-9, 1-24-2013) 
Secs. 14-90-14-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NUISANCES AND PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE ENFORCEMENT[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-02, adopted Apr. 7, 2016, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, §§ 14-109-14-374, pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference- Abatement and removal of all nuisances, § 2.404. 
State Law reference- Cutting of grass, etc., on vacant property, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901; vacant buildings which are derelict, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-907.1; abatement and removal of nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-115; vacant building registration, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1127; rehabilitation of vacant buildings, Code of Virginia, § 36-99.01. 

DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-109. - Mission. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the community director to work in partnership with the Buena Vista citizens and any and all other government offices and/or departments of the City of Buena Vista in order to promote a safe, healthy and desirable living and working environment. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-110. - Authority. 
    The City of Buena Vista has adopted the Code of Virginia, Title 15.2, as amended, Counties, Cities and Towns, Subtitle II Powers of Local Government, Chapter 9 General Powers of Local Governments, Article 1 Public Health and Safety; Nuisances, and Chapter 11, Powers of Cities and Towns, Article 1 Uniform Charter Powers. The City of Buena Vista has also adopted definitions from the International Property Maintenance Code and Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, not inconsistent with the Code of Virginia, and subsequent amendments thereto. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-111. - Definitions. 
    Community director means the person or parties appointed by the director of the department of economic development to enforce this chapter. 
    Elements means those aspects of inclement weather conditions for which items routinely used within a household, not designed nor intended to function or exist for extended periods of time, such as rain, wind, and temperature extremes normally associated with outdoor conditions. 
    Exposed means circumstances under which items routinely used within a household will experience wear and tear due to their locations out of doors and/or the deleterious effects of the elements such that water may accumulate and/or which may shelter and/or encourage the harboring of rodents and/or mosquitoes, and/or materials which generate obnoxious odors and/or become an electrical shock or fire hazard. "Exposed" does not include a garage or fully enclosed porch that cannot be accessed from outside except through a closed door that can be locked. 
    Exterior property means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners, operators, or tenants of such premises. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, and trapping or by any other approved pest elimination method. 
    Garbage means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, excluding excrement, but including the carcasses of dead animals and fowl, with the exception of cows, horses, mules and goats, coming from private premises not destined for consumption as food. 
    Household appliances and furniture means those items routinely used within a household that have no weatherproofing qualities. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, as amended, which is inoperable, as defined by any one or more of the following: (i) any motor vehicle which is not in operating condition; (ii) a motor vehicle which for a period of 60 days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle; or (iii) a motor vehicle on which there are displayed neither valid license plates nor a valid inspection decal. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a motor vehicle that does not display an inspection decal or a decal which expired more than 60 days is an inoperable vehicle. Whenever the term vehicle is used in this chapter, it shall mean to include inoperable motor vehicle. 
    Litter includes trash, wastepaper, garbage or rubbish lying scattered about. 
    Notice . Under this chapter, notice shall be by hand delivery, United States mail, or other reasonable methods that the city adopts. 
    Nuisance means the doing of any act or the omission to perform any duty, or the permitting of any condition or thing to exist that endangers life or health, obstructs, or interferes with the reasonable or comfortable use of public or private property, tends to depreciate the value of property of others, or in any way renders other persons insecure in the life of the use of property. Whenever the term nuisance is used in this chapter, it shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. 
    Owner means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
    Penalty means a civil penalty for violation of any provision of this chapter, in conformance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-901, as amended. Each day a violation of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
    Person shall include individuals, corporations, partnerships, and all other legal entities, which may hold title to real or personal property. 
    Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any building or buildings thereon and other appurtenances. 
    Property means both real and personal. 
    Rubbish means any combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials, and other debris. 
    Shielded or screened from view means not visible by someone standing at ground level from outside of the property on which the subject vehicle is located. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed or a portion thereof. 
    Tenant means a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
    Trash means abandoned personal property, metal, lumber, garbage, rubbish, litter or debris openly lying on any premises or street, which might endanger the health of residents of the city. 
    Weeds means all grasses, annual plants, poison ivy, poison oak and vegetation, other than trees, shrubs, cultivated flowers, gardens or groundcover purposefully planted for bank stabilization. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-112. - Illustrative enumeration. 
    The existence of any of the following activities or conditions are hereby declared to be a public nuisance provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(1)  Any violation of Article II of this chapter pertaining to vacant land, exterior property, vacant and accessory structures. 
(2)  Any violation of Article III of this chapter pertaining to weeds or vegetation. 
(3)  Any violation of Article IV of this chapter pertaining to the duty to dispose of, and the accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials, metal, lumber, or other things that cause a blighting problem or adversely affects the public health or safety. 
(4)  Any violation of Article V of this chapter pertaining to any building, wall, or structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located. 
(5)  Any violation of Article VI of this chapter pertaining to the keeping of inoperable vehicles on any property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes. 
(6)  Any violation of Article VII of this chapter pertaining to any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes or other vermin, or promotes insect infestation. 
(7)  Any violation of Article VIII of this chapter pertaining to unsanitary conditions of swimming pools, spas or hot tubs. 
(8)  Any violation of Article IX of this chapter pertaining to household appliances and furniture. 
(9)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as conditions, substances or other causes, which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(10)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of immediately after death. 
(11)  Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any premises. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-113. - Violations in general. 
    Violation of any provision, duty or conditions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be enforceable by the community director as set forth in Article X of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-114. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to create, cause, permit, or maintain a public nuisance. It shall also be unlawful for any person to permit the continuation of a public nuisance after having been ordered to abate such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-115. - Notice issued for violation of this chapter. 
    Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city, the community director shall provide notice of a violation to the owner of the property on which the nuisance is located, as more specifically set forth in the terms and conditions in Article X. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-116. - Contents of notice. 
    The notice of violation of any article within this chapter shall include: 
(1)  A description of the violation; 
(2)  The location of the property; 
(3)  The amount of the penalty; and 
(4)  The date by which the nuisance must be abated. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-117. - Abatement by city. 
    If the owner fails to abate the nuisance by the date specified in the notice, the city through its agents or employees, may cause the condition to be abated, in which event the costs or expenses thereof, together with an administrative fee of $75.00, shall be assessed and billed to the owner and may be collected by the city as taxes are collected. The city shall prepare an affidavit certifying the costs and expenses incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-118. - City's cost declared lien. 
    Costs and expenses incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a lien against the property upon which the nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven and collected as provided for by law, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes and shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Secs. 14-119-14-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VACANT LAND; VACANT STRUCTURES; ACCESSORY STRUCTURES; EXTERIOR PROPERTY 

Sec. 14-150. - Vacant land; vacant structures. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner to maintain all vacant land and vacant structures in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition, free from stagnant water, filth, unsightly deposits, disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches including the conditions, substances or causes giving rise to the odors or stenches, and accumulation of all offensive, unwholesome, unsanitary, or unhealthy substances, which otherwise may cause a blighting problem, adversely affect the public health and safety. Further, any premises subject to be covered by stagnant water shall be raised or drained. Failure to do so shall constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-151. - Accessory structures. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner to maintain all accessory structures, including fences, detached garages and walls, in good repair and structurally sound. Failure to do so shall constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-152. - Exterior property. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises to maintain all exterior property in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition, free from stagnant water, filth, unsightly deposits, disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches including the conditions, substances or causes giving rise to the odors or stenches, and accumulation of all offensive, unwholesome, unsanitary or unhealthy substances, which otherwise may cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. Further, any premises subject to be covered by stagnant water shall be raised or drained. Failure to do so shall constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Secs. 14-153-14-172. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION 

Sec. 14-173. - Weeds prohibited; vacant developed or undeveloped property. 
    Weeds growing on vacant developed or undeveloped property shall constitute a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vacant developed or undeveloped property, including property upon which buildings or other improvements are located, to permit grass, weeds and other foreign growth on such property or any part thereof, in excess of ten inches in height. This section shall not apply to property zoned in the conservation district. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-174. - Weeds prohibited; occupied property. 
    Weeds growing on occupied property shall constitute a nuisance. It shall be unlawful to permit grass, weeds and other foreign growth on such property or any part thereof, in excess of ten inches in height. This section shall not apply to property zoned in the conservation district. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-175. - Weeds prohibited in public rights-of-way. 
    Weeds permitted to scatter and accumulate in public rights-of-way shall constitute a nuisance. It shall be unlawful to sweep or throw any dirt, weeds, or yard trimmings, including the cuttings or clippings from same, onto the sidewalks, gutters, streets, storm sewer inlets, or any public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-176. - Weeds and maintenance of the area between the roadway and the sidewalk. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any land or premises abutting upon any public street or alley right-of-way, including the sidewalk and between the sidewalk and curb, whether paved or not, and the duty of the owner of any unoccupied land or premises abutting upon any public street or alley right-of-way, including the sidewalk and between the sidewalk and curb, whether paved or not, to have any grass, weeds and other vegetable matter cut and removed, and at all times to prevent such area from becoming unsightly, impeded or offensive by reason of failure to remove any such materials. No grass, weeds or other vegetable matter cut and removed shall be deposited or piled in any gutter, street or stormwater system, but shall be placed in a proper receptacle for collection. The owner of land or premises abutting upon a street right-of-way area upon which any grass, weeds or other vegetable matter is found contrary to the provisions of this section shall be prima facie the person responsible. Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing any person to cut or remove any city tree or bush without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Secs. 14-177-14-203. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ACCUMULATION OF TRASH; DUTY TO DISPOSE 

Sec. 14-204. - Accumulation of trash prohibited. 
    Accumulation of trash shall constitute a nuisance. It shall be unlawful to allow the accumulation of any trash in or around the exterior property or the interior of any structures, which might endanger the health or safety of other residents. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-205. - Garbage disposal container. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises to dispose of all trash or other debris in privately owned metal or plastic watertight containers with a tight-fitting lid no larger than 32 gallons in capacity, provided for such use or in authorized facilities provided for such purpose. It shall further be the duty of the owner to keep the container tightly covered at all times, except when momentarily opened to deposit garbage or have the contents removed therefrom, placed in an authorized collection vehicle, and thereafter replace the lid tightly on the container. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Secs. 14-206-14-233. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - BUILDINGS, WALLS AND OTHER STRUCTURES 

Sec. 14-234. - Condition of buildings, walls and other structures. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises to maintain any buildings, walls or other structures in a condition which endangers the health and safety of the public, or which are dangerous, unsanitary, or detrimental to the health, morals, aesthetic sensibilities, safety, convenience and/or welfare of the inhabitants of the City. Such conditions shall constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Secs. 14-235-14-261. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - KEEPING OF INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 14-262. - Restriction on keeping of inoperable motor vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises to keep any inoperable motor vehicle, not within a fully enclosed building or structure or otherwise shielded or screened from view, on any property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes. Failure to do so shall constitute a nuisance. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which on June 26, 1970, is regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Secs. 14-263-14-287. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RODENT HARBORAGE AND INFESTATION 

Sec. 14-288. - Rodent harborage and infestation. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises to keep all structures and exterior property free from rodent harborage, and insect and rodent infestation. Failure to do so shall constitute a nuisance. All structures or exterior property in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken by the owner to eliminate rodent harborage, and insect and rodent reinfestation. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Secs. 14-289-14-309. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SWIMMING POOLS; SPAS; HOT TUBS 

Sec. 14-310. - Swimming pool unsanitary conditions prohibited. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises on which there exists a swimming pool, spa and/or hot tub, to maintain such in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. Failure to do so shall constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Secs. 14-311-14-338. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES AND FURNITURE 

Sec. 14-339. - Household appliances and furniture prohibited outside any dwelling. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner therein of any dwelling to leave or permit to remain outside of the dwelling, any household appliances or furniture in such a manner that same is exposed to the elements. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-340. - Exceptions. 
    The following shall constitute specific exceptions to any alleged violation of this article: 
(1)  That such furniture and/or appliance was placed in an outside location in order to allow it to be moved, or removed as part of a trash or recycling program on a day scheduled for such move or removal. 
(2)  That such furniture and/or appliance was temporarily placed in an outside location in order that it be offered for sale at a yard or garage sale, provided that: (i) it is located in an outside location only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; (ii) the person attempting to sell the furniture and/or appliance is out side during the period of the yard or garage sale; (iii) a sign is placed near the furniture and/or appliance indicating that it is for sale; and (iv) does not apply to any furniture and/or appliance that is in an outside location for more than two days in any six-month period. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Secs. 14-341-14-368. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 14-369. - In general. 
    Whenever the community director determines that there has been a violation or violations of any of the provisions, duties or conditions of this chapter, enforcement procedures and penalties shall be in the manner prescribed below. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the community director to determine satisfactory compliance by the owner for his or her abatement of violations of any of these articles. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-370. - Violations of divisions 2, 3, sections 14-174, 14-175, and division 9 (vacant land, vacant and accessory structures, exterior property; weeds and other vegetation on occupied premises, public rights-of-way; household appliances and furniture). 
(a)  Notice . When the community director determines that a violation of these articles exists, he or she shall provide notice to the owner in accordance with section 15-8 of this chapter. 
(b)  Abatement by the city. If the owner or fails to abate the nuisance by the date specified in the notice, the city will direct its agents or employees to abate or complete the abatement of the violation or violations. 
(c)  City's costs declared a lien on the property. In any case where, pursuant to these articles, the city has provided notice of a duty to abate a nuisance, the owner or has failed to comply, and the city has abated the violation or violations, the costs together with the $75.00 administrative fee shall be chargeable to and collected from the owner in any manner provided by law for the collection of state or local taxes. Every charge in excess of $200.00 which has been assessed against the owner and remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against the property. Such lien shall have the same priority as other unpaid local taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner at the time the liens were imposed. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-371. - Violations of division 3, section 14-173, and division 4 (weeds and other vegetation on vacant premises; accumulation of trash). 
(a)  Notice . When the community director determines that a violation of these articles exists, he or she shall provide notice to the owner in accordance with section 15-8 of this chapter. 
(b)  Abatement by the city. If the owner fails to abate the nuisance by the date specified in the notice, the city will direct its agents or employees to abate or complete the abatement of the violation or violations. 
(c)  City's costs declared a lien on the property. In any case where pursuant to these articles, the city has provided notice of a duty to abate a nuisance, the owner has failed to comply, and the city has abated the violation or violations, the costs together with the $75.00 administrative fee shall be chargeable to the owner and collected as taxes are collected. Every charge which has been assessed against the owner and remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against the property. Such lien shall have the same priority as other unpaid local taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner at the time the liens were imposed. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-372. - Violations of division 4 (buildings, walls and other structures). 
(a)  Notice . When the community director determines that a violation of these articles exists, he or she shall provide notice to the owner in accordance with section 15-8 of this chapter. 
(b)  Abatement by the city. If the owner fails to comply with the notice to abate the violation or violations within the time provided in the notice, the city, after not less than 30 days from the abatement date specified in the notice, will direct its agents or employees to remove, repair, or secure any building, wall or other structure in violation of this article, except when the structure is deemed by the city to pose a significant threat to public safety, the city may take action to prevent unauthorized access to the building within seven days from the abatement date. 
(c)  City's costs declared a lien on the property. In any case where pursuant to this article, the city has provided notice of a duty to abate a nuisance or securing of the building, wall or structure, the owner has failed to comply, and the city has either abated or secured the building, wall or structure, the costs together with the $75.00 administrative fee shall be chargeable to the owner and collected as taxes are collected. Every charge which has been assessed against the owner and remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against the property. Such lien shall have the same priority as other unpaid local taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner at the time the liens were imposed. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-373. - Violations of division 6 (inoperable vehicles). 
(a)  Notice . When the community director determines that a violation of these articles exists, he or she shall provide notice to the owner in accordance with section 15-8 of this chapter. 
(b)  Abatement by the city. If the owner of the premises fails to comply with the notice to remove, move to a fully enclosed building or structure, or otherwise shield or screen the vehicle from view, within the permitted time, the city will direct its agents or employees to remove the vehicle and, if neither the occupant or owner of the premises, is the owner of the vehicle, the city will, after giving additional notice to the owner of the vehicle in writing in the manner set forth above, dispose of the vehicle. 
(c)  City's costs declared a lien on the property. In any case where pursuant to this article, the city has provided notice removal of the vehicle, the owner has failed to comply, and the city has removed and disposed of the vehicle, the costs of both removal and disposal together with the $75.00 administrative fee shall be chargeable to the owner of the vehicle or premises and may be collected as taxes are collected. All costs with which the owner of the premises has been assessed and remains unpaid, shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed and continue until actual payment has been made to the city. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Sec. 14-374. - Violations of divisions 7 and 8 (rodent harborage and infestation; swimming pools, spas and hot tubs). 
(a)  Notice . When the community director determines that a violation of this article exists, he or she shall provide notice to the owner in accordance with section 14-116. 
(b)  Abatement by the city. If the owner fails to comply with the city's notice to abate the violation or violations, within the time permitted for abatement, the city will direct its agents or employees to abate or complete the abatement of the violation or violations. 
(c)  City's costs declared a lien on the property . In any case where pursuant to these articles, the city has provided notice of abatement, the owner has failed to comply, and the city has abated the violation or violations, the costs together with the $75.00 administrative fee shall be chargeable to and collected from the owner in any manner provided by law for the collection of state or local taxes. Every charge in excess of $200.00 which has been assessed against the owner and remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against the property. Such lien shall have the same priority as other unpaid local taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner at the time the liens were imposed. 
(Ord. No. 16-02, 4-7-2016) 
Chapter 16 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Powers regarding levy of taxes, § 2.2. 
State Law reference- Taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1 et seq.; city tax levies, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3000 et seq.; general authority of city relative to taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to levy ad valorem taxes, §§ 2.201, 2.213. 
State Law reference- Property taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3200 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-19. - Annual assessment; valuation of property. 
    The city council shall, annually, before July 1, fix the tax rates on all real and personal property properly subject to taxation within and by the city as of January 1 for personal property assessment and as of July 1 for real estate assessment in accordance with the Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3515-58.1-3518 and shall assess such taxes as may be required to provide for the needs and purposes of the city. In determining the valuation of property in the city, reference shall be had to the records of the commissioner of revenue. 
(Code 1967, § 28-1; Code 1981, § 26-1; Ord. of 6-14-1979; Ord. of 5-27-2008; Ord. of 5-21-2009) 
State Law reference- Authority for section 16-19, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1104, 58.1-3010, 58.1-3011. 
Sec. 16-20. - Public service corporation property. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3010 and 58.1-3011, all public service corporation property shall be taxed on a fiscal tax year using for such fiscal tax year the rate set for real estate taxation except that the assessment of said rate shall be upon the property at its value as of January 1, prior to said fiscal year. 
(Code 1981, § 26-2; Ord. No. 78-01, 2-9-1978; Ord. of 5-27-2008; Ord. of 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 16-21. - Tax on personal property. 
    There is hereby levied upon personal property a tax rate on the assessed valuation for the calendar year. The levy shall be based upon the value of such property as of January 1. 
(Ord. of 5-27-2008; Ord. of 5-21-2009) 
State Law reference- Personal property tax relief, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1636.20; personal property tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3523 et seq. 
Sec. 16-22. - Bills for taxes. 
    As soon as practicable after taxes are assessed as provided in section 16-19, the treasurer shall make or cause to be made for each taxpayer a tax bill substantially in the form prescribed by the state department of taxation and shall send by mail to each taxpayer a bill for such taxes. 
(Code 1967, § 28-2; Code 1981, § 26-3) 
State Law reference- Treasurer to mail tax bills, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3912. 
Sec. 16-23. - When taxes due and payable; penalty. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, all real estate taxes shall be due and payable on or before December 5 of one year and June 5 of the following year following the mailing thereof. A penalty of ten percent of the taxes due shall be assessed on any unpaid balance immediately after the applicable due date. 
(b)  Personal property taxes are due June 5 and December 5 of the same year. A penalty at the rate of ten percent is assessed on any unpaid balance immediately after the applicable due date. 
(Code 1967, § 28-3; Code 1981, § 26-4) 
State Law reference- Date treasurer to receive taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3913. 
Sec. 16-24. - Interest. 
(a)  Interest at the rate of ten percent per annum shall be assessed upon the real estate tax unpaid principal and penalty beginning July 1 immediately following June 30 of each tax year. 
(b)  Interest at the rate of ten percent per annum shall be assessed upon the personal property tax unpaid principal and penalty beginning January 1 immediately following December 31 of each tax year. 
(Code 1967, § 28-4; Code 1981, § 26-5; Ord. of 10-25-1984) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish due date, form of payment and penalty, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 16-25. - Semiannual payments. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916, the taxes on real estate are to be paid in two equal installments: 
(1)  The first of which shall be due on or before December 5; and 
(2)  The second of which shall be due on or before June 5. 
(Code 1967, § 28-16; Code 1981, § 26-42; Ord. of 6-26-1980) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish form of payment, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 16-26. - Time of billing. 
    The city treasurer shall mail to each taxpayer assessed with real estate taxes a bill in the form prescribed by the department of taxation. 
(Code 1967, § 28-18; Code 1981, § 26-43) 
Sec. 16-27. - Delinquent installments. 
    In the event that either installment under this article is not paid when due then the penalty is hereby levied on the unpaid tax in the amount of ten percent. In addition, interest at the rate of ten percent per annum is hereby levied on all such delinquent taxes commencing on July 1 following the fiscal year in which such taxes are due. 
(Code 1967, §§ 28-17, 28-20; Code 1981, § 26-45; Ord. of 6-26-1980; Ord. of 10-25-1984) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to impose penalty and interest, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 16-28. - Agricultural, horticultural, forest or open real estate special assessments. 
(a)  The city finds that the preservation of real estate devoted to agricultural, horticultural, forest and open space uses within its boundaries is in the public interest and, having heretofore adopted a land use plan, hereby ordains that such real estate shall be taxed in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3230 et seq., and this section. 
(b)  Application procedure for classification based on use. 
(1)  The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3230 and 58.1-3233.2 may, at least 60 days preceding the tax year for which such taxation is sought, apply to the commissioner of revenue for the classification, assessment and taxation of such property for the next succeeding tax year on the basis of its use, under the procedures set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3236. In any year in which a general reassessment is being made such application may be submitted until 30 days have elapsed after the notice of increase in assessment is mailed. Such application shall be on forms provided by the state department of taxation and supplied by the commissioner of revenue and shall include such additional schedules, photographs and drawings as may be required by the commissioner of revenue. An individual who is the owner of an undivided interest in a parcel may apply on behalf of himself and the other owners of such parcel upon submitting an affidavit that such other owners are minors or cannot be located. An application shall be submitted whenever the use or acreage of such land previously approved changes; provided, however, that such property owner must revalidate annually with the commissioner of revenue any applications previously approved. An application fee of $20.00 shall accompany each application. 
(2)  A separate application shall be filed for each parcel on the land book. 
(c)  Promptly upon receipt of any application, the commissioner of revenue shall determine whether the subject property meets the criteria for taxation hereunder. If the commissioner of revenue determines that the subject property does meet such criteria, he shall determine the value of such property for its qualifying use, as well as its fair market value. In determining whether the subject property meets the criteria set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3230, the commissioner of revenue may request an opinion from the director of the state department of conservation and recreation, the state forester or state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services; upon the refusal of the director of the state department of conservation and recreation, the state forester or state commissioner of agriculture and consumer services to issue an opinion or in the event of an unfavorable opinion which does not comport with standards set forth by the respective director, the party aggrieved may seek relief from any court of record wherein the real estate in question is located. If the court finds in his favor it may issue an order which shall serve in lieu of an opinion for the purposes of this section. 
(d)  The use value and fair market value of any qualifying property shall be placed on the land book before delivery to the treasurer and the tax for the next succeeding tax year shall be extended from the use value. 
(e)  There is hereby imposed a rollback tax and interest thereon, in such amounts as may be determined under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3237, upon any property as to which the use changes to a nonqualifying use. 
(f)  Rollback taxation procedure. 
(1)  The owner of any real estate liable for rollback taxes shall, within 60 days following a change in use, report back such change to the commissioner of revenue or other assessing officer on such forms as may be prescribed. The commissioner shall forthwith determine and assess the rollback tax, which shall be paid to the treasurer within 30 days of assessment. On failure to report within 60 days following such change in use and/or failure to pay within 30 days of assessment, such owner shall be liable for an additional penalty equal to ten percent of the amount of the rollback tax and interest, which penalty shall be collected as a part of the tax. In addition to such penalty, there is hereby imposed interest of one-half percent of the amount of the rollback tax, interest and penalty, for each month or fraction thereof during which the failure continues. 
(2)  Any person failing to report properly any change in use of property for which an application for use value taxation had been filed shall be liable for all such taxes, in such amounts and at such times as if he had complied herewith and assessments had been properly made, and he shall be liable for such penalties and interest thereon as may be provided by ordinance. Any person making a material misstatement of fact in any application filed pursuant hereto shall be liable for all taxes, in such amounts and at such time as if such property had been assessed on the basis of fair market value as applied to other real estate in the taxing jurisdiction, together with interest and penalties thereon. If such material misstatement was made with the intent to defraud the city, he shall be further assessed with an additional penalty of 100 percent of such unpaid taxes. 
(g)  The provisions of Code of Virginia, title 58.1, applicable to local levies and real estate assessment and taxation shall be applicable to assessments and taxation hereunder mutatis mutandis including, without limitation, provisions relating to tax liens and the correction of erroneous assessments, and for such purposes the rollback taxes shall be considered to be deferred real estate taxes. 
(h)  Original applications and annual revalidations for classification, assessment and taxation of agricultural, horticultural, forest or open space real estate shall be allowed to be received and accepted no later than July 1 of each year. 
(i)  The applicant shall be required to pay a late filing fee of $20.00. 
(Code 1981, §§ 26-46, 26-47; Ord. of 12-8-1983; Ord. of 5-25-1989) 
Sec. 16-29. - Assessment of new buildings. 
    All new buildings substantially complete or fit for use and occupancy prior to July 1 of the year of completion shall be assessed for real estate tax purposes when so completed or fit for use and occupancy. The commissioner of revenue shall enter upon the land book the fair market value of such building. The collection of taxes shall be in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3292. 
(Code 1981, § 26-48; Ord. of 1-8-1987) 
Secs. 16-30-16-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RELIEF FOR THE ELDERLY AND DISABLED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Exemption or deferral of taxes of certain elderly and handicapped persons, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210 et seq. 

Sec. 16-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affidavit means the real estate tax exemption affidavit. 
    Commissioner of revenue means the commissioner of revenue of the city or any duly authorized deputies or agents. 
    Dwelling means the fulltime, owned residence of the person claiming exemption, and the land on which it is situated, not to exceed one acre. 
    Exemption means exemption from the city's real estate tax according to the provisions of this division. 
    Frozen means the amount of the real estate tax paid in the year in which the applicant first qualifies after July 1, 1979, shall not thereafter be increased. 
    Net worth means the amount by which assets exceed liabilities. 
    Person means natural person. 
    Property means real property. 
    Taxable year means the fiscal year, from July 1 until June 30, for which exemption is claimed. 
    Totally and permanently disabled means unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of such person's life. 
(Code 1981, § 26-54; Ord. of 6-28-1979; Ord. of 4-24-1980) 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217. 
Sec. 16-48. - Violations. 
    Any person falsely claiming an exemption or deferral under this division shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 26-55; Ord. of 6-28-1979) 
Sec. 16-49. - Authorized. 
    A real estate tax exemption is provided for qualified property owners, who are totally and permanently disabled or who are not less than 65 years of age and who are eligible according to the terms of this division. Persons qualifying for exemption are deemed to be bearing an extraordinary real estate tax burden in relation to their income and financial worth. 
(Code 1981, § 26-56; Ord. of 6-28-1979) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to provide for the exemption provided for in this division, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210. 
Sec. 16-50. - Amount of exemption. 
    The person claiming and qualifying for exemption under this division shall be relieved of liability of 25 percent of the real estate tax levied on the qualifying dwelling and land. Such exemption shall be frozen at the same rate as established in the year in which the applicant first qualifies after July 1, 1979, and the real estate tax to be paid to the city shall not be increased during such time as the applicant continues to qualify for such exemption. Any reduction in real estate tax rates or assessments shall be in favor of the applicant, who shall pay the lesser amount. 
(Code 1981, § 26-57; Ord. of 6-28-1979; Ord. of 4-24-1980) 
Sec. 16-51. - Administration. 
    The exemption shall be administered by the commissioner of revenue according to the provisions of this division. The commissioner of revenue is hereby authorized and empowered to make such inquiry of persons seeking such exemption in conformance with the provisions of this division, including the requiring of answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemption as specified by this division. The commissioner of revenue may require the production of certified income tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income and/or financial worth. 
(Code 1981, § 26-58; Ord. of 6-28-1979) 
Sec. 16-52. - Conditions. 
    An exemption under this division shall be granted subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The title of the dwelling for which exemption is claimed is held, or partially held, on July 1 of the taxable year, by the person or persons claiming exemption. 
(2)  The head of the household occupying the dwelling and owning title, or partial title, thereto is 65 years old or older on July 1 of the current taxable year. 
(3)  The gross combined income of the owners during the year immediately proceeding the taxable year shall not exceed $25,000. Gross combined income shall include all of the owners' relatives living in the dwelling for which exemption is claimed. 
(4)  The total combined net financial worth of the owners as of December 31 of the calendar year immediately proceeding the taxable year shall not exceed $65,000.00. 
(5)  Amount of exemption. The person or persons claiming and qualifying for exemption prior to June 30, 2002, shall be relieved of liability of 25 percent of the real estate tax levied on the qualifying dwelling and land. Such exemption will be frozen at the same rate as established in the year in which the applicant first qualified after July 1, 1979, and the real estate tax to be paid to the city shall not be increased during such time as the applicant continues to qualify for such exemption. Any reduction in real estate tax rates or assessments shall be in favor of the applicant who shall pay the lesser amount. Any person or persons claiming and qualifying for exemption after July 1, 2002, shall be relieved of liability based on gross income by the following scale: 
$0.00-$6,000.00 80% reduction $6,001.00-$12,000.00 60% reduction $12,001.00-$18,000.00 40% reduction $18,001.00-$25,000.00 20% reduction  
Effective July 1, 2002, exemptions, except those noted under amount of exemption, will no longer be frozen but will be subject to change every year based on income, tax rate and assessment. 
(6)  Any person claiming exemption under disability shall provide a certification from the Social Security Administration, the Veterans' Administration or the Railroad Retirement Board or, if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit shall be provided by two medical doctors licensed to practice medicine in the state, to the effect that such person is "totally and permanently disabled" as that term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 58-760.1(e). 
(Code 1981, § 26-59; Ord. of 6-28-1979; Ord. of 4-24-1980; Ord. of 6-14-1984; Ord. of 9-28-1989; Ord. of 8-8-2002) 
Sec. 16-53. - Claims. 
(a)  Annually, and not later than November 15 of the taxable year, the person or persons claiming an exemption must file a real estate tax exemption affidavit with the commissioner of revenue. 
(b)  The affidavit shall set forth, in a manner prescribed by the commissioner of revenue, the names of the related persons occupying the dwelling for which exemption is claimed, their gross combined income and the total combined net worth of the owners and spouses. The affidavit shall also state whether the person or persons claim the age or disabled exemption. 
(c)  If, after audit and investigation, the commissioner of revenue determines that the person or persons are qualified for exemption, it shall be so certified to the treasurer, who shall deduct the amount of the exemption from the claimant's real estate tax liability. 
(Code 1981, § 26-60; Ord. of 6-28-1979) 
Sec. 16-54. - Change in status. 
    Changes in respect to income, financial worth, ownership of property or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which the affidavit is filed and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided in this division shall nullify any relief of real estate tax liability for the then-current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following. 
(Code 1981, § 26-61; Ord. of 6-28-1979) 
State Law reference- Change in circumstances, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3215. 
Secs. 16-55-16-81. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN REHABILITATED REAL ESTATE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Exemption for certain real estate, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3220 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 16-82-16-105. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Rehabilitated Residential Real Estate 

Sec. 16-106. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Date of application means the date upon which the application required in section 16-108, is filed with the city manager. 
    Exemption means an amount equal to the increase in assessed value of the structure after rehabilitation, over its assessed value on the date of the application. 
    Residential. A structure is residential if, after rehabilitation, not less than 80 percent of its floor space is devoted to dwelling units and common areas directly related to dwelling units. 
    Structure. A building not less than 75 years old on the date of the application is a 75-year structure; a building not less than 50 years old on that date is a 50-year structure. 
    Substantially rehabilitated. A structure is substantially rehabilitated when its assessed value upon completion of rehabilitation is increased by not less than 40 percent over its assessed value on the date of application. 
(Code 1981, § 26-65; Ord. of 1-12-1982, § 1(a)) 
Sec. 16-107. - Grant and term of exemption. 
    An exemption shall be granted to a substantially rehabilitated residential structure. An exemption may be conditionally approved, based upon a plan substantially to rehabilitate a residential structure, but such exemption shall not be granted until the structure is substantially rehabilitated. An exemption, once granted, shall commence on July 1 of the year following completion of rehabilitation and shall run with the real estate. In the case of a 75-year structure, the exemption shall run for ten years; in the case of a 50-year structure, the exemption shall run for five years. 
(Code 1981, § 26-66; Ord. of 1-12-1982, § 1(b)) 
Sec. 16-108. - Application for exemption. 
    An exemption shall be granted, or a conditional approval given, only after application by the owner of the structure, or one holding an option or contract upon it. Such application shall show compliance or projected compliance with all the terms of this division. 
(Code 1981, § 26-67; Ord. of 1-12-1982, § 1(c)) 
Sec. 16-109. - Processing fee. 
    An application for an exemption or for conditional approval of an exemption, shall be accompanied by a processing fee of $20.00. 
(Code 1981, § 26-68; Ord. of 1-12-1982, § 1(d)) 
State Law reference- Processing fee authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3220. 
Secs. 16-110-16-131. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Rehabilitated Commercial or Industrial Real Estate 

Sec. 16-132. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial. A structure is commercial if, after rehabilitation, it is primarily devoted to the provision of goods and services, or activities directly related to the provision of goods and services. 
    Date of the application means the date upon which the application required in section 16-134, is filed with the city manager. 
    Exemption means an amount equal to the increase in assessed value of the structure after rehabilitation, over its assessed value on the date of the application. 
    Industrial. A structure is industrial if, after rehabilitation, it is entirely devoted to the production of goods, or activities directly related to the production of goods. 
    Structure means a building not less than 25 years old on the date of the application. 
    Substantially rehabilitated. A structure is substantially rehabilitated when its assessed value, upon completion of the rehabilitation, is increased by not less than 60 percent over its assessed value on the date of application. 
(Code 1981, § 26-69; Ord. of 1-12-1982, § 2(a)) 
Sec. 16-133. - Exemption; grant and duration. 
    An exemption shall be granted to a substantially rehabilitated commercial or industrial structure. An exemption may be conditionally approved, based upon a plan substantially to rehabilitate a commercial or residential structure, but such exemption shall not be granted until the structure is substantially rehabilitated. An exemption, once granted, shall commence on July 1 of the year following completion of rehabilitation and shall run with the real estate for ten years. 
(Code 1981, § 26-70; Ord. of 1-12-1982, § 2(b)) 
Sec. 16-134. - Application. 
    An exemption shall be granted, or a conditional approval given, only after application by the owner of the structure or one holding an option or contract upon it. Such application shall show compliance or projected compliance with all the terms of this division. 
(Code 1981, § 26-71; Ord. of 1-12-1982, § 2(c)) 
Sec. 16-135. - Processing fee. 
    An application for an exemption or for conditional approval of an exemption, shall be accompanied by a processing fee of $20.00. 
(Code 1981, § 26-72; Ord. of 1-12-1982, § 2(d)) 
Secs. 16-136-16-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAX ON UTILITY SERVICE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Tax on water or heat, light and power, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814. 

Sec. 16-154. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    CCF means the volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of 100 cubic feet. 
    Commercial or industrial user means the owner or tenant of property used for business, commercial or industrial purposes, including the owner of master-metered apartment buildings, who pays for the utility service for said property. 
    Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity or natural gas services in this jurisdiction. 
    Gas utility means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in the state. 
    Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered means 1,000 watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called "co-generators") as the term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 56-594, it means the kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer generators. 
    Pipeline distribution company means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light. 
    Purchaser means every person who purchases a utility service. 
    Residential consumer means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes including, but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
    Residential user means the owner or tenant of private residential property or tenant of an apartment who pays for utility service in or for said property. 
    Seller means every person who sells or furnishes a utility service. 
    Service provider, provider of billing services. The term "service provider" means a person who delivers electricity to a consumer or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company that delivers natural gas to a consumer. The term "provider of billing services" means the person who bills a consumer for electric services rendered. If both the service provider and another person separately and directly bill a consumer for electricity service, then the service provider shall be considered the provider of billing services. 
    Used primarily relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
    Utility service means the local telephone service (excluding long distance messages), electric, gas and water and sewage service furnished within the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 28-5; Code 1981, § 26-76; Ord. No. 77-09, § 1(a)-(f), 10-13-1977; Ord. of 10-12-2000, § 26-76) 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3814J., 56-235.8, 58.1-2600, 58.1-2901. 
Sec. 16-155. - Penalty. 
    Any consumer of electricity or natural gas failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied under this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1967, § 28-15; Code 1981, § 26-77; Ord. No. 77-09, § 6, 10-13-1977; Ord. of 10-12-2000, § 26-79) 
Sec. 16-156. - Electric utility consumer tax. 
(a)  Levied. In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers. Such tax shall be 20 percent times the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the maximum rate as determined by state law on each kWh delivered monthly to residential consumers by the service provider not to exceed $3.00 per month. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers. Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of nonresidential consumers set forth as follows: commercial/industrial consumers. Such tax shall be 20 percent times the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the maximum rate as determined by state law on each kWh delivered monthly, not to exceed $30.00 per month. 
The conversion of tax pursuant to this article to monthly kWh delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following consumers of electricity are exempt from the tax imposed by subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Any public safety answering point as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813.1. 
(2)  Any church or religious body entitled to exemption pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3650 et seq. 
(3)  The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to the commissioner of revenue for the city on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3814.F and G, and 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify the commissioner of revenue of this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. Such remittance shall be done before the last day of the calendar month following the month the tax was received by the service provider. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this article if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The kWh will be divided by two; 
(2)  A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth in subsection (a) of this section; 
(3)  The tax determined by subsection (d)(2) of this section shall be multiplied by two; 
(4)  The tax in subsection (d)(3) of this section may not exceed twice the monthly maximum tax. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2000, § 26-77) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814. 
Sec. 16-157. - Local natural gas utility consumer tax. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities classified by "class of consumers" as such term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814.J, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers. Such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall be 20 percent times the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the maximum rate as determined by state law delivered monthly to residential consumers, not to exceed $3.00 per month. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers. Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month shown for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution company or a gas utility for the classes set forth as follows: commercial/industrial consumers. Such tax shall be 20 percent times the minimum monthly charge imposed by the service provider plus the maximum rate as determined by state law on each CCF delivered monthly to commercial/industrial consumers, not to exceed $30.00 per month. 
(3)  Monthly CCF. The conversion of tax pursuant to this article to monthly CCF delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following consumers of natural gas shall be exempt from the tax imposed by subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Any public safety answering point as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813.1. 
(2)  Any church or religious body entitled to exemption pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3650 et seq. 
(3)  The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers natural gas and shall remit the same to the commissioner of revenue for the city on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3814.H and I, and 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for natural gas but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify the commissioner of revenue of this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for natural gas and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. Such remittance shall be done before the last day of the calendar month following the month the tax was received by the service provider. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this article if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The CCF will be divided by two; 
(2)  A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth in subsection (a) of this section; 
(3)  The tax determined by subsection (d)(2) of this section shall be multiplied by two; 
(4)  The tax in subsection (d)(3) of this section may not exceed twice the monthly maximum tax. 
(Ord. of 10-12-2000, § 26-78) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814. 
Secs. 16-158-16-182. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Bank franchise tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq.; authority of city to levy bank franchise tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1208. 

Sec. 16-183. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bank means as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1201. 
    Bank holding company means any corporation that is organized under the laws of the commonwealth, is doing business in the commonwealth, and is a bank holding company under the provisions of the Federal Bank Holding Company Act of 1956. 
    Net capital means a bank's net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1205. 
(Code 1981, § 26-101; Ord. of 4-10-1980, § 28-4.1) 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1201. 
Sec. 16-184. - Penalty. 
    Any bank which shall fail or neglect to comply with any provision of this article shall be fined five percent of the tax due, which fine shall be recovered upon motion, after five days' notice in the circuit court of this city. The motion shall be in the name of the commonwealth and shall be presented by the commonwealth attorney for the city. 
(Code 1981, § 26-102; Ord. of 4-10-1980, § 28-4.5) 
Sec. 16-185. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1208, there is hereby imposed upon each bank located within the boundaries of this city a tax on net capital equaling the maximum authorized rate of franchise tax as set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1204 and 58.1-1204.1. 
(b)  In the event that any bank located within the boundaries of the city is not the principal office but is a branch extension or affiliate of the principal office, the tax upon such branch shall be apportioned as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1211. 
(Code 1967, § 28-4.1; Code 1981, § 26-103; Ord. of 4-10-1980, § 28-4.2) 
Sec. 16-186. - Filing of return and payment of tax. 
(a)  On or after January 1 of each year, but not later than March 1 of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located within this city shall prepare and file with the commissioner of revenue a return as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1207 in duplicate which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq. The commissioner of revenue shall certify a copy of such filing of the bank's return and schedule and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state department of taxation. 
(b)  In the event that the principal office of a bank is located outside the boundaries of this city and such bank has branch offices located within this city, in addition to the filing requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section, any bank conducting such branch business shall file with the commissioner of revenue or appropriate assessing officer of this city a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items required under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1212. 
(c)  Each bank, on or before June 1 of each year, shall pay into the treasurer's office of this city all taxes imposed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1981, § 26-104; Ord. of 4-10-1980, § 28-4.3) 
State Law reference- Filing of return, payment of tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1207. 
Secs. 16-187-16-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX ON LODGING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Transient occupancy tax authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3819; additional transient occupancy tax in the city, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3825. 

Sec. 16-211. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City treasurer means the treasurer of the city and any of his duly authorized deputies, assistants, employees or agents. 
    Director of finance means the director of finance of the city and any of his duly authorized deputies, assistants, employees or agents. 
    Hotel means any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, roominghouse or other lodging place within the city offering lodging, as defined in this section, for compensation to any transient as defined in this section. 
    Lodging means room or space the occupancy of which is suitable or intended for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, company, association, firm, copartnership or any group of individuals acting as a unit. 
    Transient means any person who, for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging at any hotel. 
(Code 1981, § 26-175; Ord. of 6-11-1987) 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3826. 
Sec. 16-212. - Violations of article. 
    Any person violating, failing, refusing or neglecting to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Conviction of such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the taxes provided for in this article. An agreement by any person to pay the taxes provided for in this article by a series of installment payments shall not relieve any person of criminal liability for violation of this article until the full amount of taxes agreed to be paid by such person is received by the treasurer. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation, and each day's continuance thereof, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 26-185; Ord. of 6-11-1987) 
Sec. 16-213. - Levy of tax and amount. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed by law, on each transient a tax equivalent to six percent of the total amount paid for lodging by or for any such transient to any hotel. Such tax shall be collected from each transient at the time and in the manner provided by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 26-176; Ord. of 6-11-1987; Ord. No. 12-10, 5-24-2012) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3819, 58.1-3825. 
Sec. 16-214. - Payment and collection of tax. 
    The person collecting any tax as provided in this article shall make out a report thereof upon such forms and setting forth such information as the director of finance may prescribe and require, showing the amount of lodging charges collected and the tax required to be collected and shall sign and deliver such report to the city treasurer with remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittance shall be made on or before the 20th day of each month, covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. 
(Code 1981, § 26-177; Ord. of 6-11-1987) 
Sec. 16-215. - Advertising payment or absorption of tax prohibited. 
    No seller shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that all or any part of the tax imposed under this article will be paid or absorbed by the seller or by anyone else, or that the seller or anyone else will relieve the purchaser of the payment of all or any part of the tax. 
(Code 1981, § 26-178; Ord. of 6-11-1987) 
Sec. 16-216. - Duty of seller when going out of business. 
    Whenever any seller required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1981, § 26-179; Ord. of 6-11-1987) 
Sec. 16-217. - Commission. 
    For the purpose of compensating sellers for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, every seller shall be allowed three percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his monthly return, provided the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Code 1981, § 26-180; Ord. of 6-11-1987) 
State Law reference- Commission authorized, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3819D. 
Sec. 16-218. - Enforcement; duty of director of finance. 
    The director of finance shall promulgate rules and regulations for the interpretation, administration and enforcement of this article. It shall also be the duty of the director of finance to ascertain the name of every seller liable for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such tax or to make the reports and remittances required by this article. The director of finance may have issued a summons for such person and may serve a copy of such summons upon such person in the manner provided by law. One return of the original summons shall be made to the general district court for the city. Police powers are hereby conferred upon the director of finance and duly authorized deputies, assistants, employees and agents while engaged in their duties pursuant to this article, and they shall exercise all the powers and authorities of police officers in performing such duties. 
(Code 1981, § 26-181; Ord. of 6-11-1987) 
Sec. 16-219. - Procedure upon failure to collect, report, etc. 
    If any seller whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article and to make, within the time provided in this article, the reports and remittances mentioned in this article, the director of finance shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the director of finance shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any seller who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such seller the tax and penalties provided for by this article and shall notify such seller, by registered mail sent to his last known place of address, of the total amount of such tax and penalties and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date such notice is sent. 
(Code 1981, § 26-182; Ord. of 6-11-1987) 
Sec. 16-220. - Duty of city treasurer. 
    The treasurer shall have the power and the duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied hereunder and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury for the city. 
(Code 1981, § 26-183; Ord. of 6-11-1987) 
Sec. 16-221. - Penalty for late remittance or false return. 
(a)  If any seller whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to file any report required by this article or to remit to the city treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the city treasurer a penalty in the amount of ten percent if the failure is not for more than 30 days, with an additional ten percent of the total amount of tax owed along with all penalties for late payment previously levied for each additional 30 days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not to exceed 25 percent in the aggregate, with a minimum penalty of $2.00. 
(b)  In the case of a false or fraudulent return with intent to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, a penalty of 50 percent of the tax shall be assessed against the person required to collect such tax. 
(Code 1981, § 26-184; Ord. of 6-11-1987) 
Secs. 16-222-16-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Tangible personal property tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3500 et seq.; proration of tax on vehicles and boats, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3516; tax on machinery and tools, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3507 et seq.; merchants' capital tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3509 et seq. 

Sec. 16-251. - Semiannual payments. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916, the taxes on tangible personal property, machinery and tools and merchant's capital are to be paid in two equal installments the first of which shall be due on or before June 5 and the second of which shall be due on or before December 5. 
(Code 1981, § 26-190; Ord. of 11-9-1989) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish dates for filing returns, establishing due dates, penalties and interest, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 16-252. - Time of billing. 
    The city treasurer shall mail to each taxpayer assessed with tangible personal property, machinery and tools and merchant's capital a bill or bills in the form prescribed by the department of taxation, which bill or bills shall be mailed not later than 14 days before the first installment is due. 
(Code 1981, § 26-191; Ord. of 11-9-1989) 
Sec. 16-253. - Delinquent installments. 
    In the event that either installment under this article is not paid when due then the penalty is hereby levied on the unpaid tax in the amount of ten percent. In addition, interest at the rate of ten percent per annum is hereby levied on all such taxes commencing on January 1 following the calendar year on which such taxes are due. 
(Code 1981, § 26-192; Ord. of 11-9-1989; Ord. of 5-21-2009) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish penalty, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 16-254. - Filing annual returns. 
    The annual tax return for taxable tangible personal property, machinery and tools and merchant's capital shall be filed by March 1 of each year. There is hereby assessed a penalty for failure to file the return by said date of ten percent of the tax assessable on such return or $10.00, whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax assessable. The assessment of such penalty shall not be deemed a defense to any criminal prosecution for failing to make return of taxable property as may be required by law or ordinance. The penalty for failure to file a return is assessed on the day after such return is due. Any such penalty when so assessed shall become a part of the tax. 
(Code 1981, § 26-193; Ord. of 11-9-1989; Ord. of 6-10-1993) 
Sec. 16-255. - Establishing classifications. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3503 and 58.1-3506, as amended, the city does hereby establish and create the following two classifications of tangible personal property: 
(1)  The first category shall be defined as the "general classification" and is established in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3503, as amended. 
(2)  The second category shall be defined as the "other classification" and is established in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3506(13), as amended. 
(b)  Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3506(13) establishes a separate category for motor vehicles owned by members of a volunteer rescue squad or volunteer fire department. 
(1)  Each member of good standing, co-certified by the volunteer rescue squad and volunteer fire department, may have one motor vehicle which is regularly used to respond to calls which may be specifically classified under this section. 
(2)  In January of each year, the volunteer rescue and volunteer fire department member shall furnish the commissioner of revenue with a certification that said volunteer is a member of good standing who regularly responds to calls or regularly performs other duties for the rescue squad or fire department and the motor vehicle (identified by the following description: manufacturer's name, model, year, color and vehicle identification number) is identified as regularly used for such purpose. 
(Code 1981, §§ 26-194, 26-195; Ord. of 12-13-1990) 
Secs. 16-256-16-273. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TAX ON PREPARED FOOD AND BEVERAGES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3833A, the increase of the tax on prepared food was adopted by referendum on May 24, 2012. 
State Law reference- Food and beverage tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 16-274. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have, for the purposes of this article, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cater means the furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
    Collector means the director of finance or designee. 
    Director of finance means the director of finance and any duly designated deputies, assistants, inspector or other employees. 
    Food means all food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Food establishment means any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the city, including, but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
    Meal means any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
(Code 1981, § 26-200; Ord. of 6-10-1993; Ord. of 7-13-2000, § I) 
Sec. 16-275. - Penalty for violations of article. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000.00 or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 26-213; Ord. of 6-10-1993; Ord. of 7-13-2000, § VIII) 
Sec. 16-276. - Levy. 
(a)  In addition to all other taxes and fees of any kind now or hereafter imposed by law, a tax is hereby levied and imposed on the purchaser of all food served, sold or delivered in the city in or from a restaurant, whether prepared in such restaurant or not and whether consumed on the premises or not, or by a caterer. The rate of this tax shall be six percent of the amount paid for such food. In the computation of this tax, any fraction of $0.005 or more shall be treated as $0.01. 
(b)  The revenue generated from two percent of the tax rate shall be dedicated to capital projects for the city. 
(Code 1981, § 26-201; Ord. of 6-10-1993; Ord. of 7-13-2000, § II; Ord. No. 12-09, 5-24-2012) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 
Sec. 16-277. - Collection of tax by seller. 
    Every seller of food with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of tax imposed under this article from the purchaser on whom the same is levied at the time payment for such food becomes due and payable, whether payment is to be made in cash or on credit by means of a credit card or otherwise. The amount of tax owed by the purchaser shall be added to the cost of the food by the seller who shall pay the taxes collected to the city as provided in this article. Taxes collected by the seller shall be held in trust by the seller until remitted to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 26-202; Ord. of 6-10-1993; Ord. of 7-13-2000, § III) 
Sec. 16-278. - Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of any seller of food liable for collection and remittance of the taxes imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, records showing gross sales of all food and beverages, the amount charged the purchaser of each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. The director of finance shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of the seller, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article and to make copies of all or any parts thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 26-204; Ord. of 6-10-1993; Ord. of 7-13-2000, § VI) 
Sec. 16-279. - Gratuities; service charges. 
(a)  Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
(b)  An amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser as a part of the selling price of the food and beverages, is subject to the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 26-206; Ord. of 6-10-1993; Ord. of 7-13-2000, § V) 
Sec. 16-280. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature served for on-premises or off-premises consumption. 
(b)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and factory-prepackaged items of essentially the same nature. 
(2)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision: 
a.  The term "bulk sale" means the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on-premises consumption (e.g., a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream); 
b.  The term "bulk sale" does not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption. 
(3)  Alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages sold in factory-sealed containers. 
(4)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the food stamp program or drafts issued through the state special supplemental food program for women, infants and children. 
(5)  Any food or food product "purchased for home consumption" as defined in the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 USC 2012, as amended except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the Federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables and nonfactory-sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subsections (e)(3), (4) and (5) of this section. 
(c)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(d)  No blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the Department for the Blind and Vision Impaired and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect and remit meals taxes. 
(e)  The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages which are: 
(1)  Furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee; 
(2)  Sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees; 
(3)  For use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States; 
(4)  Furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof and the spouses and children of such persons; 
(5)  Furnished by a public or private nonprofit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations; 
(6)  Sold on an occasional basis by a nonprofit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for nonprofit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes; 
(7)  Sold through vending machines. 
(Code 1981, § 26-214 Ord. of 6-10-1993; Ord. of 7-13-2000, § IV) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 
Sec. 16-281. - Discount. 
    For the purposes of compensating sellers for the collection of the tax imposed by this article, every seller shall be allowed three percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his monthly return, provided the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 7-13-2000, § VII) 
Secs. 16-282-16-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SERVICE CHARGE ON CERTAIN REAL PROPERTY[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Service charge on certain property, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3400. 

Sec. 16-311. - Imposition of charge. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3400, there is hereby imposed a service charge upon the owners of all real estate within the city which has been exempted from real estate taxation by those portions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3606.A.1, except property owned by the commonwealth, and Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3606.A.3, 4 and 7, 58.1-3607.A.2 through 7, and all sections in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3609 et seq., 58.1-3650 et seq., and 58.1-3651, and except owners of buildings with land they actually occupy, together with additional adjacent land reasonably necessary for the convenient use of any such building located within the city if the buildings are lawfully owned and held by churches or religious bodies and wholly and exclusively used for religious worship or the residence of the minister of any church or religious body or for use as a religious convent, nunnery, monastery, cloister or abbey, or those buildings used or operated exclusively for nonprofit educational or charitable purposes, other than faculty or staff housing of any such educational institution. 
(b)  Such service charge shall be based on the assessed value of the tax-exempt real estate and the amount which the city shall have expended in the year preceding the year such charge is assessed for the purpose of furnishing police and fire protection, for the collection and disposal of refuse and the cost of public school education in the case of faculty and staff housing of an education institution, excluding any amount received from federal or state grants specifically designed for such purposes. 
(c)  The expenditures for services not provided for certain real estate shall not be considered in the calculation of the service charge for such real estate, nor shall such expenditures be considered when a service is currently funded by another service charge. 
(d)  The service charge shall not exceed 20 percent of the real estate tax rate of the city imposing the service charge or 50 percent in the case of faculty and staff housing of an educational institution. 
(e)  The service charge rate shall be determined by dividing the expenditures listed in subsection (b) of this section by the assessed fair market value of all of the real estate within the city, except for real estate owned by the United States government or any of its instrumentalities, expressed in $100.00, including nontaxable property; provided that there first be listed and published by the commissioner of revenue or other assessing officer on the land books of the city, in the same manner as taxable real estate, all the exempt real estate. In the valuation of exempt real estate for purposes of this section, artistic and historical significance shall not be taken into account. 
(f)  Any person aggrieved by the assessment or the valuation of real estate for purposes of this section may apply to the commissioner of revenue or other assessing officer for correction thereof; if the commissioner or other officer finds that the assessment or valuation is erroneous, he shall correct the same. Any person aggrieved by the decision of such officer may appeal to the circuit court of the city, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3407. 
(Code 1981, § 26-221; Ord. of 9-14-1989) 
Secs. 16-312-16-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Business, professional and occupational license tax authorized, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3702, 58.1-3703, 58.1-3706. 

Sec. 16-341. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affiliated group means: 
(1)  One or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock-owned partnership with a common parent corporation which is an includable corporation if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other includable corporations; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other includable corporations. 
As used in this article, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "includable corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation; and 
b.  More than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one or more of the includable corporations, including the common parent corporation is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this article refers to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
    Assessment means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. The term "assessment" includes a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
    Assessor or assessing official means the commissioner of revenue. 
    Base year means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715; or set forth in any other exceptions in the jurisdiction's ordinance, such as provisions for beginning businesses or fiscal year options. 
    Broker means an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities or services, usually on a commission basis. 
    Business means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: 
(1)  Advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or 
(2)  Filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
    Commodity means staples such as wool, cotton, etc., which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures. 
    Contractor means as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714.B, as amended, whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract. 
    Dealer. 
(1)  The term "dealer" means any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account. 
(2)  The term "dealer" does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
    Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis; and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
    Financial services means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities and other investments and includes the service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise provided for in this article. Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Buying installment receivables. 
(2)  Chattel mortgage financing. 
(3)  Consumer financing. 
(4)  Credit card services. 
(5)  Credit unions. 
(6)  Factors. 
(7)  Financing accounts receivable. 
(8)  Industrial loan companies. 
(9)  Installment financing. 
(10)  Inventory financing. 
(11)  Loan or mortgage brokers. 
(12)  Loan or mortgage companies. 
(13)  Safety deposit box companies. 
(14)  Security and commodity brokers and services. 
(15)  Stockbroker. 
(16)  Working capital financing. 
    Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 
    License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
    Personal services means rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as financial, real estate or professional service under this article, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this article unless exempted from local license tax by Code of Virginia, title 58.1. 
    Professional services means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the state department of taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701. The department shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The term "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
    Purchases means all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of wholesale merchant. The term "purchases" also includes the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. Such merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
    Real estate services means rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent or broker and providing a real estate service, unless the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this article, and such services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Appraisers of real estate. 
(2)  Escrow agents, real estate. 
(3)  Fiduciaries, real estate. 
(4)  Lessors of real property. 
(5)  Real estate agents, brokers and managers. 
(6)  Real estate selling agents. 
(7)  Rental agents for real estate. 
    Retailer or retail merchant. 
(1)  The term "retailer" or "retail merchant" means any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser. 
(2)  The term "retailer" or "retail merchant" does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. 
    Security , for the purposes of this article, has the same meaning as in the Securities Act, Code of Virginia, § 13.1-501 et seq., or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities. 
    Services means things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares or merchandise. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale merchant means any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial, government and industrial users which because of the quantity, price or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(Ord. of 10-10-1996, § B) 
Sec. 16-342. - Overriding conflicting ordinances. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the commonwealth, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by the city council, whether or not compiled in this Code, to the extent of any conflict, the provisions in this article shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within this locality. 
(Ord. of 10-10-1996, § A) 
Sec. 16-343. - License requirement. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Acted responsibly means that the taxpayer: 
(1)  Exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business; and 
(2)  Undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
    Events beyond the taxpayer's control include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the assessing official, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
(b)  Every person engaging in this jurisdiction in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively referred to in this article as a "business") as defined in this article, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license for each such business if: 
(1)  Such person maintains a definite place of business in this jurisdiction; 
(2)  Such person does not maintain a definite office anywhere but does maintain an abode in this jurisdiction, which abode for the purposes of this article shall be deemed a definite place of business; or 
(3)  There is no definite place of business but such person operates amusement machines, is engaged as a peddler or itinerant merchant, carnival or circus as specified in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3717, 58.1-3718 or 58.1-3728, respectively, or is a contractor subject to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715 or is a public service corporation subject to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731. 
(c)  A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business. A person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  Each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of this jurisdiction; 
(2)  All of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and 
(3)  The taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
(d)  Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business, if he was not subject to licensing in this jurisdiction on or before January 1, of the license year, or no later than March 1 of the current license year if he had been issued a license for the preceding license year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the assessing official. 
(e)  The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts. If, the tax is measured by the gross receipts of the business, the tax shall be paid on or before March 1. 
(f)  The assessing official may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 30 days, in which to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause. The extension shall be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of ten percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
(g)  A penalty of ten percent of the tax, but not less than $10.00, may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the assessing official if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the assessing official, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the assessing official is not paid within 30 days the treasurer (or other collecting official) may impose a ten percent late payment penalty. The penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them, if the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. 
(h)  Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the assessing official is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any tax paid under this article from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than 30 days from the date of the payment that created the refund, or the due date of the tax, whichever is later. 
(Ord. of 10-10-1996, § C) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1.A.1, 2. 
Sec. 16-344. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this article is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within this jurisdiction. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to a definite place of business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality. 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed. 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(b)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule (and the affected jurisdictions are unable to reach an apportionment agreement), except as to circumstances set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3709, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of business on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to this jurisdiction solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
(c)  Agreements. The assessor may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of the commonwealth concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than 100 percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the assessor shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. If an agreement cannot be reached, either the assessor or taxpayer may seek an advisory opinion from the state department of taxation pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701; notice of the request shall be given to the other party. Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3993, when a taxpayer has demonstrated to a court that two or more political subdivisions of the commonwealth have assessed taxes on gross receipts that may create a double assessment within the meaning of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3986, the court shall enter such orders pending resolution of the litigation as may be necessary to ensure that the taxpayer is not required to pay multiple assessments even though it is not then known which assessment is correct and which is erroneous. 
(Ord. of 10-10-1996, § D) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1.A.3. 
Sec. 16-345. - Limitations and extensions. 
(a)  Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this article, both the assessing official and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
(b)  Notwithstanding Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3903, the assessing official shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six preceding years. 
(c)  The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3940, two years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this section, two years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to section 16-346(c) or (e), or two years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984 or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. of 10-10-1996, § E) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1.A.4. 
Sec. 16-346. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amount in dispute, when used with respect to taxes due or assessed, means the amount specifically identified in the administrative appeal or application for judicial review as disputed by the party filing such appeal or application. 
    Appealable event means an increase in the assessment of a local license tax payable by a taxpayer, the denial of a refund, or the assessment of a local license tax where none previously was assessed, arising out of the local assessing official's: 
(1)  Examination of records, financial statements, books of account, or other information for the purpose of determining the correctness of an assessment; 
(2)  Determination regarding the rate or classification applicable to the licensable business; 
(3)  Assessment of a local license tax when no return has been filed by the taxpayer; or 
(4)  Denial of an application for correction of erroneous assessment attendant to the filing of an amended application for license. 
    Frivolous means a finding, based on specific facts, that the party asserting the appeal is unlikely to prevail upon the merits because the appeal is: 
(1)  Not well grounded in fact; 
(2)  Not warranted by existing law or a good faith argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law; 
(3)  Interposed for an improper purpose, such as to harass, to cause unnecessary delay in the payment of tax or a refund, or to create needless cost from the litigation; or 
(4)  Otherwise frivolous. 
    Jeopardized by delay means a finding, based upon specific facts, that a taxpayer designs to: 
(1)  Depart quickly from the locality; 
(2)  Remove his property therefrom; 
(3)  Conceal himself or his property therein; or 
(4)  Do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
(b)  Any person assessed with a licensing tax under this article as the result of appealable event may file an administrative appeal of the assessment within one year from the last day of the tax year for which such assessment is made, or within one year from the date of the appealable event, whichever is later, with the commissioner of revenue or other local assessing official. The appeal must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, the tax periods covered by the challenged assessments, the amount in dispute, the remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The assessor may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the appeal. The assessment placed at issue in the appeal shall be deemed prima facie correct. The assessor shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a written determination to the taxpayer setting forth the facts and arguments in support of his decision. Every assessment made by the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official pursuant to an appealable event shall include or be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to file an administrative appeal and the specific procedure to be followed, the name and address to which the appeal should be directed, an explanation of the required content of the appeal, and the deadline for filing the appeal. 
(c)  Provided a timely and complete administrative appeal is filed, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official, unless the treasurer or other official responsible for the collection of such tax determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay, is advised by the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time or is advised by the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official that the appeal is frivolous. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 16-343(h), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. 
(d)  Any taxpayer whose administrative appeal to the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official pursuant to the provisions of this section has been pending for more than one year without the issuance of a final determination may, upon not less than 30 days' written notice to the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official, elect to treat the appeal as denied and appeal the assessment to the state tax commissioner in accordance with the provisions of this section. The tax commissioner shall not consider an appeal filed pursuant to the provisions of this subsection if he finds that the absence of a final determination on the part of the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official was caused by the willful failure or refusal of the taxpayer to provide information requested and reasonably needed by the commissioner or other assessing official to make his determination. 
(e)  Any person assessed with a license tax under this article as a result of a determination, upon an administrative appeal to the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official pursuant to this section, that is adverse to the position asserted by the taxpayer in such appeal may appeal such assessment to the tax commissioner within 90 days of the date of the determination by the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official. The appeal shall be in such form as the tax commissioner may prescribe and the taxpayer shall serve a copy of the appeal upon the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official. The tax commissioner shall permit the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official to participate in the proceedings, and shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within 90 days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the assessing official are notified that a longer period will be required. The appeal shall proceed in the same manner as an application pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1821, and the tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1822. 
(f)  Suspension of collection activity during appeal. On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the tax commissioner under subsection (e) of this section, collection activity with respect to the amount in dispute shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the treasurer or other official responsible for the collection of such tax: 
(1)  Determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay as defined in this section; 
(2)  Is advised by the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official, or the tax commissioner, that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time; or 
(3)  Is advised by the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official that the appeal is frivolous as defined in this section. 
Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 16-343(h), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The requirement that collection activity be suspended shall cease unless an appeal pursuant to subsection (e)of this section is filed and served on the necessary parties within 30 days of the service of notice of intent to file such appeal. 
(g)  Implementation of determination of tax commissioner. Promptly upon receipt of the final determination of the tax commissioner with respect to an appeal pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official shall take those steps necessary to calculate the amount of tax owed by or refund due to the taxpayer consistent with the tax commissioner's determination and shall provide that information to the taxpayer and to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision. 
(1)  If the determination of the tax commissioner sets forth a specific amount of tax due, the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official shall certify the amount to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a bill to the taxpayer for such amount due, together with interest accrued and penalty, if any is authorized by this section, within 30 days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner. 
(2)  If the determination of the tax commissioner sets forth a specific amount of refund due, the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official shall certify the amount to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a payment to the taxpayer for such amount due, together with interest accrued pursuant to this section, within 30 days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner. 
(3)  If the determination of the tax commissioner does not set forth a specific amount of tax due, or otherwise requires the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official to undertake a new or revised assessment that will result in an obligation to pay a tax that has not previously been paid in full, the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official shall promptly commence the steps necessary to undertake such new or revised assessment, and provide the same to the taxpayer within 60 days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, or within 60 days after receipt from the taxpayer of any additional information requested or reasonably required under the determination of the tax commissioner, whichever is later. The commissioner of revenue or other assessing official shall certify the new assessment to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a bill to the taxpayer for the amount due, together with interest accrued and penalty, if any is authorized by this section, within 30 days of the date of the new assessment. 
(4)  If the determination of the tax commissioner does not set forth a specific amount of refund due, or otherwise requires the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official to undertake a new or revised assessment that will result in an obligation on the part of the locality to make a refund of taxes previously paid, the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official shall promptly commence the steps necessary to undertake such new or revised assessment, and provide the same to the taxpayer within 60 days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, or within 60 days after receipt from the taxpayer of any additional information requested or reasonably required under the determination of the tax commissioner, whichever is later. The commissioner of revenue or other assessing official shall certify the new assessment to the treasurer or other official responsible for collection, and the treasurer or other official responsible for collection shall issue a refund to the taxpayer for the amount of tax due, together with interest accrued, within 30 days of the date of the new assessment 
(Ord. of 10-10-1996, § F) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1.A.5, 6. 
Sec. 16-347. - Judicial review of determination of tax commissioner. 
(a)  Judicial review. Following the issuance of a final determination of the tax commissioner pursuant to section 16-346(e), the taxpayer or commissioner of revenue or other assessing official may apply to the appropriate circuit court for judicial review of the determination, or any part thereof, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984. In any such proceeding for judicial review of a determination of the tax commissioner, the burden shall be on the party challenging the determination of the tax commissioner, or any part thereof, to show that the ruling of the tax commissioner is erroneous with respect to the part challenged. Neither the tax commissioner nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the tax commissioner has ruled on it. 
(b)  Suspension of payment of disputed amount of tax due upon taxpayer's notice of intent to initiate judicial review. 
(1)  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an application for judicial review, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984, of a determination of the tax commissioner pursuant to section 16-346(e), and upon payment of the amount of the tax that is not in dispute together with any penalty and interest then due with respect to such undisputed portion of the tax, the treasurer or other collection official shall further suspend collection activity while the court retains jurisdiction unless the court, upon appropriate motion after notice and an opportunity to be heard, determines that: 
a.  The taxpayer's application for judicial review is frivolous, as defined in subsection (2) of the definition of the term "frivolous" in section 16-346(a); 
b.  Collection would be jeopardized by delay, as defined in this section; or 
c.  Suspension of collection would cause substantial economic hardship to the locality. 
For purposes of determining whether substantial economic hardship to the locality would arise from a suspension of collection activity, the court shall consider the cumulative effect of then-pending appeals filed within the locality by different taxpayers that allege common claims or theories of relief. 
(2)  Upon a determination that the appeal is frivolous, that collection may be jeopardized by delay, or that suspension of collection would result in substantial economic hardship to the locality, the court may require the taxpayer to pay the amount in dispute or a portion thereof, or to provide surety for payment of the amount in dispute in a form acceptable to the court. 
(3)  No suspension of collection activity shall be required if the application for judicial review fails to identify with particularity the amount in dispute. 
(4)  The requirement that collection activity be suspended shall cease unless an application for judicial review pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984 is filed and served on the necessary parties within 30 days of the service of the notice of intent to file such application. 
(5)  The suspension of collection activity authorized by this subdivision shall not be applicable to any appeal of a local license tax that is initiated by the direct filing of an action pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984 without prior exhaustion of the appeals provided by this article 
(c)  Suspension of payment of disputed amount of refund due upon locality's notice of intent to initiate judicial review. 
(1)  Payment of any refund determined to be due pursuant to the determination of the tax commissioner of an appeal pursuant to section 16-346(e) shall be suspended if the locality assessing the tax serves upon the taxpayer, within 60 days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, a notice of intent to file an application for judicial review of the tax commissioner's determination pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984 and pays the amount of the refund not in dispute, including tax and accrued interest. Payment of such refund shall remain suspended while the court retains jurisdiction unless the court, upon appropriate motion after notice and an opportunity to be heard, determines that the locality's application for judicial review is frivolous, as defined in subsection (2) of the definition of the term "frivolous" in section 16-346(a). 
(2)  No suspension of refund activity shall be permitted if the locality's application for judicial review fails to identify with particularity the amount in dispute. 
(3)  The suspension of the obligation to make a refund shall cease unless an application for judicial review pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984 is filed and served on the necessary parties within 30 days of the service of the notice of intent to file such application. 
(d)  Accrual of interest on unpaid amount of tax. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 16-343(h), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1.A.7. 
Sec. 16-348. - Rulings. 
(a)  Any taxpayer or authorized representative of a taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of a local license tax to a specific situation from the commissioner of revenue or other assessing official. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all facts relevant to the situation placed at issue and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if: 
(1)  There is a change in the law, a court decision, or the guidelines issued by the state department of taxation upon which the ruling was based; or 
(2)  The assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. 
(b)  However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1.A.8. 
Sec. 16-349. - Recordkeeping and audits. 
    Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessor to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the assessor to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the assessor in order to allow the assessor to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within this jurisdiction. The assessor shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside this jurisdiction, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the assessor's office upon demand. 
(Ord. of 10-10-1996, § G) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1 A.9. 
Sec. 16-350. - Exclusions and deductions from gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
(1)  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the commonwealth or any county, city or town for the state retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels. 
(2)  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even through the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business). 
(3)  Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer. 
(4)  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
(5)  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
(6)  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
(7)  Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
(8)  Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
(b)  Deductions. The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable: 
(1)  Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a United States federal or state government entity provided that such property was purchased within two years of the sale to said entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state or federal government entity. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a state or federal government entity in accordance with the original contract obligation. 
(2)  Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or foreign country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon income. 
(Ord. of 10-10-1996, § H) 
State Law reference- Limitation on rate of tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3703.1.A.3, 58.1-3706. 
Sec. 16-351. - License fee and tax. 
    Every person or business subject to licensure under this article shall be assessed and required to pay annually: 
(1)  A fee for the issuance of such license in the amount of $30.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the license fee specified in subsection (1) of this section, and except as may be otherwise provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3712, 58.1-3712.1 and 58.1-3713, every such person or business with annual gross receipts of more than $1.00 shall be assessed and required to pay annually a license tax on all the gross receipts of such persons includable as provided in this article at a rate set forth as follows for the class of enterprise listed: 
a.  For contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale, $0.16 per $100.00 of gross receipts ($0.16 per $100.00 maximum); 
b.  For retailers, $0.20 per $100.00 of gross receipts ($0.20 per $100.00 maximum); 
c.  For financial, real estate and professional services, $0.58 per $100.00 of gross receipts ($0.58 per $100.00 maximum); 
d.  For repair, personal and business services and all other businesses and occupations not specifically listed or exempted in this article or otherwise by law, $0.36 per $100.00 of gross receipts ($0.36 per $100.00 maximum); 
e.  For wholesalers, $0.05 per $100.00 of purchases of goods for sale (see limitations in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3701-58.1-3716); 
f.  For carnivals, circuses and speedways, $250.00 for each performance held in this jurisdiction (see limitations in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3728); 
g.  For fortunetellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry, $250.00 per year; 
h.  For massage parlors, $250.00 per year; 
i.  For itinerant merchants or peddlers, $500.00 per year (see limitation in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717); 
j.  For photographers, $30.00 per year (see limitation in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3727); 
k.  For permanent coliseums, arenas or auditoriums having a maximum capacity in excess of 10,000 persons, open to the public, $1,000.00 per year (see limitation in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3729); 
l.  For savings and loan associations and credit unions, $50.00 per year; and 
m.  For "direct sellers," as that term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3719.1 with total annual sales in excess of $4,000.00: 
1.  $0.20 per $100.00 of total annual retail sales; or 
2.  $0.05 per $100.00 of total annual wholesale sales; 
whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. of 10-10-1996, § I, Ord. of 12-11-1997) 
Secs. 16-352-16-375. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX 

Sec. 16-376. - Established. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812, a special mobile local telecommunication tax shall be imposed upon the users of mobile telephones. The tax shall be imposed at a rate equal to ten percent of the first $30.00 of monthly gross charges on each mobile telephone in service as of July 1, 1998. 
Sec. 16-377. - Exemptions. 
    No tax shall be levied on any local, state or federal government agency. Nor shall any tax be imposed on any telephone line servicing any facility owned by a bona fide church or religious organization that is used for the sole and exclusive use of a religious nature. Any facility that is used for any commercial or residential purpose shall not be entitled to the exemption. 
Sec. 16-378. - Use of funds. 
    All funds received as a result of the imposition of this mobile local telecommunication tax shall be used to provide services to the citizens of the city. 
Sec. 16-379. - Deduction for cost of collection. 
    Any telephone utility collecting and submitting the tax described herein shall receive compensation for accounting for and remitting said tax at the rate of three percent of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction in submitting the return. 
(Ord. of 6-11-1998; Ord. of 9-10-1998; Ord. of 2-16-1999) 
Secs. 16-380-16-401. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE FEE[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Franchise fees and rights-of-way fees, cable operators, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.1:1; regulation of rights-of-way fees, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.23; rights-of-way use fee, Code of Virginia, § 56-468.1. 

Sec. 16-402. - Established. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, including the Charter, section of this Code or any franchise granted by this jurisdiction, or of any other ordinance, resolution or provision of law heretofore adopted or applicable to this jurisdiction in any way relating hereto, and in lieu of any other fee or charge therefor, this jurisdiction hereby adopts the public rights-of-way use fee as herein described in order that collection of the said fee shall commence as provided in Code of Virginia, § 56-468.1.J. Terms herein shall have the same meaning as outlined in Code of Virginia, § 56-468.1. 
(b)  The clerk is directed to give notice in writing forthwith of this jurisdiction's adoption of the public rights-of-way use fee to be sent by certified mail to the registered agent of each certificated provider of local telephone exchange service within this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 7-7-1998) 
State Law reference- Rights-of-way use fee, Code of Virginia, § 56-468.1. 
Secs. 16-403-16-432. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - RECORDATION TAX[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to levy recordation tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3800. 

Sec. 16-433. - Adopting local recordation tax. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3800 et seq., as amended, the city hereby imposes a recordation tax in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of the state recordation tax, and collectable, upon the first recording of each taxable instrument in the city, except that no tax shall be levied when the state recordation tax is $0.50. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2004) 
Secs. 16-434-16-464. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - TECHNOLOGY ZONE 

Sec. 16-465. - Adopted by reference. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3850, as amended, the city hereby adopts technology zones, the location and administration of which shall be in accordance with the technology zone regulations attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived and made a part hereof by reference and which is on file in the city offices. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2004) 
Chapter 18 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire protection, Code of Virginia, § 27-1 et seq.; authority of city to make regulations for purpose of guarding against danger from accidents by fire, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-922.1; authority of city to regulate the making of fires, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-922.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fire department means the volunteer fire department of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 11-1; Code 1981, § 9-1) 
Secs. 18-2-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fire departments and fire companies, Code of Virginia, § 27-6.1 et seq.; local fire marshals, Code of Virginia, § 27-30 et seq. 

Sec. 18-21. - Fire lines. 
    At any fire in the city which is attended by the fire department, the chief of the fire department or his duly authorized agent may establish a fire line at such distance from the fire as he deems expedient. No person, unless authorized to do so by the chief of the fire department or his agent, shall go inside of such fire line. 
(Code 1967, § 11-3; Code 1981, § 9-16) 
State Law reference- Authority of officer in charge of fire department to keep persons at safe distance from fire, Code of Virginia, § 27-15.1. 
Sec. 18-22. - Directing traffic. 
    Until the arrival of a police officer, officers and members of the fire department may direct traffic at or in the immediate vicinity of a fire, and while so acting, shall have all the authority of peace officers. 
(Code 1967, § 16-37; Code 1981, § 9-17) 
State Law reference- Authority of officer in charge of fire department to direct traffic, Code of Virginia, § 27-15.1. 
Sec. 18-23. - Duties of police at fires. 
    The police shall attend all fires in the city and shall so direct traffic and enforce traffic regulations in the vicinity of the fire as to expedite the approach and work of the fire department. They shall also safeguard property during the progress of the fire. 
(Code 1967, § 11-2; Code 1981, § 9-18) 
State Law reference- Control of traffic at fire by police, Code of Virginia, § 27-15.1. 
Sec. 18-24. - Going beyond corporate limits. 
    The chief of the fire department may render aid in the extinguishment of fires occurring beyond the corporate limits of the city; provided, any such fire is within a reasonable distance of the corporate limits of the city. Subject to the approval of the city manager, the chief of the fire department may prescribe the rules, regulations and limitations under which such aid may be rendered. 
(Code 1967, § 11-5; Code 1981, § 9-19) 
State Law reference- Firefighters, emergency medical technicians, and equipment may in emergencies go or be sent beyond territorial limits, Code of Virginia, § 27-1; contracts to furnish fire protection, Code of Virginia, § 27-2. 
Sec. 18-25. - Assisting police in time of riot or insurrection. 
    The chief of the fire department, in time of riot or insurrection, shall, on the order of the city manager, assemble the fire department and assist the police of the city in restoring order or quelling insurrection. 
(Code 1967, § 11-4; Code 1981, § 9-20) 
State Law reference- Authority of council to establish the powers and duties of the fire department, Code of Virginia, § 27-14. 
Sec. 18-26. - Part of safety program. 
    The fire department and the rescue squad, both being voluntary nonprofit corporate organizations, having as their corporate names "Buena Vista Firefighters, Inc.," and "Buena Vista Rescue Squad, Inc.," respectively, are hereby recognized as an integral part of the official safety program of the city, for the purposes designated in Code of Virginia, § 15.1-136.2, such section being a portion of the "Line of Duty Act" enacted by the General Assembly of the commonwealth in the year 1972. 
(Code 1967, § 2-2.1; Code 1981, § 9-21) 
State Law reference- Payments to volunteer rescue squads, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-953. 
Sec. 18-27. - Loitering at engine house. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to loiter about any engine house of the fire department. 
(Code 1967, § 11-6; Code 1981, § 9-22) 
Secs. 18-28-18-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 18-58. - Participation of minors 16 years and older; terms and conditions. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 40.1-79.1, as amended, the city hereby authorizes persons 16 years of age or older, with parental or guardian approval, to participate fully in all activities of the city's volunteer fire department, so long as the city volunteer fire department fully complies with the terms and conditions of the aforesaid section of the Code of Virginia, including, but not limited to, acquiring insurance to cover the junior firefighters. 
(Ord. of 10-14-2004) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt provisions for minors to participate in volunteer fire company activities, Code of Virginia, § 40.1-79.1. 
Secs. 18-59-18-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXPLOSIVES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Power of city to regulate the keeping of combustibles, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113; statewide standards, Code of Virginia, § 27-96. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-90. - Blasting. 
    No person shall blast or carry on any blasting operations without having first secured therefor a permit from the city manager. Blasting or blasting operations conducted pursuant to a permit shall be carried on subject to such conditions as may be expressed in the permit. 
(Code 1967, § 11-7; Code 1981, § 9-34) 
Secs. 18-91-18-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIREWORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Permits for fireworks displays, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-974; statewide fire prevention code, Code of Virginia, § 27-97. 

Sec. 18-109. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This division shall not apply to the use or the sale of sparklers, fountains, Pharaoh's serpents, caps for pistols or pinwheels, commonly known as whirligigs or spinning jennies. 
(b)  The fireworks listed in subsection (a) of this section may only be used, ignited or exploded on private property with the consent of the owner of such property. 
(Code 1967, § 11-10; Code 1981, § 9-41) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 27-96.1. 
Sec. 18-110. - Sale, use, etc. 
    Subject to the provisions of this division, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, expose for sale or to buy, use, ignite or explode any firecracker, torpedo, skyrocket, Roman candle or other substance or thing, of whatever form or construction, intended or commonly known as fireworks, within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 11-8; Code 1981, § 9-42) 
Sec. 18-111. - Special displays. 
    The city manager may permit the special display of fireworks by properly qualified individuals under the direct supervision of experts in the handling of fireworks. Such display shall be of such a character, so located and discharged or fired as in the opinion of the city manager shall not be hazardous to surrounding property and endanger any person. 
(Code 1967, § 11-9; Code 1981, § 9-43) 
State Law reference- State law as to fireworks, Code of Virginia, §§ 27-96, 27-97. 
Chapter 20 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 

Sec. 20-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggrieved person means any person who (i) claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or (ii) believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur. 
    Complainant means a person, including the Fair Housing Board, who files a complaint under Code of Virginia, § 36-96.9. 
    Conciliation means the attempted resolution of issues raised by a complainant, or by the investigation of such complaint, through informal negotiations involving the aggrieved person, the respondent, their respective authorized representatives and the fair housing board. 
    Conciliation agreement means a written agreement setting forth the resolution of the issues in conciliation. 
    Discriminatory housing practices means an act that is unlawful under Code of Virginia, § 36-96.3, 36-96.4, 36-96.5 or 36-96.6. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof, that is occupied as, or designated or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Elderliness means an individual who has attained his 55th birthday. 
    Familial status means one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years being domiciled with (i) a parent or other person having legal custody of such individual or individuals or (ii) the designee of such parent or other person having custody with the written permission of such parent or other person. The term "familial status" also includes any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. For purposes of this section, the term "in the process of securing legal custody" means having filed an appropriate petition to obtain legal custody of such minor in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
    Family includes a single individual, whether male or female. 
    Handicap means, with respect to a person, (i) a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; (ii) a record of having such an impairment; or (iii) being regarded as having such an impairment. The term does not include current, illegal use of, or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in state or federal law. Neither the term "individual with handicap" nor the term "handicap" shall apply to an individual solely because that individual is a transvestite. 
    Lending institution includes any bank, savings institution, credit union, insurance company or mortgage lender. 
    Person means one or more individuals, whether male or female, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, fair housing organizations, civil rights organizations, organizations, governmental entities, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries. 
    Respondent means any person or other entity alleged to have violated the provisions of this article, as stated in a complaint filed under the provisions of this article and any other person joined pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 36-96.9. 
    Restrictive covenant means any specification in any instrument affecting title to real property that purports to limit the use, occupancy, transfer, rental, or lease of any dwelling because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap. 
    To rent means to lease, to sublease, to let, or otherwise to grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1981, § 6.5-17; Ord. of 12-11-1980, § 2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.1:1. 
Sec. 20-20. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 6.5-21; Ord. of 12-11-1980, § 7) 
Sec. 20-21. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for fair housing throughout the city, to all its citizens, regardless of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status or handicap, and to that end to prohibit discriminatory practices with respect to residential housing by any person or group of persons, in order that the peace, health, safety, prosperity and general welfare of all the inhabitants of the city may be protected and insured. This law shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the city for the protection of the people of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 6.5-16; Ord. of 12-11-1980, § 1) 
Sec. 20-22. - Unlawful practices. 
(a)  It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice for any person: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness or familial status; 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in the connection therewith to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, or familial status; 
(3)  To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap. The use of words or symbols associated with a particular religion, national origin, sex, or race shall be prima facie evidence of an illegal preference under this article which shall not be overcome by a general disclaimer. However, reference alone to places of worship including, but not limited to, churches, synagogues, temples, or mosques in any such notice, statement or advertisement shall not be prima facie evidence of an illegal preference; 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(5)  To deny any person access to membership in or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap; 
(6)  To include in any transfer, sale, rental, or lease of housing, any restrictive covenant that discriminates because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap or for any person to honor or exercise, or attempt to honor or exercise any such discriminatory covenant pertaining to housing; 
(7)  To induce or attempt to induce to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap; 
(8)  To refuse to sell or rent, or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise discriminate or make unavailable or deny a dwelling because of a handicap of (i) the buyer or renter, (ii) a person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available, or (iii) any person associated with the buyer or renter; 
(9)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of a handicap of (i) that person, (ii) a person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it was so sold, rented or made available, or (iii) any person associated with that buyer or renter. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, discrimination includes: (i) a refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by any person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; (ii) a refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, practices, policies, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or (iii) in connection with the design and construction of covered multi-family dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct dwellings in such a manner that: 
(1)  The public use and common use areas of the dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; 
(2)  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and 
(3)  All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain an accessible route into and through the dwelling; light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls are in accessible locations; there are reinforcements in the bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and there are usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. As used in this subsection, the term "covered multifamily dwellings" means buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators and ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. 
(c)  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standards for Building and Facilities (commonly cited as "ANSI A117.1") or with any other standards adopted as part of regulations promulgated by HUD providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to invalidate or limit any state law or regulation which requires dwellings to be designed and constructed in a manner that affords handicapped persons greater access than is required by this article. 
(e)  It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice for any person to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on the account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected 
(Code 1981, § 6.5-18; Ord. of 12-11-1980, § 3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 36-96.3, 36-96.5. 
Sec. 20-23. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 36-96.3 A.3. and 36-96.6 A.,B., and C., this article shall not apply to any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that such private individual does not own more than three single-family houses at any one time. In the case of the sale of any single-family house by a private individual-owner not residing in the house at the time of the sale or who was not the most recent resident of the house prior to sale, the exemption granted shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be exempt from the application of this article only if the house is sold or rented (i) without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, salesperson, or of the facilities or the services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee, independent contractor, or agent of any broker, agent, salesperson, or person and (ii) without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this article. However, nothing herein shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. This exemption shall not apply to or inure to the benefit of any licensee of the real estate board or regulant of the fair housing board, regardless of whether the licensee is acting in his personal or professional capacity. 
(b)  Except for Code of Virginia, § 36-96.3 A.3, this article shall not apply to rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preferences to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap. Nor shall anything in this article apply to a private membership club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. Nor, where matters of personal privacy are involved, shall anything in this article be construed to prohibit any private, state-owned or state-supported educational institution, hospital, nursing home, religious or correctional institution, from requiring that persons of both sexes not occupy any single-family residence or room or unit of dwellings or other buildings, or restrooms in such room or unit in dwellings or other buildings, which it owns or operates. 
(d)  Nothing in this article prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in federal law. 
(e)  It shall not be unlawful under this article for any owner to deny or limit the rental of housing to persons who pose a clear and present threat of substantial harm to others or to the dwelling itself. 
(f)  A rental application may require disclosure by the applicant of any criminal convictions and the owner or managing agent may require as a condition of acceptance of the rental application that applicant consent in writing to a criminal record check to verify the disclosures made by applicant in the rental application. The owner or managing agent may collect from the applicant moneys to reimburse the owner or managing agent for the exact amount of the out-of-pocket costs for such criminal record checks. Nothing in this article shall require an owner or managing agent to rent a dwelling to an individual who, based on a prior record of criminal convictions involving harm to persons or property, would constitute a clear and present threat to the health or safety of other individuals. 
(g)  Nothing in this chapter limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state or federal restriction regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. Owners or managing agents of dwellings may develop and implement reasonable occupancy and safety standards based on factors such as the number and size of sleeping areas or bedrooms and overall size of a dwelling unit so long as the standards do not violate local, state or federal restrictions. Nothing in this article prohibits the rental application or similar document from requiring information concerning the number, ages, sex and familial relationship of the applicants and the dwelling's intended occupants. 
(Code 1981, § 6.5-19; Ord. of 12-11-1980, § 4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96-2. 
Sec. 20-24. - Discrimination in residential real estate-related transactions; unlawful practices by lenders, insurers, appraisers, etc.; deposit of state funds in such institutions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity, including any lending institution, whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions, to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, or in the manner of providing such a transaction, because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap. It shall not be unlawful, however, for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate transactions to require any applicant to qualify financially for the loan or loans for which such person is making application. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "residential real estate-related transaction" means any of the following: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance (i) for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling or (ii) secured by residential real estate; or 
(2)  The selling, brokering, insuring or appraising of residential real property. However, nothing in this article shall prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any state, county, city, or municipal treasurer or governmental official whose responsibility it is to account for, to invest, or manage public funds to deposit or cause to be deposited any public funds in any lending institution provided for herein which is found to be committing discriminatory practices, where such findings were upheld by any court of competent jurisdiction. Upon such a court's judicial enforcement of any order to restrain a practice of such lending institution or for said institution to cease or desist in a discriminatory practice, the appropriate fiscal officer or treasurer of the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof which has funds deposited in any lending institution which is practicing discrimination, as set forth herein, shall take immediate steps to have the said funds withdrawn and redeposited in another lending institution. If, for reasons of sound economic management, this action will result in a financial loss to the commonwealth or any of its political subdivisions, the action may be deferred for a period not longer than one year. If the lending institution in question has corrected its discriminatory practices, any prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.4. 
Sec. 20-25. - Certain restrictive covenants void; instruments containing such covenants. 
(a)  Any restrictive covenant and any related reversionary interest, purporting to restrict occupancy or ownership of property on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap, whether heretofore or hereafter included in an instrument affecting the title to real or leasehold property, are declared to be void and contrary to the public policy of the commonwealth. 
(b)  Any person who is asked to accept a document affecting title to real or leasehold property may decline to accept the same if it includes such a covenant or reversionary interest until the covenant or reversionary interest has been removed from the document. Refusal to accept delivery of an instrument for this reason shall not be deemed a breach of a contract to purchase, lease, mortgage, or otherwise deal with such property. 
(c)  No person shall solicit or accept compensation of any kind for the release or removal of any covenant or reversionary interest described in subsection (a) of this section. Any person violating this subsection shall be liable to any person injured thereby in an amount equal to the greater of three times the compensation solicited or received, or $500.00, plus reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred. 
(d)  A family care home, foster home, or group home in which individuals with physical handicaps, mental illness, intellectual disability, or developmental disability reside, with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons, shall be considered for all purposes residential occupancy by a single family when construing any restrictive covenant which purports to restrict occupancy or ownership of real or leasehold property to members of a single family or to residential use or structure. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.6. 
Sec. 20-26. - Familial status protection not applicable to housing for older persons. 
(a)  Nothing in this article regarding unlawful discrimination because of familial status shall apply to housing for older persons. As used in this section, the term "housing for older persons" means housing: (i) provided under any state or federal program that is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program; or (ii) intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or (iii) intended for, and solely occupied by, at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. The following criteria shall be met in determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons under clause (iii) of this subsection: 
(1)  At least 80 percent of the occupied units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and 
(2)  The publication of, and adherence to, policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
(b)  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons by reason of: 
(1)  Persons residing in such housing as of September 13, 1988, who do not meet the age requirements of clauses (a)(ii) and (iii) of this section, provided that new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of those clauses; or 
(2)  Unoccupied units, provided that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the provisions of clauses (a)(ii) and (iii) of this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.7. 
Sec. 20-27. - Grievance procedure; other remedies. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this article may file a complaint with the city manager within 30 days after the aggrieved person becomes aware of the alleged unlawful practice, and in no event more than 60 days after the alleged unlawful practice occurred. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which he might otherwise be entitled, or from filing his complaint with any appropriate governmental agency. 
(Code 1981, § 6.5-20; Ord. of 12-11-1980, §§ 5, 6) 
State Law reference- Procedure under state law for receipt or initiation of complaint, notice to parties, filing of answer, etc., Code of Virginia, §§ 36-96-9-36-96.20. 
Chapter 22 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power of the city regarding preservation of safety, health, peace, good order, etc., § 2.4. 
State Law reference- Authority of council to protect the property and inhabitants of the city and to preserve peace and good order, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1700; crimes and offenses generally, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Attempts. 
    Every person who attempts to commit an offense which is a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city shall be punishable by the same punishment prescribed for the offense the commission of which was the object of the attempt. 
(Code 1967, § 18-9; Code 1981, § 16-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-27. 
Sec. 22-2. - Nuisances generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code or other ordinances of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, allow, permit or maintain upon any premises in the city, in his possession or under his control, any public nuisance, or any condition injurious to the public health or morals, or endangering the life or property of others. 
(b)  Any person found guilty of violating this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-14. Upon conviction of any violation of this section, the nuisance, unless immediately abated by the person maintaining, causing or permitting the same, may be abated by the city at the expense and cost of the offender, and the cost thereof shall be charged and collected as a part of the cost of the trial of the case. 
(Code 1967, § 18-20; Code 1981, § 16-2) 
State Law reference- Power of city to cause any nuisance to be abated, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-900. 
Sec. 22-3. - Limitations on begging on street, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or interfere with persons or traffic by soliciting contributions upon any street or public place in the city. 
(Code 1967, § 18-10; Code 1981, § 16-3) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit or regulate solicitation of contributions on street, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-931. 
Sec. 22-4. - Assault and battery. 
    Unless otherwise provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57, any person who shall commit a simple assault or assault and battery shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 18-7; Code 1981, § 16-4) 
State Law reference- Assault and battery, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57. 
Sec. 22-5. - Petit larceny. 
    Any person who commits: 
(1)  Larceny from the person of another of money or other thing of value of less than $5.00; or 
(2)  Simple larceny not from the person of another of goods and chattels of the value of less than $200.00; 
except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-95(iii), shall be deemed guilty of petit larceny, which shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 18-21; Code 1981, § 16-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-96. 
Sec. 22-6. - Trespass after having been forbidden to do so. 
    If any person without authority of law goes upon or remains upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian, or the agent of any such person, or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign or signs posted by or at the direction of such persons or the agent of any such person or by the holder of any easement or other right-of-way authorized by the instrument creating such interest to post such signs on such lands, structures, premises or portion or area thereof at a place or places where it or they may be reasonably seen, or if any person, whether he is the owner, tenant or otherwise entitled to the use of such land, building or premises, goes upon, or remains upon such land, building or premises after having been prohibited from doing so by a court of competent jurisdiction by an order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-253, 16.1-253.1, 16.1-253.4, 16.1-278.2 through 16.1-278.6, 16.1-278.8, 16.1-278.14, 16.1-278.15, 16.1-279.1, 19.2-152.8, 19.2-152.9 or 19.2-152.10 or an ex parte order issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 20-103, and after having been served with such order, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-132 through 18.2-136. 
(Code 1967, § 30-1; Code 1981, § 16-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-119. 
Sec. 22-7. - Trespass at night upon church or school property. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Church means any place of worship and includes any educational building or community center owned or leased by a church. 
    School property includes a school bus as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of some person authorized to give such consent, to go or enter upon, in the nighttime, the premises or property of any church or upon any school property for any purpose other than to attend a meeting or service held or conducted in such church or school property. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not a church member or student, to enter upon or remain upon any church or school property in violation of: 
(1)  Any direction to vacate the property by a person authorized to give such direction; or 
(2)  Any posted notice which contains such information, posted at a place where it reasonably may be seen. 
Each time such person enters upon or remains on the posted premises or after such direction that person refuses to vacate such property, it shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor, except that any person, other than a parent, who violates this subsection on school property with the intent to abduct a student shall be punished as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-128B. 
(Code 1967, § 30-3; Code 1981, § 16-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-128. 
Sec. 22-8. - Unauthorized entry, etc., upon land, etc., of city. 
    No person shall, without authority of the city manager or duly authorized agent, go or enter upon or remain upon the lands, buildings and premises of the city, or any part, portions or areas thereof, after such lands, buildings, premises or part, portions or areas thereof have been posted with a sign containing the words "No Trespassing" or words of similar import. 
(Code 1967, § 30-5; Code 1981, § 16-8) 
Sec. 22-9. - Peeping or spying into structure occupied as dwelling. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peephole means any hole, crack or other similar opening through which a person can see. 
(b)  If any person shall enter upon the property of another, in the nighttime, and secretly or furtively peep through or attempt to so peep, into, through or spy through, a window, door or other aperture of any building, structure or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure is permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy is permanent or temporary, or to do the same, without just cause, upon property owned by him and leased or rented to another under circumstances that would violate the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a peephole or other aperture to secretly or furtively peep, spy or attempt to peep or spy into a restroom, dressing room, locker room, hotel room, motel room, tanning bed, tanning booth, bedroom or other location or enclosure for the purpose of viewing any nonconsenting person who is totally nude, clad in undergarments, or in a state of undress exposing the genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female breast and the circumstances are such that the person would otherwise have a reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a lawful criminal investigation or a correctional official or local or regional jail official conducting surveillance for security purposes or during an investigation of alleged misconduct involving a person committed to the department of corrections or to a local or regional jail. 
(e)  Such person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 30-2; Code 1981, § 16-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-130. 
Sec. 22-10. - Entering property of another for purpose of damaging it, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the land, dwelling, outhouse or any other building of another for the purpose of damaging such property or any of the contents thereof or in any manner to interfere with the rights of the owner, user or the occupant thereof to use such property free from interference. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, unless such person intentionally selects the property entered because of the race, religious conviction, color or national origin of the owner, user or occupant of the property, which is punishable under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-121. 
(Code 1967, § 30-4; Code 1981, § 16-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-121. 
Sec. 22-11. - Injuring, etc., any property, monument, etc. 
(a)  If any person, unlawfully, but not feloniously, shall destroy, deface damage or remove without the intent to steal, any property, real or personal, not his own, or break down, destroy, deface, injure or remove any monument erected for the purpose of marking the site of any engagement fought during the War between the States, or for the purpose of designating the boundaries of any city, town, tract of land, or any tree marked for that purpose, he shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor; provided that the court may, in its discretion, dismiss the charge if the city or organization responsible for maintaining the injured property, monument, or memorial files a written affidavit with the court stating it has received full payment for the injury. 
(b)  If any person intentionally causes such injury, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor if the value of or damage to the property, memorial or monument is less than $1,000.00. The amount of loss caused by the destruction, defacing, damage or removal of such property, memorial or monument may be established by proof of the fair market cost of repair or fair market replacement value. Upon conviction, the court may order that the defendant pay restitution. 
(Code 1967, § 18-16; Code 1981, § 16-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137. 
Sec. 22-12. - Destruction of trees, shrubs, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pick, pull, pull up, tear up, dig, dig up, cut, break, injure, burn or destroy, in whole or in part, any tree, shrub, vine, plant, flower or turf found, growing or being upon the land of another, or upon any land reserved, set aside or maintained by the state as a public park, or as a refuge or sanctuary for wild animals, birds or fish, without having previously obtained the permission in writing of such other or his agent or of the superintendent or custodian of such park, refuge or sanctuary so to do, unless the same is done under the personal direction of such owner, his agent, tenant or lessee or superintendent or custodian of such park, refuge or sanctuary. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor; provided, however, that the approval of the owner, his agent, tenant or lessee, or the superintendent or custodian of such park or sanctuary afterwards given in writing or in open court shall be a bar to further prosecution or suit. 
(Code 1967, § 18-17; Code 1981, § 16-12) 
State Law reference- Destruction of trees, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-140. 
Sec. 22-13. - Damaging vehicles, etc. 
    Any person who shall individually or in association with one or more others willfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any part of any vehicle, boat or vessel for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying said vehicle, boat or vessel, or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, boat or vessel, or who shall in any other manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, boat or vessel, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, except that the provision set forth in this section shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty. 
(Code 1967, § 18-27; Code 1981, § 16-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-146. 
Sec. 22-14. - Entering or setting in motion vehicles, etc. 
    Any person who shall, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, climb into or upon such vehicle, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto, or who, while a vehicle, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting crank or other device, brakes or mechanism thereof or to set into motion such vehicle, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief, or injury thereto, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, except that the provision set forth in this section shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty. 
(Code 1967, § 18-28; Code 1981, § 16-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-147. 
Sec. 22-15. - Repossession under lien. 
    The provisions of sections 22-13 and 22-14 shall not apply to a bona fide repossession of a vehicle, boat or vessel by the holder of a lien on such vehicle, boat or vessel or by agents or employees of such lienholder. 
(Code 1967, § 18-29; Code 1981, § 16-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-148. 
Sec. 22-16. - Turning sluice or stream. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to turn any sluice or stream of water upon the land or premises of another person. 
(Code 1967, § 18-30; Code 1981, § 16-16) 
Sec. 22-17. - Coin-operated devices; unlawful operation. 
    Any person who shall operate, cause to be operated or attempt to operate or cause to be operated any coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine that operates on the coin-in-the slot principle, whether of like kind or not, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, in connection with the use or enjoyment of telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges or any other service, or the sale of merchandise or other property, by means of a slug, or any false, counterfeit, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick or device whatsoever, not authorized by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine; or who shall obtain or receive telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges, merchandise or any other service or property from any such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machines, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, without depositing in or surrendering to such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine lawful coin of the United States of America to the amount required therefor by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 18-11; Code 1981, § 16-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-179. 
Sec. 22-18. - Calling or summoning ambulance or firefighting apparatus without just cause; maliciously activating fire alarms in public buildings. 
    Any person who without just cause therefor, calls or summons, by telephone or otherwise, any ambulance, or firefighting apparatus, or any person who maliciously activates a manual or automatic fire alarm in any building used for public assembly or for other public use, including, but not limited to, schools, theaters, stores, office buildings, shopping centers and malls, coliseums and arenas, regardless of whether fire apparatus responds or not, shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 18-6; Code 1981, § 16-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212. 
Sec. 22-19. - Iceboxes, etc.; abandonment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two cubic feet of clear space which is airtight, without first removing the door or doors or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed, or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant, or is created, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 18-14; Code 1981, § 16-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319. 
Sec. 22-20. - Fornication generally. 
    Any person, not being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any other person shall be guilty of fornication, punishable as a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 18-3; Code 1981, § 16-21) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-344. 
Sec. 22-21. - Lewdness and lasciviousness. 
    If any persons, not married to each other, lewdly and lasciviously associate and cohabit together, or, whether married or not, are guilty of open and gross lewdness and lasciviousness, each of them shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor; and upon a repetition of the offense, and conviction thereof, each of them shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 18-19; Code 1981, § 16-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-345. 
Sec. 22-22. - Adultery generally. 
    Any person, being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any person not his or her spouse shall be guilty of adultery, punishable as a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 18-2; Code 1981, § 16-23) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-365. 
Sec. 22-23. - Adultery and fornication by persons forbidden to marry. 
    If any person shall commit adultery or fornication with any person whom he or she is forbidden by law to marry, such person shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to a person committing adultery or fornication with his daughter or granddaughter, or with her son or grandson, or her father or his mother. 
(Code 1967, § 18-5; Code 1981, § 16-24) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-366. 
Sec. 22-24. - Profane cursing or swearing. 
    If any person shall profanely curse or swear in public, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, he shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. In any area in which there is located a court-approved detoxification center a law enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Code 1967, § 18-23; Code 1981, § 16-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388. 
Sec. 22-25. - Indecent exposure. 
    Every person who intentionally makes an obscene display or exposure of his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where others are present, or procures another to so expose himself, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. No person shall be deemed to be in violation of this section for breastfeeding a child in any public place or any place where others are present. 
(Code 1967, § 18-15; Code 1981, § 16-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387. 
Sec. 22-26. - Obstructing free passage of others. 
    Any person who in any public place or on any private property open to the public unreasonably or unnecessarily obstructs the free passage of other persons to and from or within such place or property and who shall fail or refuse to cease such obstruction or move or when requested to do so by the owner or lessee or agent or employee of such owner or lessee or by a duly authorized law enforcement officer shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit lawful picketing. 
(Code 1967, §§ 18-19.1, 27-10, 27-11; Code 1981, § 16-27) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-404. 
Sec. 22-27. - Riots. 
    In accordance with the authority granted to the city council by the Code of Virginia, § 15.2-925, the chief law enforcement officer of the city is hereby authorized and empowered to regulate, restrict or prohibit any assembly of persons or the movement therein of persons or vehicles when there exists an imminent threat of any civil commotion or disturbance in the nature of a riot in the city or any part thereof which constitutes a clear and present danger thereof. In such circumstances the city council may convene immediately in a special meeting and enact an emergency ordinance or ordinances for such purposes, notwithstanding any contrary provisions in any Charter or under the general law. 
(Code 1967, § 18-24.1; Code 1981, § 16-28) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-925; what constitutes a riot, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-405. 
Sec. 22-28. - Assemblies, demonstrations, etc. 
    No gathering of persons for the holding of an assembly or demonstration or for any other purpose shall be held on or in the streets, parks, alleys, bridges and other public property of the city, unless there shall have first been obtained from the city manager a permit in writing permitting same to be held. Any person desiring to hold such a gathering of persons shall first make application to the city manager at least 12 hours in advance of the time for holding the same. The city manager may grant or refuse such permit as in his judgment is best for the public interest, good or welfare of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold such a gathering of persons without the required permit subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No matter advertising any thing or business shall be displayed in or on the public rights-of-way in connection with such temporary use. 
(2)  The person so permitted to use public rights-of-way shall furnish a public liability and property damage insurance contract insuring the liability of such person, firm, association, organization or corporation for personal injury or death and damages to property resulting from such temporary use in such amounts as shall be determined by the city council; the city shall be named as an additional insured in the contract. 
(3)  When any rights-of-way that are closed are extensions of the state primary highway system, adequate provision shall be made to detour through traffic. 
(Code 1967, § 18-8; Code 1981, § 16-29) 
State Law reference- Power of city to permit the temporary use of streets for other than public purposes, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2013; unlawful assembly, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-406 et seq. 
Sec. 22-29. - Disorderly conduct in public places. 
(a)  A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he: 
(1)  In any street, highway, public building or while in or on a public conveyance or public place engages in conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such conduct is directed; provided, however, such conduct shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under this chapter; or 
(2)  Willfully, or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts any funeral, memorial service, or meeting of the governing body of any political subdivision of this state or a division or agency thereof, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if such disruption prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of any funeral, memorial service or of such meeting or has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such disruption is directed; provided, however, such conduct shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under this chapter. 
(b)  The person in charge of any such building, place, conveyance or meeting may eject any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purpose. 
(c)  A person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, §§ 18-25, 18-26; Code 1981, § 16-30) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct in public places, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 22-30. - Abusive language. 
    If any person shall, in the presence or hearing of another, curse or abuse such other person, or use any violent abusive language to such person concerning himself or any of his relations, or otherwise use such language, under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, he shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 18-1; Code 1981, § 16-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-416. 
Sec. 22-31. - Adoption of provisions regarding juvenile and domestic relations matters in courts not of record. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313, all of the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 16.1-278 et seq., as may hereafter be amended, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though set out at length herein. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate the provisions of those sections of the Code of Virginia. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313; 
Sec. 22-32. - Minors in poolrooms. 
(a)  No minor under 16 years of age shall frequent, play in or loiter in any public poolroom or billiard room; nor shall the proprietor of any public poolroom or billiard room or his agent permit any such minor to frequent, play in or loiter in any such place. 
(b)  Any such minor or any such proprietor or agent violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 18-22; Code 1981, § 16-32) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit minors in certain places, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926. 
Sec. 22-33. - Curfew. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of 18 years to be upon the streets or in other public places of the city after the hour of 11:00 p.m., unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to allow or by insufficient control allow such child under the age of 18 years to be upon the streets or in other public places in the city after 11:00 p.m., unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(c)  This section shall not be so construed as to prohibit children under 18 years of age from attending places of religious worship or meetings held by or under the auspices of the public schools or Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, or other like organizations, not accompanied by a parent or guardian. It is also an exception if such minor is: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian and was using a direct route; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity and was using a direct route; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police officer about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending an official school or religious activity or returning home by a direct route from an official school or religious activity; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; 
(9)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with state law; or 
(10)  Traveling in a direct route to the minor's residence after any organized athletic activity. 
(d)  A violation of this section by a minor shall be disposed of as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-278.4 and 16.1-278.5. Any parent, guardian or custodian of the minor violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 18-12; Code 1981, § 16-33; Ord. of 6-23-1994) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt curfew ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926; enforcement limitations, Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-278.4, 16.1-278.5. 
Sec. 22-34. - Obstructing justice by threats or force. 
    If any person, by threats or force, attempts to intimidate or impede a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, witness, or an officer of a court, or any law enforcement officer, in the discharge of his duty, or to obstruct or impede the administration of justice in any court, he shall be deemed guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 18-24; Code 1981, § 16-34) 
State Law reference- Obstructing justice by threats or force, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460. 
Sec. 22-35. - Disturbing the peace; specific conduct prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to disturb the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct or by threatening, challenging to fight, assaulting, fighting or striking of another, or by congregating, running and playing on the sidewalk or in the street in such manner as to endanger or intimidate others using such sidewalks and streets. 
(Code 1981, § 16-35; Ord. of 11-8-1984) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 22-36. - Loitering. 
    Loitering in, upon or around any public place whether or not on private property in such a manner as to inhibit or intimidate others in the use of such places is hereby prohibited. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a lawful assembly or lawful picketing. 
(Code 1981, § 16-36; Ord. of 7-16-1992) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit loitering, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926. 
Sec. 22-37. - Burning trash, leaves, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made a fire of leaves, trash or other inflammable material. For purposes of this section, the term "open burning," means any outdoor fire not contained in a metal or masonry fireplace or grill for the purpose of cooking food. Burning may be permitted upon notification and approval of the chief of the fire department and city manager under the following exceptions: 
(1)  Recognized practices of agriculture for the clearing of land and disposal of scrubby trees, brush, weeds or other plant life. 
(2)  Open burning by the order of any public official in the performance of his duties for the prevention of an irregular and nonrecurring hazard, which cannot be reasonably abated by other means, or for the instruction of firefighting personnel. 
(3)  Open burning for the cooking of food or recreational purposes such as campfires. 
(4)  Open burning for heating by construction or other workmen. 
(5)  Open burning for the purpose of right-of-way clearing by the state highway department, any public service corporation or by any contractor pursuant to the terms of his contract and under the direction of a representative of such department or public service corporation. 
(6)  Open burning for reforestation, when undertaken in compliance with the practices recommended by the state division of forestry, department of conservation and economic development. 
(7)  Open burning by a railroad company of combustible material on its right-of-way as a forest fire preventive measure under the direction of the state division of forestry, department of conservation and economic development. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner, employer, developer or corporation, as the case may be, to obtain all other required authorizations from state or federal agencies. 
(b)  All burning shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1142 as currently adopted or as such section may hereafter be amended. 
(c)  The administration and enforcement of this section shall be the responsibility of the chief of the fire department or fire marshal or their designated representative. He shall have the right to stop burning where in his opinion such burning causes a threat to public safety or welfare, in dry weather, water shortages or other local, state or federal emergencies. The chief of the fire department or fire marshal or their designated representative shall have all rights available to them as provided by local, state or federal law, to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00 for each separate offense. If any forest fire shall originate as a result of the violation by any person for any provision of this section, such person shall in addition to the penalty set forth in this subsection, be liable to the city and to the county for the full amount of all expenses incurred by the city and county respectively in suppressing such fire, such amounts to be recoverable by action brought by the city. 
(Ord. of 5-23-1996, § 16-35; Ord. of 10-2-2003(02), § 16-37) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate the making of fires, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-922.1. 
Sec. 22-38. - Urinating and defecating in public. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or on any sidewalk, street or in any public place, or in any place where other persons are present, unless such urination or defecation be in a bathroom, restroom or other facility specifically designed for such purpose. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, 2-15-2018) 
Secs. 22-39-22-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEAPONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-63. - Pointing or brandishing firearm or object similar in appearance. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ammunition means cartridge, pellet, ball, missile or projectile adapted for use in a firearm. 
    Firearm means any weapon that will or is designed to or may readily be converted to expel single or multiple projectiles by the action of an explosion of a combustible material. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to point, hold or brandish any firearm or any air- or gas-operated weapon or any object similar in appearance, whether capable of being fired or not, in such manner as to reasonably induce fear in the mind of another or hold a firearm or any air or gas operated weapon in a public place in such a manner as to reasonably induce fear in the mind of another of being shot or injured. However, this section shall not apply to any person engaged in excusable or justifiable self-defense. Persons violating the provisions of this section other than upon any public, private or religious elementary, middle or high school, including buildings and grounds or upon public property within 1,000 feet of such school property, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor 
(c)  Any police officer, in the performance of his duty in making an arrest under the provisions of this section, shall not be civilly liable in damages for injuries or death resulting to the person being arrested if he had reason to believe that the person being arrested was pointing, holding or brandishing such firearm, or air- or gas-operated weapon or object which was similar in appearance to a firearm, with intent to induce fear in the mind of another. 
(Code 1967, § 32-2; Code 1981, § 30-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-282. 
Sec. 22-64. - Discharging firearms. 
    If any person shall willfully discharge or cause to be discharged any firearm in any street in the city, or in any place of public business or place of public gathering, or anywhere within the city and such conduct is not otherwise punishable pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-280, he shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer in the performance of his official duties nor to any other person whose said willful act is otherwise justifiable or excusable at law in the protection of his life or property, or is otherwise specifically authorized by law, or on public or private property which consists of a single parcel consisting of nine acres or more, and is undertaken in designated, approved and supervised areas by the owner or his designated responsible agent, area designated by the city manager, and is at least 250 feet from any residential lot. 
(Code 1967, § 32-3; Code 1981, § 30-3; Ord. of 9-27-1990) 
State Law reference- Discharge of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-280; authority of city to regulate or prohibit the discharge of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113. 
Sec. 22-65. - Discharging air gun, bow, etc. 
(a)  No person shall, anywhere within the city, discharge an arrow, shot, stone, gravel shooter or any other similar instrument. 
(b)  Such activities shall not be prohibited if undertaken on public properties such as Glen Maury Park or school grounds and private educational institutions if undertaken in designated, approved and supervised areas designated in writing by the city manager. 
(c)  Such activities shall not be prohibited on private property if the applicant for such permit is seeking permit for single parcel which consists of nine acres or more and the designated, approved and supervised area designated in writing by the city manager is at least 250 feet from a residential lot. 
(Code 1967, § 32-4; Code 1981, § 30-4; Ord. of 9-13-1990; Ord. of 2-17-1994) 
Sec. 22-66. - Throwing stones, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw stones, gravel or other missiles. 
(Code 1967, § 32-5; Code 1981, § 30-5) 
Sec. 22-67. - Loaded rifles and shotguns. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, possess or carry a loaded shotgun or loaded rifle in any vehicle on any public street, road or highway within the city. Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. These provisions shall not apply to duly authorized law enforcement officers or military personnel in the performance of their lawful duties, nor to any person who reasonably believes that a loaded rifle or shotgun is necessary for his personal safety in the course of his employment or business. 
(Code 1981, § 30-6; Ord. of 11-9-1989) 
Secs. 23-68-23-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONCEALED WEAPONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Carrying concealed weapons and authority of circuit court to grant a permit, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308. 

Sec. 22-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ballistic knife means any knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a spring-operated mechanism. 
    Handgun means any pistol or revolver or other firearm, except a machine gun, originally designed, made and intended to fire a projectile by means of an explosion of a combustible material from one or more barrels when held in one hand. 
    Law enforcement officer means those individuals defined as a law enforcement officer in Code of Virginia, § 9.1-101, campus police officers appointed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 23-232 et seq., law enforcement agents of the Armed Forces of the United States, the Naval Criminal Investigative Service, and federal agents who are otherwise authorized to carry weapons by federal law. The term "law enforcement officer" shall also mean any sworn full-time law enforcement officer employed by a law enforcement agency of the United States or any state or political subdivision thereof, whose duties are substantially similar to those set forth in Code of Virginia, § 9.1-101. 
    Lawfully admitted for permanent residence means the status of having been lawfully accorded the privilege of residing permanently in the United States as an immigrant in accordance with the immigration laws, such status not having changed. 
    Personal knowledge means knowledge of a fact that a person has himself gained through his own senses, or knowledge that was gained by a law enforcement officer or prosecutor through the performance of his official duties. 
    Spring stick means a spring-loaded metal stick activated by pushing a button which rapidly and forcefully telescopes the weapon to several times its original length. 
(Code 1967, § 32-1; Code 1981, § 30-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308M, N. 
Sec. 22-82. - Carrying. 
(a)  If any person shall carry about his person, hidden from common observation, any pistol or any other firearm or weapon designed or intended to propel a missile of any kind by action of an explosion of any combustible material, any dirk, bowie knife, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, machete, razor, slingshot, spring stick, metal knucks or blackjack or any weapon of like kind, or any flailing instrument consisting of two or more rigid parts connected in such a manner as to allow them to swing freely, which may be known as nun chahka, nun chuck, nunchaku, shuriken, or fighting chain or any weapon of like kind, he shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor for the first violation. Such weapon shall be forfeited to the city and may be seized by an officer as forfeited, and such as may be needed for police officers, conservators of the peace and the division of consolidated laboratory services shall be devoted to that purpose, and the remainder shall be destroyed by the officer having them in charge. For the purpose of this section, a weapon shall be deemed to be hidden from common observation when it is observable but is of such deceptive appearance as to disguise the weapon's true nature. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any person while in his own place of abode or the curtilage thereof or any person while in his own place of business. 
(c)  This section shall also not apply to any of the following individuals while in the discharge of their official duties: 
(1)  Any law enforcement officer, wherever such law enforcement officer may travel in the city; 
(2)  Any regularly enrolled member of a target shooting organization who is at, or going to or from, an established shooting range, provided that the weapons are unloaded and securely wrapped while being transported; 
(3)  Any regularly enrolled member of a weapons collecting organization who is at, or going to or from, a bona fide weapons exhibition, provided that the weapons are unloaded and securely wrapped while being transported; 
(4)  Any person carrying such weapons between his place of abode and a place of purchase or repair, provided the weapons are unloaded and securely wrapped while being transported; 
(5)  Any person actually engaged in lawful hunting, as authorized by the state board of game and inland fisheries, under inclement weather conditions necessitating temporary protection of his firearm from those conditions, provided that possession of a handgun while engaged in lawful hunting shall not be construed as hunting with a handgun if the person hunting is carrying a valid concealed handgun permit; 
(6)  Any state police officer retired from the state department of state police, any officer retired from the state division of capitol police, any local law enforcement officer, auxiliary police officer or animal control officer retired from a police department or sheriff's office within the commonwealth, any special agent retired from the state corporation commission or the state alcoholic beverage control board, any conservation police officer retired from the department of game and inland fisheries, and any state marine police officer retired from the law enforcement division of the state marine resources commission, other than an officer or agent terminated for cause: 
a.  With a service-related disability; 
b.  Following at least 15 years of service with any such law enforcement agency, board or any combination thereof; 
c.  Who has reached 55 years of age; or 
d.  Who is on long-term leave from such law enforcement agency or board due to a service-related injury, provided such officer carries with him written proof of consultation with and favorable review of the need to carry a concealed handgun issued by the chief law enforcement officer of the last such agency from which the officer retired or the agency that employs the officer or, in the case of special agents, issued by the state corporation commission or the alcoholic beverage control board. 
(d)  A copy of the proof of consultation and favorable review shall be forwarded by the chief or the board to the department of state police for entry into the state criminal information network. The chief law enforcement officer shall not without cause withhold such written proof if the retired law enforcement officer otherwise meets the requirements of this section. An officer set forth in subsection (c)(6)d of this section who receives written proof of consultation to carry a concealed handgun shall surrender such proof of consultation upon return to work or upon termination of employment with the law enforcement agency. Notice of the surrender shall be forwarded to the department of state police for entry into the state criminal information network. However, if such officer retires on disability because of the service-related injury, and would be eligible under subsection (c)(6)a of this section for written proof of consultation to carry a concealed handgun, he may retain the previously issued written proof of consultation. A retired law enforcement officer who receives proof of consultation and favorable review pursuant to this subdivision is authorized to carry a concealed handgun in the same manner as a law enforcement officer authorized to carry a concealed handgun pursuant to subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(1)  Any person who is eligible for retirement with at least 20 years of service with a law enforcement agency or board mentioned in this subsection who has resigned in good standing from such law enforcement agency or board to accept a position covered by a retirement system that is authorized under Code of Virginia, § 51.1-1 et seq., provided such person carries with him written proof of consultation with and favorable review of the need to carry a concealed handgun issued by the chief law enforcement officer of the agency from which he resigned or, in the case of special agents, issued by the state corporation commission or the alcoholic beverage control board. A copy of the proof of consultation and favorable review shall be forwarded by the chief, board or commission to the department of state police for entry into the state criminal information network. The chief law enforcement officer shall not without cause withhold such written proof if the law enforcement officer otherwise meets the requirements of this section. For purposes of applying the reciprocity provisions of section 22-85, any person granted the privilege to carry a concealed handgun pursuant to this subsection, while carrying the proof of consultation and favorable review required, shall be deemed to have been issued a concealed handgun permit. For purposes of complying with the federal Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act of 2004, a retired or resigned law enforcement officer who receives proof of consultation and review pursuant to this subsection shall have the opportunity to annually participate, at the retired or resigned law enforcement officer's expense, in the same training and testing to carry firearms as is required of active law enforcement officers in the commonwealth. If such retired or resigned law enforcement officer meets the training and qualification standards, the chief law enforcement officer shall issue the retired or resigned officer certification, valid one year from the date of issuance, indicating that the retired or resigned officer has met the standards of the agency to carry a firearm; 
(2)  Any state police officer who is a member of the organized reserve forces of any of the armed services of the United States, national guard, or naval militia, while such officer is called to active military duty, provided such officer carries with him written proof of consultation with and favorable review of the need to carry a concealed handgun issued by the superintendent of state police. The proof of consultation and favorable review shall be valid as long as the officer is on active military duty and shall expire when the officer returns to active law enforcement duty. The issuance of the proof of consultation and favorable review shall be entered into the state criminal information network. the superintendent of state police shall not without cause withhold such written proof if the officer is in good standing and is qualified to carry a weapon while on active law enforcement duty. For purposes of applying the reciprocity provisions of section 22-85, any person granted the privilege to carry a concealed handgun pursuant to this section, while carrying the proof of consultation and favorable review required, shall be deemed to have been issued a concealed handgun permit; 
(3)  Any attorney for the commonwealth or assistant attorney for the commonwealth, wherever such attorney may travel in the city; and 
(4)  Any person who may lawfully possess a firearm and is carrying a handgun while in a personal, private motor vehicle or vessel and such handgun is secured in a container or compartment in the vehicle or vessel. 
(e)  This section shall also not apply to any of the following individuals while in the discharge of their official duties, or while in transit to or from such duties: 
(1)  Carriers of the United States mail; 
(2)  Officers or guards of any state correctional institution; 
(3)  Conservators of the peace, except that an attorney for the commonwealth or assistant attorney for the commonwealth may carry a concealed handgun pursuant to subsection (d)(3) of this section. However, the following conservators of the peace shall not be permitted to carry a concealed handgun without obtaining a permit as provided in section 22-83(a): 
a.  Notaries public; 
b.  Registrars; 
c.  Drivers, operators or other persons in charge of any motor vehicle carrier of passengers for hire; or 
d.  Commissioners in chancery; and 
(4)  Noncustodial employees of the department of corrections designated to carry weapons by the director of the department of corrections pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 53.1-29. 
(Code 1967, § 32-1; Code 1981, § 30-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308A-C. 
Sec. 22-83. - Permit. 
(a)  Any person 21 years of age or older may apply in writing to the clerk of the circuit court of the city in which he resides, or if he is a member of the United States Armed Forces, the county or city in which he is domiciled, for a five-year permit to carry a concealed handgun. There shall be no requirement regarding the length of time an applicant has been a resident or domiciliary of the county or city. The application shall be made under oath before a notary or other person qualified to take oaths and shall be made only on a form prescribed by the department of state police, in consultation with the Supreme Court, requiring only that information necessary to determine eligibility for the permit. The clerk shall enter on the application the date on which the application and all other information required to be submitted by the applicant is received. The court shall consult with either the sheriff or police department of the county or city and receive a report from the central criminal records exchange. As a condition for issuance of a concealed handgun permit, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting if required by local ordinance in the county or city where the applicant resides and provide personal descriptive information to be forwarded with the fingerprints through the Central Criminal Records Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining criminal history record information regarding the applicant, and obtaining fingerprint identification information from federal records pursuant to criminal investigations by state and local law enforcement agencies. However, no local ordinance shall require an applicant to submit to fingerprinting if the applicant has an existing concealed handgun permit issued pursuant to this section and is applying for a new five-year permit pursuant to subsection (f) of this section. Where feasible and practical, the local law enforcement agency may transfer information electronically to the state police instead of inked fingerprint cards. Upon completion of the criminal history records check, the state police shall return the fingerprint cards to the submitting local agency or, in the case of scanned fingerprints, destroy the electronic record. The local agency shall then promptly notify the person that he has 21 days from the date of the notice to request return of the fingerprint cards, if any. All fingerprint cards not claimed by the applicant within 21 days of notification by the local agency shall be destroyed. All optically scanned fingerprints shall be destroyed upon completion of the criminal history records check without requiring that the applicant be notified. Fingerprints taken for the purposes described in this section shall not be copied, held or used for any other purposes. The court shall issue the permit and notify the state police of the issuance of the permit within 45 days of receipt of the completed application unless it is determined that the applicant is disqualified. A court may authorize the clerk to issue concealed handgun permits, without judicial review, to applicants who have submitted complete applications, for whom the criminal history records check does not indicate a disqualification and, after consulting with either the sheriff or police department of the county or city, about which there are no outstanding questions or issues concerning the application. The court clerk shall be immune from suit arising from any acts or omissions relating to the issuance of concealed handgun permits without judicial review pursuant to this section unless the clerk was grossly negligent or engaged in willful misconduct. This subsection shall not be construed to limit, withdraw, or overturn any defense or immunity already existing in statutory or common law, or to affect any cause of action accruing prior to July 1, 2010. Upon denial of the application, the clerk shall provide the person with notice, in writing, of his right to an ore tenus hearing. Upon request of the applicant made within 21 days, the court shall place the matter on the docket for an ore tenus hearing. The applicant may be represented by counsel, but counsel shall not be appointed, and the rules of evidence shall apply. The final order of the court shall include the court's findings of fact and conclusions of law. Any order denying issuance of the permit shall state the basis for the denial of the permit and the applicant's right to and the requirements for perfecting an appeal of such order pursuant to subsection (i) of this section. Only a circuit court judge may deny issuance of a permit. An application is deemed complete when all information required to be furnished by the applicant is delivered to and received by the clerk of court before or concomitant with the conduct of a state or national criminal history records check. If the court has not issued the permit or determined that the applicant is disqualified within 45 days of the date of receipt noted on the application, the clerk shall certify on the application that the 45-day period has expired, and mail or send via electronic mail a copy of the certified application to the applicant within five business days of the expiration of the 45-day period. The certified application shall serve as a de facto permit, which shall expire 90 days after issuance, and shall be recognized as a valid concealed handgun permit when presented with a valid government-issued photo identification pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, until the court issues a five-year permit or finds the applicant to be disqualified. If the applicant is found to be disqualified after the de facto permit is issued, the applicant shall surrender the de facto permit to the court and the disqualification shall be deemed a denial of the permit and a revocation of the de facto permit. If the applicant is later found by the court to be disqualified after a five-year permit has been issued, the permit shall be revoked. The clerk of court may withhold from public disclosure the social security number contained in a permit application in response to a request to inspect or copy any such permit application, except that such social security number shall not be withheld from any law enforcement officer acting in the performance of his official duties. 
(b)  The following persons shall be deemed disqualified from obtaining a permit: 
(1)  An individual who is ineligible to possess a firearm pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308.1:1, 18.2-308.1:2 or 18.2-308.1:3 or the substantially similar law of any other state or of the United States. 
(2)  An individual who was ineligible to possess a firearm pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308.1:1 and who was discharged from the custody of the commissioner pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 19.2-182.7 less than five years before the date of his application for a concealed handgun permit. 
(3)  An individual who was ineligible to possess a firearm pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308.1:2 and whose competency or capacity was restored pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 37.2-1012 less than five years before the date of his application for a concealed handgun permit. 
(4)  An individual who was ineligible to possess a firearm under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308.1:3 and who was released from commitment less than five years before the date of this application for a concealed handgun permit. 
(5)  An individual who is subject to a restraining order, or to a protective order and prohibited by Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308.1:4 from purchasing or transporting a firearm. 
(6)  An individual who is prohibited by Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308.2 from possessing or transporting a firearm, except that a permit may be obtained in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308.2C. 
(7)  An individual who has been convicted of two or more misdemeanors within the five-year period immediately preceding the application, if one of the misdemeanors was a Class 1 misdemeanor, but the judge shall have the discretion to deny a permit for two or more misdemeanors that are not Class 1 misdemeanors. Traffic infractions and misdemeanors set forth in title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia shall not be considered for purposes of this disqualification. 
(8)  An individual who is addicted to, or is an unlawful user or distributor of, marijuana, synthetic cannabinoids, or any controlled substance. 
(9)  An individual who has been convicted of a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 or a substantially similar local ordinance, or of public drunkenness, or of a substantially similar offense under the laws of any other state, the District of Columbia, the United States, or its territories within the three-year period immediately preceding the application, or who is a habitual drunkard as determined pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 4.1-333. 
(10)  An alien other than an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States. 
(11)  An individual who has been discharged from the Armed Forces of the United States under dishonorable conditions. 
(12)  An individual who is a fugitive from justice. 
(13)  An individual who the court finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, based on specific acts by the applicant, is likely to use a weapon unlawfully or negligently to endanger others. The sheriff, chief of police or attorney for the commonwealth may submit to the court a sworn written statement indicating that, in the opinion of such sheriff, chief of police, or attorney for the commonwealth, based upon a disqualifying conviction or upon the specific acts set forth in the statement, the applicant is likely to use a weapon unlawfully or negligently to endanger others. The statement of the sheriff, chief of police, or the attorney for the commonwealth shall be based upon personal knowledge of such individual or of a deputy sheriff, police office, or assistant attorney for the commonwealth of the specific acts, or upon a written statement made under oath before a notary public of a competent person having personal knowledge of the specific acts. 
(14)  An individual who has been convicted of any assault, assault and battery, sexual battery, discharging of a firearm in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-280 or 18.2-286.1 or brandishing of a firearm in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-282 within the three-year period immediately preceding the application. 
(15)  An individual who has been convicted of stalking. 
(16)  An individual whose previous convictions or adjudications of delinquency were based on an offense which would have been at the time of conviction a felony if committed by an adult under the laws of any state, the District of Columbia, the United States or its territories. For purposes of this disqualifier, only convictions shall be deemed to be previous convictions if they occur within 16 years following the later of the date of: 
a.  The conviction or adjudication; or 
b.  Release from any incarceration imposed upon such conviction or adjudication. 
(17)  An individual who has a felony charge pending or a charge pending for an offense listed in subsection (b)(14) or (15) of this section. 
(18)  An individual who has received mental health treatment or substance abuse treatment in a residential setting within five years prior to the date of his application for a concealed handgun permit. 
(19)  An individual not otherwise ineligible pursuant to this section, who, within the three-year period immediately preceding the application for the permit, was found guilty of any criminal offense set forth in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-247 et seq., or of a criminal offense of illegal possession or distribution of marijuana, synthetic cannabinoids, or any controlled substance, under the laws of any state, the District of Columbia, or the United States or its territories. 
(20)  An individual, not otherwise ineligible pursuant to this section, with respect to whom, within the three-year period immediately preceding the application, upon a charge of any criminal offense set forth in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-247 et seq., or upon a charge of illegal possession or distribution of marijuana, synthetic cannabinoids, or any controlled substance under the laws of any state, the District of Columbia, or the United States or its territories, the trial court found that the facts of the case were sufficient for a finding of guilt and disposed of the case pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-251 or the substantially similar law of any other state, the District of Columbia, or the United States or its territories. 
(c)  The making of a materially false statement in an application under this section shall constitute perjury, punishable as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-434. 
(d)  The court shall require proof that the applicant has demonstrated competence with a handgun and the applicant may demonstrate such competence by one of the following, but no applicant shall be required to submit to any additional demonstration of competence, nor shall any proof of demonstrated competence expire: 
(1)  Completing any hunter education or hunter safety course approved by the department of game and inland fisheries or a similar agency of another state; 
(2)  Completing any National Rifle Association firearms safety or training course; 
(3)  Completing any firearms safety or training course or class available to the general public offered by a law enforcement agency, junior college, college, or private or public institution or organization or firearms training school utilizing instructors certified by the National Rifle Association or the department of criminal justice services; 
(4)  Completing any law enforcement firearms safety or training course or class offered for security guards, investigators, special deputies or any division or subdivision of law enforcement or security enforcement; 
(5)  Presenting evidence of equivalent experience with a firearm through participation in organized shooting competition or current military service or proof of an honorable discharge from any branch of the armed services; 
(6)  Obtaining or previously having held a license to carry a firearm in the commonwealth or a locality thereof, unless such license has been revoked for cause; 
(7)  Completing any firearms training or safety course or class, including an electronic, video, or on-line course, conducted by a state-certified or National Rifle Association-certified firearms instructor; 
(8)  Completing any governmental police agency firearms training course and qualifying to carry a firearm in the course of normal police duties; or 
(9)  Completing any other firearms training which the court deems adequate. 
A photocopy of a certificate of completion of any of the courses or classes; an affidavit from the instructor, school, club, organization or group that conducted or taught such course or class attesting to the completion of the course or class by the applicant; or a copy of any document which shows completion of the course or class or evidences participation in firearms competition shall constitute evidence of qualification under this subsection. 
(e)  The permit to carry a concealed handgun shall specify only the following information: name, address, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair, color of eyes, and signature of the permittee; the signature of the judge issuing the permit, of the clerk of court who has been authorized to sign such permits by the issuing judge, or of the clerk of court who has been authorized to issue such permits pursuant to subsection (a) of this section; the date of issuance; and the expiration date. The permit to carry a concealed handgun shall be no larger than two inches wide by 31/4-inches long and shall be of a uniform style prescribed by the department of state police. The person issued the permit shall have such permit on his person at all times during which he is carrying a concealed handgun and shall display the permit and a photo-identification issued by a government agency of the Commonwealth or by the United States Department of Defense or United States Department of State (passport) upon demand by a law enforcement officer. If a permit holder is a member of the Virginia National Guard, Armed Forces of the United States or the Armed Forces Reserves of the United States, and his five-year permit expires during an active-duty military deployment outside of the permittee's county or city of residence, such permit shall remain valid for 90 days after the end date of the deployment. In order to establish proof of continued validity of the permit, such a permittee shall carry with him and display, upon request of a law enforcement officer, a copy of the permittee's deployment orders or other documentation from the permittee's commanding officer that order the permittee to travel outside of his county or city of residence and that indicate the start and end date of such deployment. 
(f)  Persons who previously have held a concealed handgun permit shall be issued, upon application as provided in subsection (a) of this section, and upon receipt by the circuit court of criminal history record information as provided in subsection (a) of this section, a new five-year permit unless it is found that the applicant is subject to any of the disqualifications set forth in subsection (b) of this section. Persons who previously have been issued a concealed handgun permit pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall not be required to appear in person to apply for a new five-year permit pursuant to this subsection, and the application for the new permit may be submitted via the United States mail. The circuit court that receives the application shall promptly notify an applicant if the application is incomplete or if the fee submitted for the permit pursuant to subsection (h) of this section is incorrect. If the new five-year permit is issued while an existing permit remains valid, the new five-year permit shall become effective upon the expiration date of the existing permit, provided that the application is received by the court at least 90 days, but no more than 180 days, prior to the expiration of the existing permit. If the circuit court denies the permit, the specific reasons for the denial shall be stated in the order of the court denying the permit. Upon denial of the application, the clerk shall provide the person with notice, in writing, of his right to an ore tenus hearing. Upon request of the applicant made within 21 days, the court shall place the matter on the docket for an ore tenus hearing. The applicant may be represented by counsel, but counsel shall not be appointed, and the rules of evidence shall apply. The final order of the court shall include the court's findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
(g)  Any person convicted of an offense that would disqualify that person from obtaining a permit under subsection (b) of this section or who violates subsection (c) of this section shall forfeit his permit for a concealed handgun and surrender it to the court. Upon receipt by the Central Criminal Records Exchange of a record of the arrest, conviction or occurrence of any other event that would disqualify a person from obtaining a concealed handgun permit under subsection (b) of this section, the Central Criminal Records Exchange shall notify the court having issued the permit of such disqualifying arrest, conviction or other event. Upon receipt of such notice of a conviction, the court shall revoke the permit of a person disqualified pursuant to this subsection, and shall promptly notify the state police and the person whose permit was revoked of the revocation. 
(1)  Any person permitted to carry a concealed handgun, who is under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs while carrying such handgun in a public place, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Conviction of any of the following offenses shall be prima facie evidence, subject to rebuttal, that the person is "under the influence" for purposes of this section: 
a.  Manslaughter in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-36.1; 
b.  Maiming in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-51.4; 
c.  Driving while intoxicated in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266; 
d.  Public intoxication in violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388; or 
e.  Driving while intoxicated in violation of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24. 
Upon such conviction that court shall revoke the person's permit for a concealed handgun and promptly notify the issuing circuit court. A person convicted of a violation of this subsection shall be ineligible to apply for a concealed handgun permit for a period of five years. 
(2)  An individual who has a felony charge pending or a charge pending for an offense listed in subsection (b)(14) or (15) of this section, holding a permit for a concealed handgun, may have the permit suspended by the court before which such charge is pending or by the court that issued the permit. 
(3)  No person who carries a concealed handgun onto the premises of any restaurant or club as defined in Code of Virginia, § 4.1-100 for which a license to sell and serve alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption has been granted by the state alcoholic beverage control board under title 4.1 of the Code of Virginia may consume an alcoholic beverage while on the premises. A person who carries a concealed handgun onto the premises of such a restaurant or club and consumes alcoholic beverages is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. However, nothing in this subsection shall apply to a federal, state, or local law enforcement officer. 
(4)  The court shall revoke the permit of any individual for whom it would be unlawful to purchase, possess or transport a firearm under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308.1:2 or 18.2-308.1:3, and shall promptly notify the state police and the person whose permit was revoked of the revocation. 
(h)  Permits issued to certain retired services: 
(1)  No fee shall be charged for the issuance of such permit to a person who has retired from service as a: 
a.  Magistrate in the commonwealth; 
b.  Special agent with the alcoholic beverage control board or as a law enforcement officer with the department of state police, the department of game and inland fisheries, or a sheriff or police department, bureau or force of any political subdivision of the commonwealth, after completing 15 years of service or after reaching age 55; 
c.  Law enforcement officer with the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Secret Service Agency, Drug Enforcement Administration, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, Customs Service, Department of State Diplomatic Security Service, U.S. Marshals Service or Naval Criminal Investigative Service, after completing 15 years of service or after reaching age 55; 
d.  Law enforcement officer with any police or sheriff's department within the United States, the District of Columbia or any of the territories of the United States, after completing 15 years of service; 
e.  Law enforcement officer with any combination of the agencies listed in subsection (h)(1)b through d of this section, after completing 15 years of service; or 
f.  Designated boarding team member or boarding officer of the United States Coast Guard, after completing 15 years of service or after reaching age 55. The clerk shall charge a fee of $10.00 for the processing of an application or issuing of a permit, including his costs associated with the consultation with law enforcement agencies. 
The local law enforcement agency conducting the background investigation may charge a fee not to exceed $35.00 to cover the cost of conducting an investigation pursuant to this section. The $35.00 fee shall include any amount assessed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for providing criminal history record information, and the local law enforcement agency shall forward the amount assessed by the Federal Bureau of Investigation to the state police with the fingerprints taken from the applicant. The state police may charge a fee not to exceed $5.00 to cover their costs associated with processing the application. The total amount assessed for processing an application for a permit shall not exceed $50.00, with such fees to be paid in one sum to the person who accepts the application. Payment may be made by any method accepted by that court for payment of other fees or penalties. No payment shall be required until the application is accepted by the court as a complete application. The order issuing such permit, or the copy of the permit application certified by the clerk as a de facto permit pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, shall be provided to the state police and the law enforcement agencies of the county or city. The state police shall enter the permittee's name and description in the state criminal information network so that the permit's existence and current status will be made known to law enforcement personnel accessing the network for investigative purposes. The state police shall withhold from public disclosure permittee information submitted to the state police for purposes of entry into the state criminal information network, except that such information shall not be withheld from any law enforcement agency, officer, or authorized agent thereof acting in the performance of official law enforcement duties, nor shall such information be withheld from an entity that has a valid contract with any local, state, or federal law enforcement agency for the purpose of performing official duties of the law enforcement agency. However, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the release of records by the state police concerning permits issued to nonresidents of the commonwealth pursuant to sections 22-86 and 22-87, or statistical summaries, abstracts or other records containing information in an aggregate form that does not identify any individual permittees. 
(2)  The clerk of a circuit court that issued a valid concealed handgun permit shall, upon presentation of the valid permit and proof of a new address of residence by the permit holder, issue a replacement permit specifying the permit holder's new address. The clerk of court shall forward the permit holder's new address of residence to the state police. The state police may charge a fee not to exceed $5.00, and the clerk of court issuing the replacement permit may charge a fee not to exceed $5.00. The total amount assessed for processing a replacement permit pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed $10.00, with such fees to be paid in one sum to the person who accepts the information for the replacement permit. 
(3)  The clerk of a circuit court that issued a valid concealed handgun permit shall, upon submission of a notarized statement by the permit holder that the permit was lost or destroyed, issue a replacement permit. The replacement permit shall have the same expiration date as the permit that was lost or destroyed. The clerk shall issue the replacement permit within ten business days of receiving the notarized statement, and may charge a fee not to exceed $5.00. 
(i)  Any person denied a permit to carry a concealed handgun under the provisions of this section may present a petition for review to the court of appeals. The petition for review shall be filed within 60 days of the expiration of the time for requesting an ore tenus hearing pursuant to subsection (f) of this section, or if an ore tenus hearing is requested, within 60 days of the entry of the final order of the circuit court following the hearing. The petition shall be accompanied by a copy of the original papers filed in the circuit court, including a copy of the order of the circuit court denying the permit. Subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 17.1-410B, the decision of the court of appeals or judge shall be final. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the decision to deny the permit is reversed upon appeal, taxable costs incurred by the person shall be paid by the commonwealth. 
(Code 1967, § 32-1; Code 1981, § 30-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308D-L. 
Sec. 22-84. - Permit does not authorize possession in otherwise prohibited places. 
    The granting of a concealed handgun permit shall not thereby authorize the possession of any handgun or other weapon on property or in places where such possession is otherwise prohibited by law or is prohibited by the owner of private property. 
(Code 1967, § 32-1; Code 1981, § 30-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308O. 
Sec. 22-85. - Valid permits by other states legal in commonwealth in certain cases. 
    A valid concealed handgun or concealed weapon permit or license issued by another state shall authorize the holder of such permit or license who is at least 21 years of age to carry a concealed handgun in the commonwealth, provided: 
(1)  The issuing authority provides the means for instantaneous verification of the validity of all such permits or licenses issued within that state, accessible 24 hours a day; and 
(2)  Except for the age of the permit or license holder and the type of weapon authorized to be carried, the requirements and qualifications of that state's law are adequate to prevent possession of a permit or license by persons who would be denied a permit in the commonwealth under this section. 
(Code 1967, § 32-1; Code 1981, § 30-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308P. 
Sec. 22-86. - Nonresident-Permit; application procedure. 
    Nonresidents of the commonwealth 21 years of age or older may apply in writing to the department of state police for a five-year permit to carry a concealed handgun. Every applicant for a nonresident concealed handgun permit shall submit two photographs of a type and kind specified by the department of state police for inclusion on the permit and shall submit fingerprints on a card provided by the department of state police for the purpose of obtaining the applicant's state or national criminal history record. As a condition for issuance of a concealed handgun permit, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by his local or state law enforcement agency and provide personal descriptive information to be forwarded with the fingerprints through the Central Criminal Records Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining criminal history record information regarding the applicant and obtaining fingerprint identification information from federal records pursuant to criminal investigations by state and local law enforcement agencies. The application shall be made under oath before a notary or other person qualified to take oaths on a form provided by the department of state police, requiring only that information necessary to determine eligibility for the permit. If the permittee is later found by the department of state police to be disqualified, the permit shall be revoked and the person shall return the permit after being so notified by the department of state police. The permit requirement and restriction provisions of section 22-87(b) and (c) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 32-1; Code 1981, § 30-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308P.1. 
Sec. 22-87. - Same-Applicant requirements. 
(a)  The applicant shall demonstrate competence with a handgun by one of the following: 
(1)  Completing a hunter education or hunter safety course approved by the state department of game and inland fisheries or a similar agency of another state; 
(2)  Completing any National Rifle Association firearms safety or training course; 
(3)  Completing any firearms safety or training course or class available to the general public offered by a law enforcement agency, junior college, college, or private or public institution or organization or firearms training school utilizing instructors certified by the National Rifle Association or the department of criminal justice services or a similar agency of another state; 
(4)  Completing any law enforcement firearms safety or training course or class offered for security guards, investigators, special deputies, or any division or subdivision of law enforcement or security enforcement; 
(5)  Presenting evidence of equivalent experience with a firearm through participation in organized shooting competition approved by the department of state police or current military service or proof of an honorable discharge from any branch of the armed services; 
(6)  Obtaining or previously having held a license to carry a firearm in the commonwealth or a locality thereof, unless such license has been revoked for cause; 
(7)  Completing any firearms training or safety course or class, including an electronic, video, or online course, conducted by a state-certified or National Rifle Association-certified firearms instructor; 
(8)  Completing any governmental police agency firearms training course and qualifying to carry a firearm in the course of normal police duties; or 
(9)  Completing any other firearms training that the department of state police deems adequate. 
(b)  A photocopy of a certificate of completion of any such course or class, an affidavit from the instructor, school, club, organization or group that conducted or taught such course or class attesting to the completion of the course or class by the applicant, or a copy of any document which shows completion of the course or class or evidences participation in firearms competition shall satisfy the requirement for demonstration of competence with a handgun. 
(c)  The department of state police may charge a fee not to exceed $100.00 to cover the cost of the background check and issuance of the permit. Any fees collected shall be deposited in a special account to be used to offset the costs of administering the nonresident concealed handgun permit program. The department of state police shall enter the permittee's name and description in the state criminal information network so that the permit's existence and current status are known to law enforcement personnel accessing the network for investigative purposes. 
(d)  The permit to carry a concealed handgun shall contain only the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair, color of eyes and photograph of the permittee; 
(2)  The signature of the superintendent of the department of state police or designee; 
(3)  The date of issuance; and 
(4)  The expiration date. 
(e)  The person to whom the permit is issued shall have such permit on his person at all times when he is carrying a concealed handgun in the commonwealth and shall display the permit on demand by a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1967, § 32-1; Code 1981, § 30-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308 P.1. 
Sec. 22-88. - State of Maryland permit valid under certain conditions in the state. 
(a)  A valid concealed handgun permit issued by the State of Maryland shall be valid in the commonwealth, provided the holder of the permit is licensed in the State of Maryland to perform duties substantially similar to those performed by state branch pilots licensed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 54.1-900 et seq., and is performing such duties while in this state, and the holder of the permit is 21 years of age or older. 
(b)  For the purposes of participation in concealed handgun reciprocity agreements with other jurisdictions, the official government-issued law enforcement identification card issued to an active-duty law enforcement officer in the commonwealth who is exempt from obtaining a concealed handgun permit under this section shall be deemed a concealed handgun permit. 
(Code 1967, § 32-1; Code 1981, § 30-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308Q, R. 
Sec. 22-89. - Concealed handgun permit. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308, any applicant for a concealed handgun permit as a condition of issuance of such permit, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting and provide personal description information to be forwarded with the fingerprints for the purpose of obtaining criminal history record information. 
(Ord. of 6-12-1997) 
State Law reference- Authority to require fingerprinting for initial concealed handgun permit, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-915.3; concealed handgun permits, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308. 
Chapter 24 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to establish, maintain and regulate the use of parks, golf courses, playgrounds and other public grounds, § 2.305. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish and maintain parks, playgrounds and recreation systems, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1806, 15.2-1811 et seq.; liability of city in the operation of recreational facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1809; regulation and liability of use of parks, playgrounds, recreation, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1801 et seq. 

Sec. 24-1. - Penalties. 
    It shall be a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to fail to abide by duly authorized restrictive signs within Glen Maury Park. 
(Code 1981, § 17-1) 
Sec. 24-2. - Glen Maury Park. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without authority of law, to go upon or remain upon the land constituting the Glen Maury Park owned by the city after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the city manager or his duly authorized agent, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign or signs posted upon said property or its buildings. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to duly registered campers who have not had their registration cancelled. 
(c)  The prerogative to forbid a person from entering or going upon the property of Glen Maury Park shall rest with the park director, and anyone aggrieved by his decision shall have the right of appeal to the circuit court of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 17-2; Ord. No. 76-26, 8-12-1976) 
Chapter 26 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning, zoning, subdivision, etc., article 7. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt planning and zoning regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2200; authority for council to give notice by direct mail of planning and zoning matters, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2205; planning, subdivision of land and zoning generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2200 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Planning and zoning, article 7. 
State Law reference- Local planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210 et seq. 

Sec. 26-19. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a planning commission of the city. Such commission shall bear the title of, and shall be known as, the city planning commission. Such creation is pursuant to the Charter of the city and the applicable state law. 
(Code 1967, § 19-1; Code 1981, § 20-16) 
State Law reference- Duty of council to create planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2210. 
Sec. 26-20. - Composition. 
    In accordance with the Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212, the city planning commission shall consist of nine members, including the city manager, who shall be an ex officio member of the planning commission. Such members of the planning commission shall be residents of the city and at least half the members shall be freeholders qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development. 
(Code 1967, § 19-2; Code 1981, § 20-17; Ord. of 2-28-1980) 
State Law reference- Qualifications, appointment, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212. 
Sec. 26-21. - Appointment; term. 
    The members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve for terms in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212. 
(Code 1967, § 19-3; Code 1981, § 20-18) 
State Law reference- Members to serve staggered terms of four years, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212. 
Sec. 26-22. - Compensation. 
    The members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation by reason of the performance of the duties as a member of such commission. 
(Code 1967, § 19-5; Code 1981, § 20-19) 
State Law reference- Compensation, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212. 
Sec. 26-23. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning commission shall have all of the powers and duties conferred upon such planning commission by the general laws of the state and by the provisions of the Charter. 
(Code 1967, § 19-8; Code 1981, § 20-20) 
Charter reference- Planning, zoning, etc., art. 7. 
State Law reference- Duties of planning commissions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2221. 
Sec. 26-24. - Regular meetings; rules; records. 
    The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting during each month and shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be a public record. 
(Code 1967, § 19-6; Code 1981, § 20-21) 
State Law reference- Planning commission to establish time for meetings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2214. 
Sec. 26-25. - Chair. 
    The members of the planning commission shall, at the regular meeting of such commission held during the month of September of each year, elect one of the members of such commission as chair of the planning commission for a term of office of one year, and the chair shall be eligible for reelection upon the termination of his term of office. 
(Code 1967, § 19-7; Code 1981, § 20-22) 
State Law reference- Officers, employees, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2217. 
Sec. 26-26. - Reappointment of members. 
    A member of the planning commission shall be eligible for reappointment upon the termination of his term of office as a member of the planning commission. 
(Code 1967, § 19-4; Code 1981, § 20-23) 
State Law reference- Appointments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2212. 
Chapter 28 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require property owners to remove garbage and refuse and city's right to operate a garbage and refuse collection and disposal service, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-901, 15.2-927; authority of city to contract for and regulate garbage and refuse pickup and disposal services, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-930; solid and hazardous waste management, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-177 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Automobile bodies. 
    No person shall dump or deposit any automobile bodies or parts of automobile bodies in or upon the county landfill. 
(Code 1967, § 24-1; Code 1981, § 24-2) 
Secs. 28-2-28-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION, ETC., BY CITY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-21. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall be construed to apply to commercial and residential premises. 
(Code 1967, § 24-3; Code 1981, § 24-16) 
Sec. 28-22. - Garbage containers-Liquids. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place any liquid in any garbage or trash container. 
(Code 1967, § 24-8; Code 1981, § 24-20) 
Sec. 28-23. - Same-Injuring. 
    When a garbage container is placed on the outside of commercial or residential premises, it shall be unlawful for any person to throw such garbage container on the street or sidewalk or to injure it in any way so as to make it leak or bend it, or its cover, so as to prevent such garbage container from being tightly covered. 
(Code 1967, § 24-7; Code 1981, § 24-22) 
Sec. 28-24. - Fees and rates. 
    The sold waste fees and charges are on file in the city offices. 
(Code 1967, § 24-8.1; Code 1981, § 24-23; Ord. No. 75-07, 6-12-1975; Ord. of 7-10-1980; Ord. of 5-30-1985; Ord. of 5-26-1989; Ord. of 5-31-1990; Ord. of 4-13-1995; Ord. of 5-7-1998) 
Sec. 28-25. - Nonresident's use of solid waste containers. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nonresident means any individual, person, corporation, partnership or firm not having a place of abode or business licensed by the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any nonresident to place any material or waste of any type in or about the solid waste containers provided by the city. 
(c)  Any individual, person, firm, corporation, partnership or any other legal entity violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction therefor the first offense shall be punished by a fine not less than the sum of $25.00 or more than $100.00; upon the second and all subsequent offenses which result in a conviction, punishment shall be a fine not less than the sum of $100.00 nor more than $500.00 and by confinement in jail not to exceed the term of 30 days, either or both. 
(Code 1981, § 24-24; Ord. of 1-23-1992) 
Secs. 28-26-28-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL PREMISES 

Sec. 28-54. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this division shall be construed to apply to residential premises only. 
(Code 1967, § 24-9; Code 1981, § 24-31) 
Sec. 28-55. - Container location; entry by collector. 
    All containers containing garbage or refuse to be hauled away shall be so placed or located that they can be easily and conveniently reached by the persons hauling the garbage or refuse away. Such person shall not be required to enter any building for removal of any garbage or refuse. If any person connected with the garbage or trash removal services shall enter any building in connection with such work, he shall do so only on request and the city shall not be liable because of or on account of any claim made for any injury or damage caused by such person entering such building. 
(Code 1967, § 24-10; Code 1981, § 24-32) 
Sec. 28-56. - Containers set out for collection. 
    All containers containing garbage, ashes or refuse intended for collection by the city or by a contractor with the city shall be set out as provided in this article not earlier than 5:30 p.m. of the day preceding collection. 
(Code 1967, § 24-13; Code 1981, § 24-33) 
Sec. 28-57. - Removal of containers following collection. 
    All containers for garbage, ashes or refuse set out for collection by the city or by a contractor with the city shall be removed as promptly as possible following collection of the garbage, ashes or refuse. 
(Code 1967, § 24-14; Code 1981, § 24-34) 
Sec. 28-58. - Trash and other containers. 
    No bulk trash, refuse, tree limbs, shrubbery, leaves and other similar matter shall be collected without additional charge, unless such matter can be and is placed in a suitable container. 
(Code 1967, § 24-11; Code 1981, § 24-35) 
Sec. 28-59. - Limbs and cuttings. 
    Limbs and cuttings shall be cut in five-foot lengths and tied in bundles not exceeding 11/2 feet in diameter and placed by the garbage container on regular collection days. 
(Code 1967, § 24-12; Code 1981, § 24-36) 
Chapter 30 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power relating to public works and properties, § 2.3; authority to regulate activities in streets, § 2.304. 
State Law reference- General authority of city relative to streets and sidewalks, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2000 et seq., 15.2-2100 et seq.; alteration and vacation of public rights-of-way, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2006-15.2-2008; street obstructions and encroachments, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2009-15.2-2012; temporary closing of street, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2013, 15.2-2014; use of streets, permits, etc., Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2015-15.2-2018; naming of streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2019; assessments for local improvements, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2400 et seq.; local government authority over highways, etc., Code of Virginia, § 33.1-224 et seq.; laying of pipes in streets, Code of Virginia, § 56-257 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Authority of city manager. 
    The city manager shall have authority to prescribe regulations for work done on city streets by the city forces. 
(Code 1967, § 27-2; Code 1981, § 25-1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Acceptance of streets for care and maintenance. 
(a)  No street shall be accepted for care and maintenance by the city unless such new street has been graded and surfaced as provided in this chapter and dedicated by the recording of a plat drawn to scale showing such street, in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the city, at the expense of the owner of the property, and no such acceptance shall take place until the plat of the street has been accepted and approved by the city council. 
(b)  Before new streets can be accepted by the city for care and maintenance, such streets must meet the requirements of the state department of highways and transportation. 
(Code 1967, § 27-1; Code 1981, § 25-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - Cellar doors or gratings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or construct or cause to be constructed any structure or obstruction in or upon any paved sidewalk within the city, unless prior approval is granted by the city. 
(Code 1967, § 27-5; Code 1981, § 25-3) 
Sec. 30-4. - Open cellar ways, areaways, etc., guarded. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any cellar way, areaway or other place of like character opening on or in a public sidewalk in the city to remain open unless properly guarded by bars or otherwise. 
(Code 1967, § 27-7; Code 1981, § 25-4) 
Sec. 30-5. - Gates and doors generally. 
    Every gate or door built or constructed in any fence, garden or yard wall, upon or within two feet of the line of any public sidewalk on any street in the city, shall be hung so as to open inward. 
(Code 1967, § 27-6; Code 1981, § 25-5) 
Sec. 30-6. - Permit to construct entrance to property on street. 
(a)  Any landowner desiring to construct a driveway, steps, curb cut or other entrance to his property which would result in construction on city streets or avenues shall first make application for and receive a permit from the city manager or designated agent authorizing the construction of any such entrance. The application shall contain information as prescribed by the city manager or his agent. The permit issued shall set forth the specifications for the proposed construction and the landowner shall comply with these specifications. 
(b)  Prior to issuance of such a permit to any landowner, the landowner shall first execute a hold harmless agreement with the city, agreeing to be financially responsible for any damage done to city or public utility installations and any cost which the city might be caused to expend as a result of the failure of the landowner to comply with the requirements of the permit issued. 
(Code 1967, § 27-14.1; Code 1981, § 25-6) 
Sec. 30-7. - Merchandise, boxes, crates, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit to remain upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks adjoining his premises any merchandise, boxes, crates or other things that will cause the streets, alleys or sidewalks to be obstructed. However, this section shall not be construed to prohibit the display of merchandise during the hours a person is open for business; provided that the display of such merchandise does not occupy more than one-half of the width of the sidewalk immediately adjacent to such business and does not unreasonably interfere with the orderly movement of pedestrians. Merchandise left on the sidewalks during nonbusiness hours shall be deemed to be on the sidewalk for purposes of storage and not display and in violation of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 27-8; Code 1981, § 25-7) 
Sec. 30-8. - Opening car doors. 
    No person shall open a car door so as to render dangerous the use of public streets or so as to obstruct traffic. 
(Code 1967, § 27-6.1; Code 1981, § 25-8) 
Sec. 30-9. - Removal of ground, dirt, etc., from street or alley. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up or carry away from any street or alley, within the city, any ground, dirt or stone without the written permission of the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 27-9; Code 1981, § 25-9) 
Sec. 30-10. - Building materials. 
    No person shall place building materials upon the street, sidewalk or alley for use in connection with construction work, unless he shall have first obtained a permit from the city manager to do so and unless he shall place such materials in the space assigned and in the manner directed by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 27-13; Code 1981, § 25-10) 
Sec. 30-11. - Throwing or depositing garbage, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw paper, garbage, liquid wastes, refuse, offal or other obnoxious or unsightly matter into or upon any street or public place of the city, or to permit or suffer the same to be done by any person in his employment, or to throw, place, drop or cause to be put, any coal, ashes, dirt or filth of any kind or any lumber, wood, stone or other obstruction into or upon any street or public place in the city. This section shall not be construed to apply to building material placed on the street, sidewalk or alley pursuant to section 30-10. 
(Code 1967, § 27-12; Code 1981, § 25-11) 
State Law reference- Litter control, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1414 et seq. 
Sec. 30-12. - Projecting trees, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property abutting a street or sidewalk to allow any trees, plants or shrubs growing on such property to project from the property in such manner as to obstruct or interfere with the safe passage of vehicles or pedestrians. 
(Code 1967, § 27-14; Code 1981, § 25-12) 
Sec. 30-13. - Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. 
    The tenant or occupant, and in case there shall be no tenant or occupant, the owner, or any person having the care of any building or lot of land abutting on any curbed or paved sidewalk shall, during the first eight hours of daylight following the time when snow or ice ceases to fall or form, cause the same to be removed from such curbed or paved sidewalk. 
(Code 1967, § 27-3; Code 1981, § 25-13) 
State Law reference- Removal of snow and ice, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1115, 15.2-2025. 
Sec. 30-14. - Removal of snow and ice to sidewalks or streets prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any tenant or occupant, the owner or any person having the care of any building or lot of land to remove snow from such building, lot or land by removing the snow to any sidewalk or street. 
(Code 1967, § 27-4; Code 1981, § 25-14) 
Sec. 30-15. - An obstruction within five feet of right-of way prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to remain on the streets or avenues or at any point within the public right-of-way of such streets and avenues which is closer than five feet from the edge of the paved portion of such street or avenue or the curbing adjoining such street or avenue, any temporary or permanent obstruction including, but not limited to, any nonmotor vehicle recreational equipment, basketball goals or similar personal property. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2003) 
Secs. 30-16-30-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS AND LOTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Numbering of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2024. 

Sec. 30-34. - Plat book showing numbers. 
    For the purpose of facilitating correct numbering, as provided in this article, a plat book of all streets, avenues and public highways within the city showing the proper number of all lots or houses fronting upon all streets, avenues or highways shall be kept on file in the office of the city manager. These plats shall be open to inspection of all persons during the regular office hours of the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 27-30; Code 1981, § 25-31) 
Sec. 30-35. - Location of numbers. 
    The numbers installed pursuant to this article shall be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at the side of the proper door of each building so that the number can be seen plainly from the street. Whenever any building is situated more than 50 feet from the street line, the number of such building shall be conspicuously displayed at the street line, near the walk, driveway or common entrance to such building and upon the gatepost, fence, tree, post or other appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the sidewalk. 
(Code 1967, § 27-29; Code 1981, § 25-32) 
Sec. 30-36. - System established. 
    There is hereby established a uniform system of numbering of buildings and lots fronting on all streets and public ways in the city. All buildings and lots shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 27-21; Code 1981, § 25-33) 
Sec. 30-37. - Base lines. 
(a)  First Street shall constitute the base line for the numbering of buildings and lots on streets running north and south. 
(b)  Magnolia Avenue and its extension along Lombardy Avenue shall constitute the base line for the numbering of buildings and lots on streets running east and west. 
(Code 1967, § 27-22; Code 1981, § 25-34) 
Sec. 30-38. - Streets not extending through to the base line street. 
    All buildings and lots on streets that do not extend through to the base line street shall be assigned the same relative numbers as if the street in question did extend to the base line street. 
(Code 1967, § 27-24; Code 1981, § 25-35) 
Sec. 30-39. - Diagonal streets. 
    All buildings and lots on diagonal streets shall be numbered the same as north and south streets if the diagonal runs more from the north to the south and the same as east and west streets if the diagonal runs more from the east to the west. 
(Code 1967, § 27-23; Code 1981, § 25-36) 
Sec. 30-40. - Assignment of numbers within blocks. 
(a)  The numbering of buildings and lots on each street shall begin at the base line. The numbers within the first block shall be from 100 to 199 and the numbers in each succeeding block shall increase from the base line in units of 100, namely the first block shall be 100 to 199, the second block shall be 200 to 299, the third block shall be 300 to 399 and so forth. There shall be assigned 100 numbers to each block or square or space that would be one block or square, if streets each way were so extended as to intersect each other, and one number shall be assigned to each ten feet of frontage. In blocks or equivalent space longer than 500 feet which is not intersected by a street if extended, the total length of space divided by 50 shall be used to determine the feet of frontage assigned to each number. 
(b)  Where blocks of different lengths occur on opposite sides of a street, the numbers on both sides shall be assigned on the basis of the shorter blocks, unless the city manager shall otherwise determine. 
(c)  All lots and houses on the north and west side of all streets shall be numbered with odd numbers, each increase from the base line one number for each ten feet of frontage or fraction thereof, except as provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. Where any building has more than one door serving separate occupants, a separate number shall be assigned to each door serving a separate occupant, provided, the building is ten feet or more in width and if the entrances are not that far apart, the consecutive number shall be marked fractional. Buildings fronting on two or more streets shall have a number assigned only to the main entrance, unless other entrances serve different occupants. 
(Code 1967, § 27-25; Code 1981, § 25-37) 
Sec. 30-41. - Assignment of numbers. 
    When any person applies for the assignment of a number, the city manager shall inform such person concerning the number belonging or embraced within the limits of the lot or property in question, as provided in this article. In case of doubt as to the proper number to be assigned to any lot or building, the city manager shall determine the number of such lot or building. 
(Code 1967, § 27-27; Code 1981, § 25-38) 
Sec. 30-42. - Designation of portion of building. 
    Where only one number can be assigned to any house or building and the owner, occupant or agent of such house or building desires distinctive numbers for the upper or lower portion of any such house or building or for any part of such house or building fronting on any street, such owner, occupant or agent shall use the suffix A, B, C, etc., as may be required. 
(Code 1967, § 27-26; Code 1981, § 25-39) 
Sec. 30-43. - Duty of property owner; size of numbers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of buildings and lots to ascertain the correct number or numbers as designated from the city manager for the property in question and to immediately fasten or locate the number or numbers so assigned upon the building in question as provided by this article. No building permit shall be issued for any house, building or structure until the owner has obtained from the city manager the official number of the premises. 
(b)  Numbers installed pursuant to this article shall be procured and paid for by the owner of the property in question. The numbers used shall not be less than three inches in height. 
(Code 1967, § 27-28; Code 1981, § 25-40) 
Secs. 30-44-30-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate activities in streets, § 2.304. 
State Law reference- Alteration and vacation of public rights-of-way, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2006-15.2-2008; street obstructions and encroachments, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2009-15.2-2012; temporary closing of street, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2013, 15.2-2014; use of streets, permits, etc., Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2015-15.2-2018. 

Sec. 30-75. - Exception. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to work done by city forces under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 27-20; Code 1981, § 25-52) 
Sec. 30-76. - Permit required. 
    No person, unless specially authorized by the city council, shall take up or remove any portion of the surface of the sidewalk or street, or excavate in any public street of the city, without a written permit from the city manager, who shall not refuse such permit to any applicant except for cause, but in case of refusal the applicant may appeal to the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 27-15; Code 1981, § 25-53) 
Sec. 30-77. - Deposits; acquiescence in provisions of article. 
(a)  Before a permit as required in this article is granted, the city manager may require a deposit sufficient to pay for resurfacing the street to be disturbed, the amount of such deposit to be determined by the city manager. 
(b)  Every person who shall make application for such a permit shall be deemed to have assented thereby to all the provisions and terms of this article, including the right of the city to collect the actual cost of replacing the pavement, sidewalk or street surface in the manner directed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 27-16; Code 1981, § 25-54) 
Sec. 30-78. - Duty to prosecute work without delay. 
    It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit, as required in this article, shall have been granted, to institute at once and prosecute without delay the work for which such permit was obtained, and promptly, on its completion, give written notice thereof to the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 27-17; Code 1981, § 25-55) 
Sec. 30-79. - Lights and barriers; damages. 
    Any person to whom a permit, as required in this article, is granted shall place guards or barriers around the excavation in question and shall protect it by warning lights at night, and shall be responsible for damages to persons or property caused by such excavations until taken in charge by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 27-19; Code 1981, § 25-56) 
Sec. 30-80. - Replacing surface. 
    No pavement, sidewalk or street surface shall be replaced, after being taken up, pursuant to a permit as required in this article, by any person except under the direction of the city manager. If the applicant fails to resurface the street disturbed, promptly and in a manner approved by the city manager, the city manager is authorized to cause such work to be done at the expense of the applicant. 
(Code 1967, § 27-18; Code 1981, § 25-57) 
Secs. 30-81-30-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CEMETERY 

Sec. 30-104. - Rates. 
    The following cemetery rates and charges are hereby established: 
(1)  Resident lot sale, $550.00 to $900.00. 
(2)  Nonresident lot sale, $1,100.00 to $1,200.00. 
(3)  Weekday grave opening, $400.00 to $750.00. 
(4)  Weekend grave opening, $550.00 to $1,000.00. 
(5)  Holiday grave opening, $650.00 to $1,000.00. 
(Ord. of 7-22-1999) 
Chapter 32 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to control, regulate, limit and restrict, as permitted by general law, the operation of motor vehicles, § 2.412. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq.; general authority of city to regulate traffic, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique motor vehicle means every motor vehicle which was actually manufactured, or designated by the manufacturer as a model manufactured, in a calendar year not less than 25 years prior to January 1 of each calendar year and is owned solely as a collector's item, and is used for participation in club activities, exhibits, tours, parades and similar uses, but in no event used for general transportation, and which has been classified by the commissioner as an antique motor vehicle. 
    Bicycle means a device propelled solely by human power, upon which a person may ride either on or astride a regular seat attached thereto, having two or more wheels in tandem, including children's bicycles, except a toy vehicle intended for use by young children. For purposes of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800 et seq., a bicycle shall be a vehicle while operated on the highway. 
    Business district means the territory contiguous to a street or highway where 75 percent or more of the property contiguous to a street or highway, on either side of the street or highway, for a distance of 300 feet or more along the street or highway, is occupied by land and buildings actually in use and operation for business purposes. 
    Camping trailer means every vehicle which has collapsible sides and contains sleeping quarters, but may or may not contain bathing and cooking facilities, and is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Chauffeur means every person employed for the principal purpose of operating a motor vehicle and every person who drives a motor vehicle while in use as a public or common carrier of persons or property. 
    Commission means the state corporation commission. 
    Commissioner means the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles of this state. 
    Crosswalk means the part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street or highway, measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. The term "crosswalk" also means and includes any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
    Dealer means every person engaged in the business of buying, selling or exchanging motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers in this city and who has an established place of business for such purpose in this city, at which place of business the books and records of such dealer are kept and at which a substantial part of the business of such dealer is conducted. 
    Department means the department of motor vehicles of this state. 
    Essential parts means all integral parts and body parts, the removal, alteration or substitution of which will tend to conceal the identity of a vehicle. 
    Farm tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm, agricultural or horticultural implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other farm, agricultural or horticultural machinery and implements, including self-propelled mowers designed and used for mowing lawns. 
    Highway or street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place of whatever nature open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in this city, including the streets, alleys and publicly maintained parking lots in the city, and for law enforcement purposes, the entire width between the boundary lines of all private roads or private streets which have been specifically designated "highways" by an ordinance adopted by the city council. 
    Intersection means: 
(1)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles travelling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(2)  Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
(3)  For purposes only of authorizing installation of traffic control devices, every crossing of a highway or street at grade by a pedestrian crosswalk. 
    Mobile home means every vehicle not otherwise classified in this section which has noncollapsible sides, which contains sleeping quarters and may or may not contain bathing and cooking facilities, and every trailer not designed for the transportation of property but is used primarily for office space and is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled or designed for self-propulsion. Any structure designed, used or maintained primarily to be loaded on or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling, sleeping place, office or commercial space shall be considered a part of a motor vehicle. Any device defined in this section as a "bicycle" shall be deemed not to be a motor vehicle. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground and any four-wheeled vehicle weighing less than 500 pounds and equipped with an engine of less than six horsepower, except any such vehicle as may be included within the term "farm tractor" as defined in this section. 
    Nonresident. 
(1)  The term "nonresident" means every person who is not domiciled in this state. 
(2)  The term "nonresident" does not mean: 
a.  Any foreign corporation which is authorized to do business in this state by the state corporation commission shall be deemed a resident of this state for the purpose of this chapter; provided, however, that in the case of corporations incorporated in this state but doing business without the state, only such principal place of business or branches located within this state shall be dealt with as residents of this state. 
b.  A person who becomes engaged in a gainful occupation in the state for a period exceeding 60 days shall be deemed a resident for the purposes of this chapter. 
c.  A person who has actually resided in this state for a period of six months, whether employed or not, or who has registered a motor vehicle, listing an address within this state in the application for registration, shall be deemed a resident for the purposes of this chapter. 
    Operator means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a highway or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle. 
    Owner means a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or, in the event a vehicle is the subject to an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter, except that in all such instances when the rent paid by the lessee includes charges for services of any nature or when the lease does not provide that title shall pass to the lessee upon payment of the rent stipulated, the lessor shall be regarded as the owner of such vehicle and the vehicle shall be subject to such requirements of this chapter as are applicable to vehicles operated for compensation; provided, however, that a "truck lessor," as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, shall be regarded as the owner, and his vehicles shall be subject to such requirements of this chapter as are applicable to vehicles of private carriers. 
    Peace or police officer means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
    Pneumatic tires means all tires inflated with compressed air. 
    Private road or driveway means every way in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
    Reconstructed vehicle means every vehicle of a type required to be registered under state law, which is materially altered from its original construction by the removal, addition or substitution of essential parts, new or used. 
    Rescue vehicle means any vehicle designed or utilized for the principal purposes of supplying resuscitation or other emergency relief where human life is endangered. 
    Residence district means the territory contiguous to a street or highway, not comprising a business district, where 75 percent or more of the property contiguous to such street or highway, on either side of the street or highway, for a distance of 300 feet or more along the street or highway, is occupied by dwellings and land improved for dwelling purposes or by land or buildings in use for business purposes. 
    Road tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. A street or highway may include two or more roadways, if divided by a physical barrier or barriers or unpaved area. 
    Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
    School bus means any motor vehicle, other than a station wagon, automobile, truck or commercial bus, which is: 
(1)  Designed and used primarily for the transportation of pupils to and from public, private or religious schools, or used for the transportation of the mentally or physically handicapped to and from a sheltered workshop; and 
(2)  Painted yellow and bears the words "School Bus" in black letters of a specified size on front and rear; and 
(3)  Is equipped with warning devices prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 46.1-1090. 
    Semitrailer means every vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
    Shoulder means that part of a street or highway between the portion regularly travelled by vehicular traffic and the lateral curbline or ditch. 
    Solid rubber tire means every tire made of rubber other than a pneumatic tire. 
    Specially constructed vehicle means any vehicle which shall not have been originally constructed under a distinctive name, make, model or type by a generally recognized manufacturer of vehicles, and not a "reconstructed vehicle," as that term is defined in this section. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the department of state police. 
    Tractor truck means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the load and weight of the vehicle attached thereto. 
    Traffic infraction means a violation of law punishable as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113, which is neither a felony nor a misdemeanor. 
    Traffic lane or lane means that portion of a roadway designed or designated to accommodate the forward movement of a single line of vehicles. 
    Trailer means every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including manufactured homes. 
    Truck means every motor vehicle designed to transport property on its own structure independent of any other vehicle and having a registered gross weight in excess of 7,500 pounds. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway. For the purposes of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800 et seq., bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, and mopeds shall be vehicles while operated on a highway. 
(Code 1967, § 16-2; Code 1981, § 13-1; Ord. of 6-8-2000; Ord. of 6-13-2002) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
Sec. 32-2. - Compliance with chapter; general penalty for violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Unless otherwise stated, such violations shall constitute traffic infractions punishable by a fine of not more than that provided for Class 4 misdemeanor under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-11. 
(Code 1967, § 16-31; Code 1981, § 13-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions applicable to violations of state traffic laws, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113; maximum penalties for violation of traffic ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113. 
Sec. 32-3. - Applicability of chapter to drivers, regardless of vehicle ownership. 
    The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles, regardless of ownership, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 16-4; Code 1981, § 13-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-801. 
Sec. 32-4. - Applicability of chapter to persons riding or driving animals. 
    Every person riding or driving an animal upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and shall have all of the rights and all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application. 
(Code 1967, § 16-5; Code 1981, § 13-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800. 
Sec. 32-5. - Exemptions for operators of emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The operator of any law enforcement vehicle operated by or under the direction of a federal, state or local law enforcement officer in the chase or apprehension of violators of the law or persons charged with or suspected of any such violation, or in response to an emergency call; any vehicle used for the purpose of fighting fire, including publicly owned state forest warden vehicles not to exceed 200 in number, when traveling in response to a fire alarm or emergency call; any vehicle owned by a political subdivision of the state for rescue purposes, when traveling in response to a fire alarm or an emergency call; or any ambulance or rescue or life-saving vehicle designed or utilized for the principal purposes of supplying resuscitation or emergency relief where human life is endangered, when such vehicle is being used in the performance of public services, and when such vehicle is operated under emergency conditions, may, without subjecting himself to criminal prosecution: 
(1)  Proceed past a red signal, light, stop sign or device indicating moving traffic shall stop, if the speed and movement of the vehicle are reduced and controlled so that it can pass a signal, light or devices with due regard to the safety of persons and property. 
(2)  Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Disregard regulations governing a direction of movement of vehicles turning in specified directions, so long as the operator does not endanger life or property. 
(4)  Pass or overtake, with due regard to the safety of persons and property, another vehicle at any intersection. 
(5)  Pass or overtake, with due regard to the safety of persons and property, while in route to an emergency, other stopped or slow-moving vehicles, by going off the paved or main traveled portion of the roadway on the right. Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, vehicles exempted in this instance will not be required to sound a siren or any device to give automatically intermittent signals. 
(b)  The exemptions granted by this section to a moving vehicle shall apply only when the operator of such vehicle displays a flashing, blinking or alternating red light and sounds a siren, exhaust whistle or air horn designed to give automatically intermittent signals, as may be reasonably necessary, and only when there is in force and effect for such vehicle standard automobile liability insurance covering injury or death to any person in the sum of at least $100,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident and, subject to the limit for one person, to a limit of $300,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and to a limit of $10,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident. 
(c)  The exemptions granted by this section shall not protect the operator of such vehicle from criminal prosecution for conduct constituting reckless disregard of the safety of persons and property. Nothing in this section shall be construed to release the operator of any such vehicle from civil liability for failure to use reasonable care in such operation. 
(Code 1967, § 16-79; Code 1981, § 13-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-920. 
Sec. 32-6. - Adoption of state traffic laws. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, as currently exist or as may hereafter be amended, except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, can have no application to or within the city, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the city. Reference to term "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia which is adopted by this section; provided, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq. 
(b)  All definitions of words and phrases contained in the state law hereby adopted shall apply to such words and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless clearly indicated to the contrary. 
(Code 1967, § 16-1; Code 1981, § 13-6; Ord. No. 75-12, 7-24-1975; Ord. of 12-14-1989; Ord. of 6-13-1991; Ord. of 11-26-1996(02), § 13-6; Ord. of 9-12-2002(01); Ord. of 11-13-2003(01)) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt state law by reverence, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313. 
Sec. 32-7. - Adoption of provisions regarding driving while under influence of alcohol or drugs. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313, all of the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 et seq., as may hereafter be amended, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though set out at length herein. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate the provisions of said article and section of the Code of Virginia, while operating a motor vehicle in an area subject to the jurisdiction of the court system of the city. 
(Code 1967, §§ 16-83-16-89; Code 1981, § 13-7; Ord. of 9-12-2002(02); Ord. of 11-13-2003(02)) 
State Law reference- General power of city to prohibit operation of vehicles while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1716; authority to adopt state law on the subject, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313. 
Sec. 32-8. - Powers of city manager. 
(a)  The city manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed, from time to time, by the city council, shall have power and is hereby authorized to regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the corporate limits of the city by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating prohibited or limited parking, angle parking, the parking of buses, trucks and other vehicles of various weights, U-turns, turning at intersections (including prohibited or required right or left turns), hazardous intersections, school zones, hospital zones, loading and unloading zones, quiet zones, traffic control signals exhibiting colored lights or the word "go," "caution" or "stop" and other signs or markers indicating the place and manner of operating or parking vehicles in the city. 
(b)  The city manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed, from time to time, by the city council, shall also have power and is hereby authorized to regulate the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and sidewalks of the city by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
(c)  The city manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed, from time to time, by the city council, shall also have power and is hereby authorized to designate bus stops and to erect signs prohibiting the parking of vehicles other than buses at such stops. 
(d)  The city manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed, from time to time, by the city council, is further empowered and authorized to mark off traffic lanes or streets and parts of streets indicating and directing the flow of traffic. 
(e)  The city manager shall further have power and is hereby authorized to secure all such necessary signs, signals or markers to be erected or placed on any street or part of a street. 
(Code 1967, § 16-6; Code 1981, § 13-9) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1300 et seq., 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 32-9. - Stop and yield intersections. 
(a)  The city manager, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the city council, may designate intersections at which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way. 
(b)  The city manager shall further have power and is hereby authorized to secure all such necessary signs, signals or markers to be erected or placed on or at any such intersection, so that an ordinarily observant person, who may be affected by such regulation, may be aware of such regulation. 
(Code 1967, § 16-7; Code 1981, § 13-10) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301. 
Sec. 32-10. - Signs, etc., authorized. 
    The existence of signs, signals or markers as described in the preceding two sections at any place within the corporate limits of the city shall be prima facie evidence that such signs, signals or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the city manager in accordance with the provisions of such sections. 
(Code 1967, §§ 16-6, 16-7; Code 1981, § 13-11) 
State Law reference- Signs or markers must be visible, etc., Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301. 
Sec. 32-11. - Compliance with signs, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the directions indicated on any sign, signal or marker erected or placed in accordance with the provisions of sections 32-8-32-10 when such sign, signal or marker so placed or erected is visible and legible. 
(Code 1967, § 16-8; Code 1981, § 13-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-830. 
Sec. 32-12. - Permits for parades and processions. 
    No funeral procession or parade, excepting the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of the state and the forces of the police and fire departments of the city, shall occupy or march or proceed along any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 16-10; Code 1981, § 13-13) 
State Law reference- Power of city to permit the temporary use of streets for other than public purposes, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2013. 
Sec. 32-13. - Enforcement of chapter by police; officers not to benefit from fines. 
(a)  Every police officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter; provided that such officer shall be uniformed at the time of such enforcement or shall display his badge or other sign of authority. All officers making arrests incident to the enforcement of this chapter shall be paid fixed salaries for their services and shall have no interest in, nor be permitted by law to accept the benefit of, any fine or fee resulting from the arrest or conviction of an offender against any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  With the consent of the landowner, any such officer or other uniformed employee of the police department may patrol the landowner's property to enforce state, county or city motor vehicle registration and licensing requirements. 
(c)  Any law enforcement officer may patrol the streets and roads within subdivisions of real property or within land submitted to a horizontal property regime pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 55-79.1 et seq., or 55-79.39 et seq., which streets and roads are maintained by the owners of the lots or parcels of land within the subdivision or the owners of condominium units within any horizontal property regime or any association of owners, on the request or with the consent of the owners or association of owners, to enforce the provisions of this chapter punishable as felonies, misdemeanors, or traffic infractions. 
(Code 1981, § 13-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-102. 
Sec. 32-14. - Authority of police generally. 
    Every police officer of this city is authorized to act as a traffic officer in the direction of traffic on any street where traffic is heavy or continuous, and the direction by such traffic officer shall take precedence over any lights or semaphores. 
(Code 1967, § 16-32; Code 1981, § 13-15) 
Sec. 32-15. - Regulation of traffic in subdivisions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code to the contrary, there shall be in all subdivisions presently existing or hereafter established all necessary traffic signs, devices and controls, irrespective of ownership, in any street, right-of-way, easement, pedestrian way, parking area or other area open to the public. 
(b)  The police department of the city shall enforce all of the provisions of this chapter within all subdivisions, whether under the control of homeowners' associations or other associations maintaining their own streets, sidewalks, parking areas, recreation areas or their common areas or ways in public use, but not in public ownership. Any law enforcement officer properly enforcing the law shall not be subject to any civil or criminal action for trespassing while enforcing the law in or upon any property in public use but not in public ownership. 
(c)  This section shall apply to all existing and future residential subdivisions. All signs or other appropriate marking or devices regulating pedestrian traffic shall be prepared and installed, at expense of the owner, by the city manager in accordance with the provisions of sections 32-8-32-10. 
(Code 1981, § 13-16) 
State Law reference- Authority for section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1305. 
Sec. 32-16. - Direction of traffic by police officers and school crossing guards. 
(a)  Police officers and uniformed school crossing guards may direct traffic by signals. Such signals, other than by voice, shall be as follows: 
(1)  To stop traffic by hand. Stand with shoulders parallel to moving traffic. Raise arms 45 degrees above shoulder with hand extended, palm towards moving traffic to be stopped. 
(2)  To move traffic by hand. Stand with shoulders parallel to traffic to be moved. Extend right arm and hand full length at height of shoulders, towards such traffic, fingers extended and joined, palm down. Bring hand sharply in direction traffic is to move. Repeat movement with left arm and hand to start traffic from opposite direction. 
(3)  To stop and start traffic by whistles. One blast, moving traffic to stop; two blasts, traffic in opposite direction to move. 
(4)  Emergency stop of traffic by whistle. Three or more short blasts. All traffic shall immediately clear the intersection and stop. 
(b)  Such law enforcement officers and uniformed school crossing guards may also use supplemental traffic direction devices, including but not limited to handheld stop or go signs, in directing traffic as provided in this section. 
(Code 1967, § 16-34; Code 1981, § 13-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1309. 
Sec. 32-17. - Authority of chief of police to deputize persons to direct traffic. 
(a)  The chief of police may deputize persons over the age of 18 years, without the power of arrest, for the limited purpose of directing traffic in accordance with the preceding section during periods of heavy traffic or congestion, provided such persons first receive such training as the chief of police determines necessary to fully acquaint such persons with the techniques of traffic control. They shall not have arrest powers. 
(b)  Any person who is deputized as provided in this section shall, at all times while engaged in traffic control, wear a distinctive police uniform, safety vest or a white reflectorized belt which crosses both the chest and back above the waist. 
(Code 1981, § 13-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1310. 
Sec. 32-18. - Minimum age for drivers of school buses and passenger carriers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, who is under the age of 18 years to drive a motor vehicle while in use as: 
(1)  A school bus for the transportation of pupils; or 
(2)  Public passenger-carrying vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 13-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-919, 46.2-810. 
Sec. 32-19. - Vehicle motor numbers and identification numbers; required; specifications. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or to operate upon any highway in this city, any motor vehicle which does not have stamped upon or cut into the motor thereof the motor number or which does not bear a permanent serial or other identification number assigned thereto by the manufacturer or by the commissioner, or any trailer or semitrailer which does not bear a permanent serial or other identification number assigned thereto by the manufacturer thereof or by the commissioner. Such number shall be stamped, cut, embossed or attached in such a manner that it cannot be changed, altered or removed without plainly showing evidence which would be readily detectable or which would destroy the attached plate. Such number shall be die stamped, cut or embossed into or attached to a permanent part of the vehicle, which is easily accessible for checking or verification. 
(b)  Nonresident owners who are permitted to operate motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers without registration, under the registration provisions relating to nonresidents contained in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-655 through 46.2-661, shall not be required to comply with the provisions of this section before operating a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer upon the highways of this city. 
(Code 1967, § 16-22; Code 1981, § 13-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1072. 
Sec. 32-20. - Inspection of vehicles. 
(a)  The owner or operator of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer operated upon a highway within this state shall submit such vehicle to an inspection of its mechanism and equipment by an official inspection station designated for that purpose in accordance with Code of Virginia § 46.2-1158. No owner or operator of any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer operated or parked upon the highways of this city shall fail to submit such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to such inspection, or fail or refuse to correct or have corrected, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter or of state law, any mechanical defects found by such inspection to exist. Each day that such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is operated or parked on any highway of the city after failure to comply with this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The penalty for violation of this section shall be as provided in Code of Virginia § 46.2-1158.02. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles exempt pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1158.01 and 46.2-1159. 
(Code 1967, § 16-25; Code 1981, § 13-21) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1157, 46.2-1158.02. 
Sec. 32-21. - Unauthorized taking, possession or use of inspection stickers. 
(a)  No person shall, within this city, remove from the custody of any person to whom the same has been issued by or under authority of the superintendent, nor have in his possession or use otherwise than as authorized by the superintendent, the sticker or other form of paper issued by the superintendent in connection with the inspection of motor vehicles. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 16-26; Code 1981, § 13-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1172. 
Sec. 32-22. - Imitation or counterfeit inspection sticker; use of sticker issued for another vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall make, issue or knowingly use any imitation or counterfeit of any official safety inspection sticker. 
(b)  No person shall display or cause or permit to be displayed upon any vehicle any safety inspection sticker knowing it to be fictitious or issued for another vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 16-27; Code 1981, § 13-23) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1173. 
Sec. 32-23. - Authority of police to stop vehicles for inspection or to secure information. 
(a)  Except as prohibited by Code of Virginia, § 19.2-59, on request or signal, any law enforcement officer who is in uniform or displays his badge or other sign of authority may stop any: 
(1)  Motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to inspect its equipment, operation, manufacturer's serial or engine number; or 
(2)  Property-carrying motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to inspect its contents or load or to obtain other necessary information. 
(b)  Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed to authorize the establishment on any highway of police checkpoints where the only vehicles subject to inspection are motorcycles 
(Code 1967, § 16-11; Code 1981, § 13-24) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-103. 
Sec. 32-24. - Records required of persons renting motor vehicles without drivers. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the business of renting motor vehicles without drivers, who shall rent any such vehicle without a driver, otherwise than as a part of a bona fide transaction involving the sale of such motor vehicle, shall maintain a record of the identity of the person to whom the vehicle is rented and the exact time the vehicle is the subject of such rental or in possession of the person renting and having the use of the vehicle. Every such record shall be a public record and open to inspection by any person damaged as to his person or property by the operation of the vehicle or by any member of the police department in the discharge of his duty. Any person who has been damaged as to his person or property may require a production of such written record upon application in person or by his duly authorized agent or attorney. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who shall rent a motor vehicle as provided in this section to fail to make or have in possession, or to refuse an inspection of, the record required in this section. 
(c)  The owner shall use such forms for the keeping of the record provided for in this section as shall be prescribed by the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles of this state or by the city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 13-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-108. 
Sec. 32-25. - Lettering on certain vehicles including tow trucks. 
(a)  No person shall drive, cause to be driven, or permit the driving of a "for hire" motor vehicle on the highways in the city unless the name and address of the owner of the vehicle is plainly displayed on both sides of the vehicle. The letters and numerals in the display shall be of such size, shape, and color as to be readily legible during daylight hours from a distance of 50 feet while the vehicle is not in motion. The display shall be kept legible and may take the form of a removable device which meets the identification and legibility requirements of this section. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle: 
(1)  Having a registered gross weight of less than 10,000 pounds; 
(2)  Which is used exclusively for wedding, ambulance or funeral services; or 
(3)  Which is rented without chauffeur and operated under a valid lease which gives the lessee exclusive control of the vehicle. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the exemptions contained in subsection (b) of this section, the requirements of subsection (a) of this section shall also apply to all motor vehicles leased to common or contract carriers of persons or property which are required to operate under certificates or permits issued by the state corporation commission or the interstate commerce commission. 
(d)  Subsection (a) of this section shall also apply to tow trucks used in providing service to the public for hire. For the purposes of this section, the term "tow truck" means any motor vehicle which is constructed and used primarily for towing, lifting or otherwise moving disabled vehicles. 
(e)  No person shall drive on the highways in the city a pickup or panel truck, tractor truck, trailer, or semitrailer bearing any name other than that of the vehicle's owner or lessee. However, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to advertising material for another, displayed pursuant to a valid contract. 
(Code 1967, § 16-17; Code 1981, §§ 13-26-13-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1076. 
Sec. 32-26. - Occupation of trailer being towed on streets or highways. 
    No person shall occupy a house trailer or camping trailer while such trailer is being towed upon a public street or highway, and no operator of a towing vehicle shall knowingly permit another person to do such In any civil proceeding, the violation hereof shall not constitute negligence per se. 
(Code 1981, § 13-29) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-813. 
Sec. 32-27. - Inoperable vehicles; removal. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Inoperable motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which: 
(1)  Is not in operating condition; 
(2)  Which for a period of 60 days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle; or 
(3)  Does not display an inspection decal that is valid or does display an inspection decal that has been expired for more than 60 days. 
    Shielded or screened from public view means not visible by someone standing at ground level from outside of the property on which the subject vehicle is located. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure or otherwise shielded or screened from public view, or any property zoned for residential or commercial or agricultural purposes, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, as such is defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, as amended, which is inoperable. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which on June 26, 1970, was regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. It is further provided by this section that the owners of the property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes shall remove from such property any inoperable motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers that are not kept within a fully enclosed building or structure. The city, through its agents or employees, may remove any such inoperable vehicles, trailers or semitrailers, whenever the owner of the premises, after receiving a 30-day notice, has failed to do so. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, if the owner of such vehicle can demonstrate that he is actively restoring or repairing the vehicle, and if it is shielded or screened from view, the vehicle and one additional inoperative motor vehicle that is shielded or screened from view and being used for the restoration or repair may remain on the property. 
(d)  In the event the city, through its agents or employees, removes any such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers, after having given 30 days' notice, the city may dispose of such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers after giving additional notice to the owner of the vehicle. The cost of any such removal and disposal shall be chargeable either to the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the premises and may be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. The costs authorized by this section with which the owner of the premises shall have been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, the lien to continue until actual payment of such costs shall have been made to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 13-30; Ord. of 9-23-1992) 
State Law reference- Authority to restrict keeping of inoperable vehicles on residential, commercial or agricultural property, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-904. 
Sec. 32-28. - Traffic infractions treated as misdemeanors for arrest purposes. 
    For purposes of arrest, traffic infractions shall be treated as misdemeanors. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the authority and duties of arresting officers shall be the same for traffic infractions as for misdemeanors. 
(Code 1981, § 13-35) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-937. 
Sec. 32-29. - Arrest procedure for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Whenever any person is detained by or in the custody of an arresting officer, including an arrest on a warrant, for a violation of any provision of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-940 and section 32-547, the arresting officer shall, except as otherwise provided in section 32-31, or any other section of this chapter, take the name and address of such person and the license number of his motor vehicle and issue a summons or otherwise notify him in writing to appear at a time and place to be specified in such summons or notice, such time to be at least five days after such arrest unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing and such person shall, if he so desires, have a right to an immediate hearing or a hearing within 24 hours at a convenient hour, and before a court having jurisdiction. Such officer shall thereupon, and upon giving by such person of his written promise to appear at such time and place, forthwith release him from custody. 
(b)  Any person refusing to give a written promise to appear as provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be taken immediately by the arresting or other police officer before the nearest or most accessible judicial officer or other person qualified to admit to bail having jurisdiction under this chapter. 
(c)  Any person who willfully violates his written promise to appear, given in accordance with this section, shall be treated in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-938. 
(d)  Any officer violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in office and subject to removal therefrom upon complaint filed by any person in a court of competent jurisdiction. This section shall not be construed to limit the removal of a police officer for other misconduct in office. 
(Code 1967, § 16-29; Code 1981, § 13-36) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-936. 
Sec. 32-30. - Insurance of warrant upon failure to comply with summons; suspension of license for failure to appear. 
(a)  Upon the failure of any person to comply with the terms of a summons or notice as provided in the preceding section, the court may direct the arresting officer or the clerk of the court to obtain a warrant for his arrest or for the violation of his written promise to appear given in accordance with such section and serve, or cause to be served, or attempt, or cause to be attempted, to serve such warrant on the person. The warrant shall be returnable to the court having jurisdiction of the offense and shall be accompanied by a report by the arresting officer which shall clearly identify the person arrested, specifying the section of this chapter violated, the location of the offense, a description of the motor vehicle and its registration or license number. 
(b)  If the warrant is returned to the court with the notation "not found" or the person named in the warrant does not appear on the return date thereof, the court shall forward a certificate of the fact of nonservice or nonappearance, with a copy of the report specified in subsection (a) of this section, to the commissioner, who shall forthwith suspend the driver's license of such person. The order of suspension shall specify the reason for the suspension. Such suspension shall continue until such time as the court has notified the commissioner that the defendant has appeared before the court under the terms of the summons or notice and the warrant. 
(Code 1981, § 13-37) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-938. 
Sec. 32-31. - When arrested person to be taken before judicial officer. 
    If any person arrested for a violation of this chapter is believed by the arresting officer to have committed a felony; believed by the arresting officer to be likely to disregard a summons issued under section 32-29, or refuses to give a written promise to appear under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-936 or 46.2-945, the arresting officer shall promptly take such person forthwith before a magistrate or other issuing authority having jurisdiction and proceed in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 19.2-82. The magistrate or other authority may issue either a summons or warrant as he shall determine proper. 
(Code 1967, § 16-30; Code 1981, § 13-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-940. 
Secs. 32-32-32-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Registration and licensing of vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600 et seq. 

Sec. 32-53. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or for the owner thereof to knowingly permit the operation of, upon a highway within the city, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by him which is not registered or for which a certificate of title has not been issued, whenever such registration or certificate of title is required by state law or it does not have displayed on it the license plate or plates and decal or decals, if any, assigned to it by the state department for the current registration period, subject to the exemptions mentioned in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-655 et seq., and 46.2-662 et seq. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display, cause or permit to be displayed, any registration card, certificate of title, or license plate or decal which he knows is fictitious or which he knows has been cancelled, revoked, suspended, or altered; or display or cause or permit to be displayed on any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer any license plate or decal that he knows is currently issued for another vehicle. Violation of this subsection shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or lend or knowingly permit the use of any registration card, license plate, or decal by anyone not entitled to it. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to surrender to the department or the department of state police, on demand, any certificate of title, registration card, or license plate or decal which has been suspended, cancelled or revoked. Violation of this subsection shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a false name or address in any application for the registration of any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer or for a certificate of title or for any renewal or duplicate certificate, or knowingly to make a false statement of a material fact or to conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a fraud in any registration application. Violation of this subsection shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 16-13; Code 1981, § 13-51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-613. 
Sec. 32-54. - New certificate of title after substitution of motor. 
    Each holder of a certificate of title of a motor vehicle who shall substitute in such vehicle another motor, so that such motor vehicle no longer conforms to the description contained in the application for the certificate of title, shall, promptly after such change is made, secure a new certificate of title. 
(Code 1981, § 13-52) 
Sec. 32-55. - Sale of vehicle without having certificate of title. 
    Except as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-644.03 and 58.1-3942, any person who shall sell, trade, exchange or barter a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer in this city, without first having secured a certificate of title for it or without legally having in his possession a certificate of title for it issued to the owner thereof, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 16-23; Code 1981, § 13-53) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-617. 
Sec. 32-56. - Purchasing vehicle from vendor who does not have certificate of title. 
    It is unlawful for any person to purchase, trade, exchange or barter for a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer in this city, knowing or having reason to believe that the seller thereof has not secured a certificate of title, or knowing or having reason to believe that the seller thereof does not legally have in his possession a certificate of title for the vehicle issued to the owner thereof. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, for the purpose of this section, off-road motorcycles and all-terrain vehicles shall be deemed motor vehicles. 
(Code 1981, § 13-54) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-616. 
Sec. 32-57. - Possession of registration cards; exhibiting registration card and licenses; failure to carry license or registration card. 
(a)  The operator of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer being operated on the highways in the city, shall have in his possession: 
(1)  The registration card issued by the state department of motor vehicles or the registration card issued by the state or country in which the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is registered; and 
(2)  His driver's license, learner's permit, or temporary driver's permit. 
(b)  The owner or operator of any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer shall stop on the signal of any law enforcement officer who is in uniform or shows his badge or other sign of authority and shall, on the officer's request, exhibit his registration card, driver's license, learner's permit, or temporary driver's permit and write his name in the presence of the officer, if so required, for the purpose of establishing his identity. 
(c)  Every person licensed by the state department of motor vehicles as a driver or issued a learner's or temporary driver's permit who fails to carry his license or permit, and the registration card for the vehicle which he operates, shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and upon conviction punished by a fine of $10.00. However, if any person summoned to appear before a court for failure to display his license, permit, or registration card presents, before the return date of the summons, to the court a license or permit issued to him prior to the time the summons was issued or a registration card, as the case may be, or appears pursuant to the summons and produces before the court a license or permit issued to him prior to the time the summons was issued or a registration card, as the case may be, he shall, upon payment of all applicable court costs, have complied with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 16-12; Code 1981, § 13-55) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-104. 
Sec. 32-58. - Offenses relating to registration, licensing, and certificates of title; penalty. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Operate or permit the operation of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by him to be operated on a highway unless: 
a.  It is registered; 
b.  A certificate of title therefor has been issued; and 
c.  It has displayed on it the license plates and decals, if any, assigned to it by the state department of motor vehicles for the current registration period, subject to the exemptions mentioned in this chapter and Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-655 et seq., and 46.2-662 et seq. 
(2)  Display, cause or permit to be displayed, any registration card, certificate of title, or license plate or decal which he knows is fictitious or which he knows has been cancelled, revoked, suspended, or altered; or display or cause or permit to be displayed on any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer any license plate or decal that he knows is currently issued for another vehicle. Violation of this subsection shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(3)  Possess or lend or knowingly permit the use of any registration card, license plate, or decal by anyone not entitled to it. 
(4)  Fail or refuse to surrender to the department or the department of state police, on demand, any certificate of title, registration card, or license plate or decal which has been suspended, cancelled, or revoked. Violation of this subsection shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(5)  Use a false name or address in any application for the registration of any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer or for a certificate of title or for any renewal or duplicate certificate, or knowingly to make a false statement of a material fact or to conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a fraud in any registration application. Violation of this subsection shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 16-12; Code 1981, § 13-56) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-613. 
Sec. 32-59. - Attachment and display of license plates and decals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or for the owner thereof to knowingly permit the operation of, upon a highway of the city, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer without having attached thereto and displayed thereon the license plate or plates and decal or decals assigned thereto by the division for the current registration year, whenever such license plates and decals are required by state law. 
(b)  License plates assigned to a motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, road tractor, tractor truck, trailer or semitrailer, or to persons licensed as motor vehicle dealers or transporters of unladen vehicles, shall be attached to such motor vehicle, one in front and the other in the rear. The license plate assigned to a motorcycle, trailer or semitrailer shall be attached to the rear thereof. The license plate assigned to a road tractor or tractor truck shall be attached to the front thereof. The license plates issued to licensed motor vehicle dealers and to persons licensed as transporters of unladen vehicles shall be attached to the rear of the vehicle to which it is assigned. 
(c)  Decals shall be attached to license plates in such manner as may be prescribed by the commissioner. 
(d)  Every license plate shall at all times be securely fastened to the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to which it is assigned, so as to prevent the plate from swinging, in a position to be clearly visible, and in a condition to be clearly legible. No colored glass, colored plastic, bracket, holder, mounting, frame or any other type of covering shall be placed, mounted, or installed on, around, or over any license plate if such glass, plastic, bracket, holder, mounting, frame, or other type of covering in any way alters or obscures: 
(1)  The alpha-numeric information; 
(2)  The color of the license plate; 
(3)  The name or abbreviated name of the state wherein the vehicle is registered; or 
(4)  Any character or characters, decal, stamp or other device indicating the month or year in which the vehicle's registration expires. 
No insignia, emblems or trailer hitches or couplings shall be mounted in such a way as to hide or obscure any portion of the license plate or render any portion of the license plate illegible. 
(Code 1967, § 16-14; Code 1981, § 13-57) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-715, 46.2-716. 
Sec. 32-60. - Display or possession of fictitious, suspended, etc., registration card, certificate of title or license plate or decal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to display, cause or permit to be displayed or to have in possession any vehicle registration card, certificate of title or registration license plate or decal, knowing the same to be fictitious or to have been cancelled, revoked, suspended or altered. 
(Code 1967, § 16-15; Code 1981, § 13-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-613.2. 
Sec. 32-61. - Unlawful possession of certificate of title issued to another. 
    It shall be unlawful and constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person in this city to have in his possession a certificate of title issued by the commissioner to a person other than the holder thereof, unless and until the certificate of title has been duly assigned to the holder as provided in title 46.2, Code of Virginia. This section shall not apply to secured parties who legally hold such certificates of title or to the spouse of the person to whom the certificate of title was issued. 
(Code 1967, § 16-18; Code 1981, § 13-59) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-618 A. 
Sec. 32-62. - Lending registration card or license plate or decal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to lend, or to knowingly permit the use of, by one not entitled thereto, any vehicle registration card or license plate or decal. 
(Code 1981, § 13-60) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 4.2-613.3. 
Sec. 32-63. - Operation on foreign dealer's license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or for the owner thereof to permit the operation of, a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer in the city on a foreign dealer's license, unless the operation of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer on such license is specifically authorized by the commissioner. 
(Code 1967, § 16-16; Code 1981, § 13-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-660. 
Sec. 32-64. - Operation of vehicle with gross weight exceeding that for which it is registered and licensed. 
(a)  No person shall operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer for which the fee for registration is prescribed by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-697 on any highway in the city, under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Without first having paid the registration fee prescribed. 
(2)  If, at the time of the operation, the gross weight of the vehicle or of the combination of vehicles of which it is a part, is in excess of the gross weight on the basis of which it is registered. In any case where a pickup truck is used in combination with another vehicle, operation shall be unlawful only if the combined gross weight exceeds the combined gross weight on the basis of which each vehicle is registered. 
(b)  Any officer authorized to enforce the motor vehicle laws, having reason to believe that the gross weight of any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer being operated on any highway in the city exceeds that on the basis of which the vehicle is registered, may weigh the vehicle by whatever means the state superintendent may prescribe and the operator, or other person in possession of the vehicle, shall permit this weighing whenever requested by the officer. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this section or who operates or permits the operation of a trailer or semitrailer designed for the use of human beings as living quarters, on the highways in the city without having first paid to the state commissioner the fee prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-694.A.5, is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 16-21; Code 1981, § 13-62) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-704. 
Sec. 32-65. - Operation for hire of certain vehicles displaying not-for-hire plates. 
    If a motor vehicle of over 10,000 pounds registered gross weight that is registered to be operated exclusively not-for-hire is operated for-hire, the licensee shall be guilty of a traffic infraction. This penalty shall be in addition to the penalty prescribed by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-724. 
(Code 1967, § 16-24; Code 1981, § 13-63) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-724. 
Secs. 32-66-32-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL VEHICLE LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Taxes and license fees levied by city, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-752-46.2-756. 

Sec. 32-89. - Levy and assessment. 
    The city does hereby levy and assess taxes and charge license fees on motor vehicles, trailers, and semitrailers as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752. The amount of the license fee or tax imposed by the city shall be as provided in section 32-92. The license fees and taxes shall be imposed in such manner, on such basis, for such periods, and subject to proration for fractional periods of years, as provided in this article. 
State Law reference- Authority to levy taxes and fees, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752. 
Sec. 32-90. - Exemption. 
    Any owner or person becoming a resident of the city subsequent to March 1 and who has made a similar registration of a motor vehicle with another political subdivision of the state for the year shall not be required to register any such motor vehicle with the city until the following year. 
(Code 1981, § 13-76; Ord. No. 78-13, 3-22-1979) 
Sec. 32-91. - Required; payment of personal tax prerequisite to issuance. 
(a)  During each calendar year, each owner or person having possession or control of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer normally garaged, stored or parked in the city. If it cannot be determined where the personal property is normally garaged, stored or parked, the situs shall be the domicile of its owner. In the event the owner of the motor vehicle is a fulltime student attending an institution of higher education, the situs shall be the domicile of such student, provided the student has presented sufficient evidence that he has paid a personal property tax on the motor vehicle in his domicile. 
(b)  Upon receipt of required registration material and appropriate payments as required by section 32-92, the commissioner of the revenue will authorize the issuance of a city decal as evidence thereof which shall be displayed upon the motor vehicle in conjunction with the state inspection decal issued for the motor vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 13-77; Ord. No. 78-13, 3-22-1979; Ord. of 4-9-1981; Ord. of 10-22-1987) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752. 
Sec. 32-92. - Tax and fee. 
    The provision of the city budget that increased city decal fees is intended to include all vehicle decals issued so the fee schedule for each calendar year is as follows: 
(1)  Automobiles: $35.00. 
(2)  Trucks one ton and under: $25.00. 
(3)  Trucks over one ton: $32.50. 
(4)  Trucks for hire one ton and under: $32.50. 
(5)  Trucks for hire over one ton: $40.00. 
(6)  Taxicabs and buses for hire 4,000 pounds and under: $25.00. 
(7)  Taxicabs and buses for hire over 4,000 pounds: $30.00. 
(8)  Motorcycles: $18.00. 
(Code 1981, § 13-78; Ord. No. 78-13, 3-22-1979; Ord. of 5-28-1987; Ord. of 1-13-2005) 
State Law reference- Vehicle license fees imposed by cities, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752 et seq.; vehicle registration fees imposed by state, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600 et seq. 
Sec. 32-93. - License year. 
    Registration under this article shall be made for each calendar year, prior to March 1 or upon acquisition of a motor vehicle subsequent to March 1. City decals shall go on sale February 1 through March 1. 
(Code 1981, § 13-79; Ord. No. 78-13, 3-22-1979; Ord. of 11-9-1989) 
Sec. 32-94. - Duplicate license. 
(a)  The city treasurer is authorized to issue a duplicate license tag or decal upon proof that the original tag or decal has been destroyed or lost. 
(b)  The duplicate license tag or decal shall be issued upon affidavit of the applicant and/or providing the original license tag or decal number found on the lower portion of the license tag or decal. 
(c)  The charge for a duplicate tag shall be $1.00. 
(Code 1981, § 13-80; Ord. of 11-9-1989) 
Secs. 32-95-32-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EQUIPMENT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle and equipment safety, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1000 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-117. - Motorcycles exempt from certain equipment requirements under certain circumstances. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, it shall be lawful for any duly licensed person to operate a motorcycle designed exclusively for use in trail riding, or sporting events known as endurance runs, during the actual running of such events, when the same have been sanctioned by the American Motorcycle Association, on portions of the public streets or highways, between sunrise and sunset, without a headlight, horn or rearview mirror. 
(b)  Persons operating such motorcycles without such equipment on the public streets or highways of this city, other than at the times and under the circumstances set forth in subsection (a) of this section, shall be guilty of a traffic infraction. 
(Code 1981, § 13-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-912. 
Sec. 32-118. - Special permit for traction engines and tractors with movable tracks. 
    The city manager may issue special permits, limited to such time as he may deem proper, authorizing the operation upon a street or highway of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of such movable tracks. A fee fixed by the city council shall be charged for each permit at the time of issuance. 
(Code 1981, § 13-92) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1046. 
Sec. 32-119. - Sale or use of unapproved equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, with intent to sell or offer for sale, either separately or as a part of the equipment of a motor vehicle, or to use or have as equipment upon a motor vehicle operated on a highway in this city, any lighting device, warning device, signal device, safety glass or other equipment on which approval is required, or any part or parts tending to change or alter the operation of such device, glass or other equipment, unless of a type that has been submitted to and approved by the superintendent, or meets or exceeds the standards and specifications of the Society of Automotive Engineers, the American National Standards Institute, Inc. or the Federal Department of Transportation. 
(Code 1981, § 13-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1002. 
Sec. 32-120. - Use of defective or unsafe equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or have as equipment upon a motor vehicle operated on a street or highway in this city, any device or equipment mentioned in the preceding section which is defective or in unsafe condition. 
(Code 1981, § 13-94) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1003. 
Sec. 32-121. - Trademark or name and instructions for equipment. 
    Each device, glass or other equipment mentioned in section 32-119 offered for sale in this city shall bear thereon a trademark or name, or be identified in keeping with the superintendent's regulations, and shall be accompanied by printed instructions as to the proper mounting, use and candle power or bulbs, if any, to be used therewith and any particular methods of mounting or adjustments necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter, and any rule or regulation of the superintendent. 
(Code 1967, § 16-142; Code 1981, § 13-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1004. 
Sec. 32-122. - Operator's seat. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle upon a highway of this city, unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a securely affixed seat for the driver. The seat shall be so located as to permit the driver to adequately control the steering and braking mechanisms and other instruments necessary for the safe operation of the motor vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 13-96) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1084. 
Sec. 32-123. - Steering gear. 
    Every motor vehicle being operated upon a highway shall be equipped with steering gear adequate to insure the safe control of the vehicle, which gear shall not show signs of weakness or breaking under ordinary conditions. Such steering gear shall conform to the standards adopted by the superintendent pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1065. 
(Code 1967, § 16-11; Code 1981, § 13-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1065. 
Sec. 32-124. - Horns. 
    Every motor vehicle driven on a highway shall be equipped with a working horn capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions over a distance of not less than 200 feet. 
(Code 1967, § 16-112; Code 1981, § 13-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1059. 
Sec. 32-125. - Brakes. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle when driven on a highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movements of and to stop and hold such vehicle. The brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall conform to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Every bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle, and moped, when operated on a highway, shall be equipped with a brake that will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. Every electric personal assistive mobility device, when operated on a highway, shall be equipped with a system that, when activated or engaged, will enable the operator to bring the device to a controlled stop. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1066. 
Sec. 32-126. - Sirens, whistles, etc.; use of warning devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be equipped with or for any person to use upon any vehicle any siren or exhaust, compression or spark plug whistle or horn, except as may be authorized in this article. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be equipped with or for any person to use any warning device while upon a highway or any way open to public travel that is not of a type that has been approved by the superintendent. It shall further be unlawful for any person at any time to use a horn otherwise than as a reasonable warning or to make any unnecessary or unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or other warning device, except that the vehicles of common carriers or extraordinarily large and heavy vehicles may be equipped with such type of warning device as the superintendent may require or permit. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, a siren, bell or supplemental horn may be used on a vehicle as a noise-maker for an alarm system, provided the device is installed so as to prohibit actuation of the system by the driver while the vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1967, § 16-113; Code 1981, § 13-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1060. 
Sec. 32-127. - Same-Emergency vehicles. 
    Every police vehicle, every vehicle authorized to be equipped with warning lights pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1022 and 46.2-1023, (every vehicle used for the purpose of fighting fire and every ambulance or rescue vehicle used for emergency calls) shall be equipped with a siren, exhaust whistle or air horn designed to give automatically intermittent signals of a type not prohibited by the superintendent. 
(Code 1967, § 16-114; Code 1981, § 13-100) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1061. 
Sec. 32-128. - Warning devices on school buses. 
(a)  Every bus used for the principal purpose of transporting school children shall be equipped with a warning device of such type as may be prescribed by the state board of education after consultation with the superintendent of state police. Such a warning device shall indicate when such bus is either: 
(1)  Stopped or about to stop to take on or discharge children, the elderly, or mentally or physically handicapped persons; or 
(2)  Stopped or about to stop for another such bus, when approaching from any direction, that is stopped or about to stop to take on or discharge any such persons. 
(b)  Such warning device shall be used and in operation for at least 100 feet before any proposed stop of such bus if the lawful speed limit is less than 35 miles per hour, and for at least 200 feet before any proposed stop of such bus if the lawful speed limit is 35 miles per hour or more. 
(c)  For any new bus placed into service on or after July 1, 2007, such warning devices, at a minimum, shall include a nonsequential system of red traffic warning lights, a warning sign with flashing lights, and a crossing control arm such that when the bus door is opened, the red warning lights, warning sign with flashing lights, and crossing control arm are automatically activated. 
(d)  Failure of a warning device to function on any school bus shall not relieve any person operating a motor vehicle from his duty to stop as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-844 and 46.2-859. 
(e)  Any person operating such bus who fails or refuses to equip such vehicle being driven by him with such equipment, or who fails to use such warning devices in the operation of such vehicle shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 16-115; Code 1981, § 13-101) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1090. 
Sec. 32-129. - Paint, lettering on school buses. 
    School buses shall be painted yellow with the words "School Bus" on the front and rear in letters at least eight inches high. All school buses shall be equipped with warning devices prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1090. Only school buses, as defined in section 32-1, may be painted yellow and identified by the words set forth in this section and equipped with the specified warning devices. A vehicle which merely transports pupils or residents at a school, from one point to another, without intermittent stops for the purpose of picking up or discharging pupils, need not comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 16-116; Code 1981, § 13-102) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1089. 
Sec. 32-130. - Equipment for vehicles hired to transport children to or from school, camp, etc. 
    Any private individual, corporation or civic, charitable or eleemosynary organization, for the purpose of transporting children to or from school, camp or any other space during any part of the year, may contract to hire motor vehicles identified as regular school buses, having a seating capacity of more than 15 persons, which are painted yellow, and if such motor vehicles are used for such purpose, they shall be equipped and operated in the same manner as are regular school buses pursuant to the provisions of this chapter relating thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 16-117; Code 1981, § 13-103) 
Sec. 32-131. - Mirrors. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a highway of this city which is not equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway for a distance of not less than 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle. 
(b)  No motor vehicle registered in this state designed and licensed primarily for passenger vehicular transportation on the public highways, and manufactured for the year 1969 or for subsequent years, shall be operated on the highways of this city, unless equipped with at least one outside and at least one inside rearview mirror meeting the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, no motor vehicle which either has no rear window, or which has a rear window so obstructed as to prevent rearward vision by means of an inside rearview mirror, shall be required to be equipped with an inside rearview mirror, if such motor vehicle has horizontally and vertically adjustable outside rearview mirrors installed on both sides of such motor vehicle in such a manner as to provide the driver of such motor vehicle a rearward view along both sides of such motor vehicle for a distance of not less than 200 feet. 
(Code 1967, § 16-118; Code 1981, § 13-104) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1082. 
Sec. 32-132. - Windshields required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon a street in this city any motor vehicle or reconstructed motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, registered in this state, which was manufactured, assembled or reconstructed after July 1, 1970, unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a windshield. 
(Code 1967, § 16-123; Code 1981, § 13-105) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1057. 
Sec. 32-133. - Windshield wipers. 
    Every permanent windshield on a motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning snow, rain, moisture or other matter from the windshield directly in front of the driver. The device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle. Every such device on a school bus or a vehicle designed or used to carry passengers for compensation or hire or as a public conveyance shall be of a mechanically or electrically operated type. The device or devices on any motor vehicle manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1943, shall clean both the right and left sides of the windshield and shall be of a mechanically or electrically operated type. 
(Code 1967, § 16-122; Code 1981, § 13-106) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1055. 
Sec. 32-134. - Signs on windshields, etc. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Front side windows means those windows located adjacent to and forward of the driver's seat. 
    Holographic effect means a picture or image that may remain constant or change as the viewing angle is changed. 
    Multipurpose passenger vehicle means any motor vehicle that is: 
(1)  Designed to carry no more than ten persons; and 
(2)  Constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road use. 
    Prism effect means a visual, iridescent, or rainbow-like effect that separates light into various colored components that may change depending on viewing angle. 
    Rear side window means those windows located to the rear of the driver's seat. 
    Rear window means those windows which are located to the rear of the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle and which are approximately parallel to the windshield. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this article or permitted by federal law, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle on a highway with any sign, poster, colored or tinted film, sun-shading material, or other colored material on the windshield, front or rear side windows, or rear windows of such motor vehicle. This provision, however, shall not apply to any certificate or other paper required by law or permitted by the superintendent to be placed on a motor vehicle's windshield or window. The size of stickers or decals used by counties, cities and towns in lieu of license plates shall be in compliance with regulations promulgated by the superintendent. Such stickers shall be affixed on the windshield at a location designated by the superintendent. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) this section, whenever a motor vehicle is equipped with a mirror on each side of such vehicle, so located as to reflect to the driver of such vehicle a view of the highway for at least 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle, any or all of the following shall be lawful to: 
(1)  Drive a motor vehicle equipped with one optically grooved clear plastic right-angle rearview lens attached to one rear window of such motor vehicle, not exceeding 18 inches in diameter in the case of a circular lens or not exceeding 11 inches by 14 inches in the case of a rectangular lens, which enables the driver of the motor vehicle to view below the line of sight as viewed through the rear window; 
(2)  Have affixed to the rear side windows, rear window or windows of a motor vehicle any sticker or stickers, regardless of size; or 
(3)  Drive a motor vehicle when the driver's clear view of the highway through the rear window or windows is otherwise obstructed. 
(d)  Except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1053, but notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) this section, no sun-shading or tinting film may be applied or affixed to any window of a motor vehicle unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a mirror on each side of such motor vehicle, so located as to reflect to the driver of the vehicle a view of the highway for at least 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle, and the sun-shading or tinting film is applied or affixed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  No sun-shading or tinting films may be applied or affixed to the rear side windows or rear window or windows of any motor vehicle operated on the highways of this commonwealth that reduce the total light transmittance of such window to less than 35 percent. 
(2)  No sun-shading or tinting films may be applied or affixed to the front side windows of any motor vehicle operated on the highways of this commonwealth that reduce total light transmittance of such window to less than 50 percent. 
(3)  No sun-shading or tinting films shall be applied or affixed to any window of a motor vehicle that: 
a.  Have a reflectance of light exceeding 20 percent; or 
b.  Produce a holographic or prism effect. 
(4)  Any person who operates a motor vehicle on the highways of this commonwealth with sun-shading or tinting films that: 
a.  Have a total light transmittance less than that required by subsections (d)(1) and (2) of this section; 
b.  Have a reflectance of light exceeding 20 percent; or 
c.  Produce holographic or prism effects; 
shall be guilty of a traffic infraction but shall not be awarded any demerit points by the commissioner for the violation. 
(5)  Any person or firm who applies or affixes to the windows of any motor vehicle in the commonwealth sun-shading or tinting films that: 
a.  Reduce the light transmittance to levels less than that allowed in subsections (d)(1) and (2) of this section; 
b.  Have a reflectance of light exceeding 20 percent; or 
c.  Produce holographic or prism effects; 
shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor for the first offense and of a Class 2 misdemeanor for any subsequent offense. 
(e)  The division of purchases and supply, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 2.2-1112, shall determine the proper standards for equipment or devices used to measure light transmittance through windows of motor vehicles. Law enforcement officers shall use only such equipment or devices to measure light transmittance through windows that meet the standards established by the division. Such measurements made by law enforcement officers shall be given a tolerance of minus seven percentage points. 
(f)  No film or darkening material may be applied on the windshield except to replace the sunshield in the uppermost area as installed by the manufacturer of the vehicle. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the affixing to the rear window of a motor vehicle of a single sticker no larger than 20 square inches if such sticker is totally contained within the lower five inches of the glass of the rear window, nor shall subsection (c) of this section apply to a motor vehicle to which but one such sticker is so affixed. 
(h)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit applying to the rear side windows or rear window of any multipurpose passenger vehicle or pickup truck sun-shading or tinting films that reduce the total light transmittance of such window or windows below 35 percent. 
(i)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, sun-shading material which was applied or installed prior to July 1, 1987, in a manner and on which windows not then in violation of state law, shall continue to be lawful, provided that it can be shown by appropriate receipts that such material was installed prior to July 1, 1987. 
(j)  Where a person is convicted within one year of a second or subsequent violation of this section involving the operation of the same vehicle having a tinted or smoked windshield, the court, in addition to any other penalty, may order the person so convicted to remove such tinted or smoked windshield from the vehicle. 
(k)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to law enforcement vehicles. 
(l)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the rear windows or rear side windows of any ambulance, rescue squad vehicle, or any other emergency medical vehicle used to transport patients. 
(m)  The provisions of subsection (d)(1) of this section shall not apply to sightseeing carriers as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2000 and contract passenger carriers as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2000. 
(Code 1967, § 16-120; Code 1981, § 13-107) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1052. 
Sec. 32-135. - Obstruction of driver's view. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon a highway in this city with any object or objects, other than a rearview mirror, sun visor or other equipment of the motor vehicle approved by the superintendent, suspended from any part of such motor vehicle in such a manner as to obstruct the driver's clear view of the highway through the windshield, the front side windows or the rear window, or to alter a passenger-carrying vehicle in such a manner as to obstruct the driver's view through the windshield. However, this subsection shall not apply when the driver's clear view of the highway through the rear window is obstructed, if such motor vehicle is equipped with a mirror on each side, so located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway for a distance of not less than 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle; to safety devices installed on the windshields of vehicles owned by private waste haulers or local governments and used to transport solid waste; or to bicycle racks installed on the front of any bus operated by any city, county, transit authority, or transit or transportation district. 
(Code 1967, § 16-121; Code 1981, § 13-108) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1054. 
Sec. 32-136. - Safety glass and glazing material. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Safety glass means any product composed of glass so manufactured, fabricated or treated as substantially to prevent shattering and flying of the glass when struck or broken. The commissioner shall maintain a list of types of glass approved by the superintendent as conforming to the specifications and requirements for safety glass as set forth in this section and shall not issue a license for or relicense any motor vehicle subject to the provisions herein stated unless such motor vehicle is equipped as herein provided with the approved type of glass 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive on any highway in the city a motor vehicle registered in this state and manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1935, and designed or used for the purpose of carrying persons for compensation or hire or as a public conveyance to transport school children and others, unless such vehicle is equipped with safety glass wherever glass is used in doors, windows, windshields and sideshields. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, on any highway in the city, any motor vehicle registered in this state and manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1936, unless such vehicle is equipped with safety glass approved by the superintendent, or meets the standards and specifications of the American National Standards Institute, Inc., or the regulations of the federal department of transportation, whenever glass is used in doors, windows, windshields and sideshields. 
(d)  No glazing material, other than safety glass, shall be used in any motor vehicle registered in this state and operated in the city, except that the superintendent may permit safety glazing materials, other than glass, to be used in lieu of safety glass in portions of motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers designated by him, provided any such material so used bears a trade name or identifying mark and has been submitted to and approved by the superintendent for such use prior to being used in any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to replace any glass in any vehicle with any material other than an approved type of safety glass; provided that, safety glazing materials, other than glass, approved by the superintendent as provided in subsection (d) of this section, may be used to replace safety glass in any portion of a motor vehicle which has been designated for such use by the superintendent. 
(f)  Replacement safety glass installed in any part of a vehicle other than the windshield need not bear a trademark or name, provided the glass consists of two or more sheets of glass separated by a glazing material, and provided the glass is cut from a piece of approved safety glass, and provided the edge of the glass can be observed. 
(Code 1967, § 16-124; Code 1981, § 13-109) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1056. 
Sec. 32-137. - Signal devices. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is so constructed or carries a load in such a manner as to prevent a hand and arm signal required by section 32-334 from being visible both to the front and rear of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or any vehicle the driver of which is incapable of giving the required hand and arm signals, shall be equipped with a mechanical or electrical signal device which meets the requirements of this article and is of a type that has been approved by the superintendent; provided that, a tractor truck need not be equipped with mechanical or electrical signal devices on the rear, if it is equipped with double-faced signal lamps mounted on the front fenders or on the sides near the front of the vehicle clearly visible to the rear. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on any highway in the city a motor vehicle registered in this state and manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1955, unless such vehicle is equipped with such a mechanical or electrical signal device on both front and rear. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to any motorcycle or to motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers used for agricultural or horticultural purposes which are exempted from annual registration under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-662 et seq. 
(Code 1967, § 16-131; Code 1981, § 13-110) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1038. 
Sec. 32-138. - Requirements of turn signals; visibility rules. 
    Every device intended and used to give a signal of intention to turn a vehicle shall be so constructed and so installed as to give a signal plainly visible, in clear weather and under normal traffic conditions, from a distance of at least 100 feet to the rear and 100 feet to the front of the vehicle. No front signal shall be required on vehicles manufactured or assembled before January 1, 1943. Every such device shall conform to the rules and regulations adopted by the superintendent pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1039. Nothing contained in this section, however, shall prohibit the requiring of turn signals on any vehicle whose driver is prevented by any reason from giving the hand and arm signal required in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-849. 
(Code 1967, § 16-132; Code 1981, § 13-111) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1039. 
Sec. 32-139. - Exhaust system generally. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Exhaust system means all the parts of a motor vehicle through which the exhaust passes after leaving the engine block. 
(b)  No person shall drive and no owner of a motor vehicle shall permit or allow the operation of any owned vehicle upon a highway in the city, unless such motor vehicle is equipped with an exhaust system of a type installed as standard factory equipment, or comparable to that designed for use upon the particular vehicle as standard factory equipment, in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, annoying smoke and escape of excessive gas, steam or oil. An exhaust system shall not be deemed to prevent excessive or unusual noise if it permits or allows the escape of noise in excess of that permitted by the standard factory equipment exhaust system of private passenger motor vehicles or trucks of standard make. 
(c)  Chambered pipes shall not be deemed to be an effective muffling device to prevent excessive or unusual noise as required in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 16-134; Code 1981, § 13-112) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1049. 
Sec. 32-140. - Certain mufflers and straight exhausts prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale a muffler without interior baffle plates or other effective muffling device, or any gutted muffler, muffler cutout or straight exhaust. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate on the highways of this city a motor vehicle, moped, motorized skateboard or scooter equipped with a gutted muffler, muffler cutout or straight exhaust. 
(Code 1967, § 16-135; Code 1981, § 13-113) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1047. 
Sec. 32-141. - Regulating vehicles that are equipped with engine compression brake devices. 
(a)  It is illegal for any vehicle to operate an engine compression brake device within the city limits, except on that part of U.S. 60 from the eastern city limits to Ridge Road, or in an emergency if the vehicle's standard braking system is inoperable. 
(b)  In addition to the city's enforcement provisions as contained within this chapter, a violation of this section will result in the following fines: 
(1)  First violation: $100.00 fine. 
(2)  Second violation: $500.00 fine. 
(3)  Third and subsequent violations: $1,000.00 fine. 
(Ord. of 11-10-2005; Ord. of 11-10-2005) 
Sec. 32-142. - Mufflers on motorcycles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any motorcycle not equipped with a muffler or other sound dissipative device in good working order and in constant operation. 
(b)  No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement, any muffler or sound dissipative device on a motorcycle. 
(Code 1981, § 13-114) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1050. 
Sec. 32-143. - Maximum height of handlebars of motorcycles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorcycle upon a highway of this city, which motorcycle is equipped with handlebars, or other type steering mechanisms, that are more than 15 inches above the level of the seat of such motorcycle. 
(Code 1981, § 13-115) 
Sec. 32-144. - Pollution control systems or devices. 
(a)  No motor vehicle registered in this city and manufactured for the model year 1973 or for subsequent model years shall be operated on the highways of this city unless it is equipped with an air pollution control system or device, or combination of such systems or devices, such as a crankcase emission control system or device, exhaust emission control system or device, fuel evaporative emission control system or device or other air pollution control system or device which has been installed in accordance with federal laws and regulations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, as herein described, on the highways of this city, with the pollution control system or device removed or otherwise rendered inoperable. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, as herein defined, on the highways of this city equipped with any emission control system or device, unless it is of a type installed as standard factory equipment, or comparable to that designed for use upon the particular vehicle as standard factory equipment. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit or prevent shop adjustments or replacements of equipment for maintenance or repair or the conversion of engines to low polluting fuels, such as, but not limited to, natural gas or propane, so long as such action does not degrade in any manner or to any degree the antipollution capabilities of the vehicle power system. 
(Code 1981, § 13-116) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1048. 
Sec. 32-145. - Air conditioning units. 
    No motor vehicle shall be operated on any highway in the city, when such vehicle is equipped with any air conditioning unit, unless such device is of a type approved as to safety by the superintendent. No refrigerant used in such unit shall be explosive, flammable or toxic unless the refrigerant is included in the list published by the United States Environmental Protection Agency as a safe alternative motor vehicle air conditioning substitute for chlorofluorocarbon-12, pursuant to 42 USC 7671k(c). 
(Code 1967, § 16-139; Code 1981, § 13-117) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1088. 
Sec. 32-146. - Rear fenders, flaps or guards required for certain vehicles. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gross weight includes the load upon such motor vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
(b)  No person shall operate upon a street or highway any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles having a licensed gross weight in excess of 40,000 pounds, which motor vehicle or combination of vehicles is not equipped with rear fenders, flaps or guards which shall be of sufficient size to substantially prevent the projection of rocks, dirt, water or other substances to the rear. Vehicles used exclusively for hauling logs and tractor trucks shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 16-119; Code 1981, § 13-118) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1083. 
Sec. 32-147. - Certain passenger vehicles to be equipped with safety lap belts. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Forward-facing rear outboard seats means those designated seating positions for passengers in outside front facing seats behind the driver and front passenger seats, except any designated seating position adjacent to a walkway that is located between the seat and the near side of the vehicle and is designed to allow access to a more rearward seating position. 
(b)  No motor vehicle registered in this state and designed and licensed primarily for private passenger vehicular transportation on the public highways, and manufactured for the year 1963 or for subsequent years, shall be operated on the highways of this city unless the front seats thereof are equipped with adult safety lap belts or a combination of lap belts and shoulder straps or harnesses of a type approved by the superintendent. 
(c)  Passenger motor vehicles registered in this state and manufactured after January 1, 1968, and operated in this city, shall be equipped with lap belts or a combination of lap belts and shoulder harnesses as required to be installed at the time of manufacture by the federal department of transportation. 
(d)  No passenger car, except convertibles, registered in the commonwealth and manufactured on or after September 1, 1990, shall be operated on the highways in the commonwealth unless the forward-facing rear outboard seats thereof are equipped with rear seat lap/shoulder belts of types required to be installed at the time of manufacture by the federal department of transportation. 
(e)  No passenger car, including convertibles, registered in the commonwealth and manufactured on or after September 1, 1991, shall be operated on the highways in the commonwealth unless the forward-facing rear outboard seats thereof are equipped with rear seat lap/shoulder belts of types required to be installed at the time of manufacture by the federal department of transportation. 
(f)  Passenger cars, trucks, multipurpose vehicles, and buses, except school buses and motor homes, registered in the commonwealth and manufactured on or after September 1, 1992, shall not be operated on the highways of the city unless equipped with rear seat lap/shoulder belts of types required to be installed at the time of manufacture by the federal department of transportation for each forward-facing rear outboard seating position on a readily removable seat. 
(g)  Failure to use safety lap belts or a combination of lap belts and shoulder straps or harnesses after installation shall not be deemed to be negligence, nor shall evidence of such nonuse of such devices be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature. 
(Code 1967, § 16-143; Code 1981, § 13-119) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1092. 
Sec. 32-148. - Specifications for safety lap belts and shoulder straps. 
(a)  Any safety lap belt or shoulder straps or harnesses or any combination of lap belt and shoulder strap or harness installed in a vehicle shall be designed and installed in such manner as to prevent or materially reduce movement of any person using the same in the event of collision or upset of the vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall sell, or offer or keep for sale, any safety lap belt, shoulder straps or harness, or any combination of lap belt and shoulder strap or harness, or attachments thereto, for use in a vehicle, unless of a type which has been approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1967, § 16-144; Code 1981, § 13-120) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1093. 
Sec. 32-149. - Safety belts to be worn by certain bus drivers. 
(a)  Any person operating a school bus shall wear the appropriate safety belt system when the bus is in motion. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 13-121) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1091. 
Sec. 32-150. - Slow-moving vehicle emblems. 
(a)  Every farm tractor and every self-propelled unit of farm equipment or implement of husbandry, and any other vehicle designed for operation at speeds not in excess of 25 miles per hour or normally operated at speeds not in excess of 25 miles per hour, shall display a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem on the rear of the vehicle, when traveling on a public highway during day or night. 
(b)  Should a slow-moving vehicle tow a unit on a public highway, then the towing vehicle or the towed unit shall be equipped with the slow-moving vehicle emblem, as follows: 
(1)  If the towed unit or any load thereon obscures the slow-moving vehicle emblem on the towing vehicle, the towed unit shall be so equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem, in which case, the towing vehicle need not display such emblem. 
(2)  If the slow-moving vehicle emblem on the towing vehicle is not obscured by the towed unit or any load thereon, then either or both such vehicles may be equipped with such emblem. 
(c)  The emblem required by this section, and the position of mounting them on vehicles, shall conform to standards and specifications adopted by the department of state police pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1081. 
(d)  The use of slow-moving vehicle emblems shall be restricted to the uses specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, and their use on any other type of vehicle or on stationary objects is prohibited. 
(e)  The use of the slow-moving vehicle emblem shall be restricted to the uses specified in this chapter. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to bicycles, electric power-assisted bicycles, or mopeds. Display of a slow-moving vehicle emblem on a bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle or moped shall not be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 13-122) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1081. 
Sec. 32-151. - Television receivers in vehicles. 
(a)  No motor vehicle registered in the commonwealth of Virginia shall be equipped with, nor shall there be used therein, a television receiver when the moving images are visible to the driver while the vehicle is in motion. The operator of a motor vehicle that is not required to be registered in the commonwealth shall not operate a television receiver that violates the provisions of this section while driving in the commonwealth. The prohibitions contained in this subsection shall not, however, include: 
(1)  Electronic displays used in conjunction with vehicle navigation and mapping systems, or as part of a digital dispatch system; 
(2)  Closed-circuit video monitors designed to operate only in conjunction with dedicated video cameras and used in rearview systems on trucks, motor homes and other motor vehicles; 
(3)  Television receivers or monitors used in government-owned vehicles by law enforcement officers and employees of the commonwealth department of transportation in the course of their official duties; 
(4)  Visual displays used to enhance or supplement the driver's view forward, behind, or to the sides of a motor vehicle for the purpose of maneuvering the vehicle; 
(5)  A vehicle information display; 
(6)  A visual display used to enhance or supplement a driver's view of vehicle occupants; 
(7)  Television-type receiving equipment used exclusively for safety or traffic engineering information; or 
(8)  A television receiver, video monitor, television or video screen, or any other similar means of visually displaying a television broadcast or signal, if that equipment has an interlock device that, when the motor vehicle is driven, disables the equipment for all uses except as a visual display described in subsections (a)(1) through (7) of this section. 
(b)  Except for displays explicitly authorized in subsection (a) of this section, no driver of any motor vehicle shall view any motion picture or similar video display while driving. 
(Code 1967, § 16-140; Code 1981, § 13-123) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-10677. 
Sec. 32-152. - Sticker required on mopeds. 
(a)  Any dealer who sells any moped at retail shall affix to any such moped, or verify that there is affixed thereto a permanent decal or sticker which states that: 
(1)  The operation of mopeds on highways and public vehicular areas by persons under the age of 16 is prohibited by state law; 
(2)  The maximum horsepower of the moped; and 
(3)  The maximum speed at which the moped may be ridden. 
(b)  Any dealer who sells any such moped which does not have affixed thereto such a permanent decal or sticker or who sells a motorcycle with such a sticker or decal attached thereto indicating that its motor is rated at no more than two brake horsepower producing only ordinary speeds up to a maximum of 35 miles per hour shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 13-124) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-915. 
Sec. 32-153. - Changing, tampering with, etc., odometer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to knowingly cause, either personally or through an agent, the changing, tampering with, disconnection, or nonconnection of any odometer or similar device designed to show by numbers or words the distance which a motor vehicle has traveled or the use it has sustained. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell a motor vehicle if he knows or should reasonably know that the odometer or similar device of the motor vehicle has been changed, tampered with, or disconnected to reflect a lesser mileage or use, unless he gives clear and unequivocal notice of such tampering, etc., or of his reasonable belief thereof, to the purchaser in writing prior to the sale. In a prosecution under this subsection, evidence that a person or his agent has changed, tampered with, disconnected, or failed to connect an odometer or similar device of a motor vehicle shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge thereof. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise for sale, sell, or use any device designed primarily for the purpose of resetting the odometer or similar device of a motor vehicle in any manner. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The changing of odometer or similar device readings registered in the course of predelivery testing of any motor vehicle by its manufacturer prior to its delivery to a dealer. 
(2)  Any necessary repair or replacement of an odometer or similar device, provided that the repaired or replaced odometer or similar device is forthwith set at a reading determined by the reading on the device immediately prior to repair or replacement plus a bona fide estimate of the use of the vehicle sustained between the period when the device ceased to accurately record that use and the time of repair or replacement. Compliance with the requirements of 49 USC 32704 of the Federal Odometer Act in the service, repair or replacement of an odometer shall be deemed compliance with this subsection. 
(3)  Passenger vehicles having a capacity in excess of 15 persons. 
(4)  Trucks having a net weight in excess of 10,000 pounds. 
(e)  Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of subsections (a) through (d) of this section shall, for a first offense, be fined not more than $10,000.00 and sentenced to a term of confinement in jail for not more than 12 months, either or both. Any person convicted of a subsequent offense under this section shall be fined not more than $50,000.00 and sentenced to a term of confinement in a state correctional facility for not less than one year nor more than five years, either or both, for each offense if the offense is committed with the intent thereby to defraud another. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(f)  Any person who with intent to defraud violates subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be liable in a civil action in an amount equal to three times the amount of actual damages sustained or $3,000.00, whichever is greater. In the case of a successful action to enforce the foregoing liability, the costs of the action, together with reasonable attorney fees as determined by the court, shall be assessed against the person committing the violation. An action under this subsection shall be brought within two years from the date on which liability arises. For the purpose of this subsection, liability arises when the injured party discovers, or with due diligence should have discovered, the violation. 
(Code 1981, § 13-125) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-112. 
Secs. 32-154-32-174. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LIGHTING EQUIPMENT 

Sec. 32-175. - General requirements. 
(a)  Every vehicle operated or moved upon a street or highway within this city shall at all times be equipped with such lamps as are in this division required for different classes of vehicles. The lights shall at all times be capable of being lighted, except as otherwise provided. This subsection shall not apply to any vehicle for transporting well-drilling machinery licensed under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-700, when operated only between the hours of sunrise and sunset. 
(b)  No motor vehicle which is equipped with any lighting device, other than lamps required or permitted in this division or required or approved by the superintendent or required by the federal department of transportation, shall be operated on any street or highway in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 13-137) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1010. 
Sec. 32-176. - Lamps for vehicles not specifically covered in division. 
    All vehicles or other mobile equipment not in this division required to be equipped with specified lamps, shall carry one or more white lights to the front and a red light to the rear visible in clear weather from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the front and rear of such vehicles. In lieu of or in addition to such lamps or lanterns, a reflex reflector of a type, size and color approved by the superintendent may be permanently affixed to the rear and front of such vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 16-148; Code 1981, § 13-138) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1016. 
Sec. 32-177. - Headlights. 
    Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, road roller, road machinery or tractor used on a highway shall be equipped with at least two headlights, approved by the superintendent, at the front of and on opposite sides of the motor vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 16-145; Code 1981, § 13-139) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1011. 
Sec. 32-178. - Headlights on motorcycles. 
(a)  Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one headlight which shall be of a type that has been approved by the superintendent and shall be capable of projecting sufficient light to the front of such motorcycle to render discernible a person or object at a distance of 200 feet. However, the lights shall not project a glaring or dazzling light to persons approaching such motorcycles. In addition, each motorcycle may be equipped with not more than two auxiliary headlights of a type approved by the superintendent. 
(b)  Motorcycles may be equipped with means of modulating the high beam of their headlights between high and low beam at a rate of 200 to 280 flashes per minute. Such headlights shall not be so modulated during periods when headlights would ordinarily be required to be lighted under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1030. 
(c)  Every motorcycle registered in the commonwealth and operated on the highways of the commonwealth shall be equipped with at least one brake light of a type approved by the superintendent. Motorcycles may be equipped with one or more auxiliary brake lights of a type approved by the superintendent. The superintendent may by regulation prescribe or limit the size, number, location, and configuration of such auxiliary brake lights. 
(d)  Every motorcycle shall carry at the rear at least one or more red lights plainly visible in clear weather from a distance of 500 feet to the rear of such vehicle. Such tail lights shall be constructed and so mounted in their relation to the rear license plate as to illuminate the license plate with a white light so that the same may be read from a distance of 50 feet to the rear of such vehicle. Alternatively, a separate white light shall be so mounted as to illuminate the rear license plate from a distance of 50 feet to the rear of such vehicle. Any such taillights or special white light shall be of a type approved by the superintendent. 
(e)  Motorcycles may be equipped with a means of varying the brightness of the vehicle's brake light for a duration of not more than five seconds upon application of the vehicle's brakes. 
(Code 1967, § 16-146; Code 1981, § 13-140) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1012. 
Sec. 32-179. - Rear lights. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is being drawn at the end of one or more other vehicles or motorcycles shall carry at the rear a light capable of exhibiting a red light plainly visible in clear weather from a distance of 500 feet to the rear of such vehicle. Such taillight shall be so constructed and so mounted in its relation to the rear license plate as to illuminate, by a white light, such license plate so that the same may be read from a distance of 50 feet to the rear of such vehicle, or a separate white light shall be so mounted as to illuminate and make visible such rear license plate from a distance of 50 feet to the rear of such vehicle. Such rear light or special white light shall be of a type that has been approved by the superintendent. 
(b)  In any instance where the rear lamp is to be installed on a boat trailer and the boat extends beyond the end of the trailer or to the end of the trailer, an approved portable light assembly or assemblies may be attached to the exposed rear of the boat, provided such installation complies with the visibility requirements of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 16-147; Code 1981, § 13-141) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1013. 
Sec. 32-180. - Brake lights. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, except an antique vehicle not originally equipped with a brake light, shall be equipped with at least two brake lights of a type approved by the superintendent. Such brake lights shall automatically exhibit a red or amber light plainly visible in clear weather from a distance of 500 feet to the rear of such vehicle when the foot brake pedal is applied. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to motorcycles equipped with brake lights as required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1012. 
(Code 1981, § 13-142) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1014. 
Sec. 32-181. - Lights on bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, and mopeds. 
(a)  Every bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, and moped when in use between sunset and sunrise shall be equipped with a headlight on the front emitting a white light visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and a red reflector visible from a distance of at least 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlights on a motor vehicle. Such lights and reflectors shall be of types approved by the superintendent. In addition to the foregoing provisions of this section, a bicycle or its rider may be equipped with lights or reflectors. These lights may be steady burning or blinking. 
(b)  Every bicycle, or its rider, shall be equipped with a taillight on the rear emitting a red light plainly visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the rear when in use between sunset and sunrise and operating on any highway with a speed limit of 35 miles per hour or greater. Any such taillight shall be of a type approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1981, § 13-143) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1015. 
Sec. 32-182. - Dimension or marker lights. 
(a)  All motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers exceeding seven feet in width or the widest portion of which extends four inches beyond the front fender extremes shall be equipped with amber lights mounted at the extreme right and left front top corners of such vehicle. Each such light shall be visible in clear weather for a distance of at least 500 feet to the front of such vehicle. Such vehicles shall also be equipped with red lights mounted at the extreme right and left rear top corners of such vehicle. Each such light shall be visible in clear weather for at least 500 feet to the rear of such vehicle. Any tractor truck, however, need not be equipped with rear red dimension or marker lights. If the front or the rear of such vehicle is not the widest portion of the vehicle, the dimension or marker lights required in this section shall be mounted on the widest portions of the vehicle with the amber lights herein required visible from the front as herein required and the red lights herein required visible from the rear as herein required. The lights herein required shall be of a type approved by the superintendent. 
(b)  In addition to the lights required in this section, each such vehicle shall be equipped with amber reflectors located on each side thereof, at or near the front. Red reflectors shall be used on the rear of each such vehicle. Such reflectors shall be securely fastened to the vehicle not less than 15 inches and not more than 60 inches from the ground. For a vehicle that is less than 15 inches tall, however, such reflectors shall be securely fastened thereto at the highest point the structure of a vehicle will permit. The reflectors shall be of a type approved by the superintendent. 
(c)  If any vehicle is so constructed as to make compliance with the requirements of this section impractical, the lights and reflectors shall be placed on the vehicle in accordance with the superintendent's regulations. 
(d)  If any vehicle required by this section to be equipped with dimension or marker lights has installed on its rear, as close as practicable to the top of the vehicle and as close as practicable to the vertical centerline of the vehicle, three red identification lights of a type approved by the superintendent, with the light centers spaced not less than six inches or more than 12 inches apart, the rear dimension or marker lights may be mounted at any height but must indicate as nearly as practicable the extreme width of the vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 16-149; Code 1981, § 13-144) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1017. 
Sec. 32-183. - Vehicles or loads exceeding 35 feet. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles whose actual length, including the load thereon, shall exceed 35 feet and is not subject to the provisions of the preceding section, such vehicle shall be equipped with reflectors of a type approved by the superintendent when operated between sunset and sunrise. Such reflectors shall be mounted on the widest part of the towed vehicle or the load thereon, so as to be visible from the front and sides of the vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 16-150; Code 1981, § 13-145) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1018. 
Sec. 32-184. - Spotlights and ditch lights. 
    Any motor vehicle or motorcycle may be equipped with not to exceed two spotlights which, when lighted, shall be aimed and used so that no portion of the beam will be directed to the left of the center of the highway at any time or more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle, and shall be of a type that has been approved by the superintendent. No such spotlights shall be used in conjunction with or as a substitute for required headlights, except in case of emergency. 
(Code 1967, § 16-151; Code 1981, § 13-146) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1019. 
Sec. 32-185. - Flashing, blinking or alternating warning lights. 
(a)  The following vehicles may be equipped with flashing, blinking, or alternating amber warning lights of types approved by the superintendent: 
(1)  Vehicles used for the principal purpose of towing or servicing disabled vehicles; 
(2)  Vehicles used in constructing, maintaining, and repairing highways or utilities on or along public highways; 
(3)  Vehicles used for the principal purpose of removing hazardous or polluting substances from state waters and drainage areas on or along public highways, or state vehicles used to perform other state-required environmental activities, provided that the amber lights are not lit while the vehicle is in motion; 
(4)  Vehicles used for servicing automatic teller machines, provided the amber lights are not lit while the vehicle is in motion; 
(5)  Vehicles used in refuse collection, provided the amber lights are lit only when the vehicles are engaged in refuse collection operations; 
(6)  Vehicles used by individuals for emergency snow-removal purposes; 
(7)  Hi-rail vehicles, provided the amber lights are lit only when the vehicles are operated on railroad rails; 
(8)  Fire apparatus, ambulances, and rescue and life-saving vehicles, provided the amber lights are used in addition to lights permitted under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1023 and are so mounted or installed as to be visible from behind the vehicle; 
(9)  Vehicles owned and used by businesses providing security services, provided the amber lights are not lit while the vehicle is being operated on a public highway; 
(10)  Vehicles used to collect and deliver the United States mail, provided the amber lights are lit only when the vehicle is actually engaged in such collection or delivery; 
(11)  Vehicles used to transport petroleum products, provided the amber light is mounted on the rear of the vehicle and is lit only when the vehicle's back-up lights are lit and its device producing an audible signal when the vehicle is operated in reverse gear, as provided for in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1175.1, is in operation; 
(12)  Vehicles used by law enforcement agency personnel in the enforcement of laws governing motor vehicle parking; 
(13)  Government-owned law enforcement vehicles, provided the lights are used for the purpose of giving directional warning to vehicular traffic to move one direction or another and are not lit while the vehicle is in motion; 
(14)  Chase vehicles when used to unload a hot air balloon or used to load a hot air balloon after landing, provided the amber lights are not lit while the vehicle is in motion; 
(15)  Vehicles used for farm, agricultural, or horticultural purposes, or any farm tractor; 
(16)  Vehicles owned and used by construction companies operating under state contractors' licenses; 
(17)  Vehicles used to lead or provide escorts for bicycle races authorized by the department of transportation or the locality in which the race is being conducted; 
(18)  Vehicles used by radio or television stations for remote broadcasts, provided that the amber lights are not lit while the vehicle is in motion; 
(19)  Vehicles used by municipal safety officers in the performance of their official duties. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "municipal safety officers" means municipal employees responsible for managing municipal safety programs and ensuring municipal compliance with safety and environmental regulatory mandates; 
(20)  Vehicles used as pace cars, security vehicles, or firefighting vehicles by any speedway or motor vehicle race track, provided that the amber lights are not lit while the vehicle is being operated on a public highway; 
(21)  Vehicles used in patrol work by members of neighborhood watch groups approved by the chief law enforcement officer of the locality in their assigned neighborhood watch program area, provided that the vehicles are clearly identified as neighborhood watch vehicles, and the amber lights are not lit while the vehicle is in motion; and 
(22)  Vehicles that are not tow trucks as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, but are owned or controlled by a towing and recovery business, provided that the amber lights are lit only when the vehicle is being used at a towing and recovery site. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, such amber lights shall be lit only when performing the functions which qualify them to be equipped with such lights. 
(c)  Vehicles used to lead or provide escorts for funeral processions may use either amber warning lights or purple warning lights, but amber warning lights and purple warning lights shall not simultaneously be used on the same vehicle. The superintendent of state police shall develop standards and specifications for purple lights authorized in this subsection. 
(d)  Vehicles used by police, firefighting, or rescue personnel as command centers at the scene of incidents may be equipped with and use green warning lights of a type approved by the superintendent. Such lights shall not be activated while the vehicle is operating upon the highway. 
(Code 1967, § 16-152; Code 1981, § 13-147) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1025. 
Sec. 32-186. - Auxiliary lamps on firefighting and other emergency vehicles. 
    Any firefighting vehicle, ambulance, rescue or life-saving vehicle, state department of transportation vehicle or tow truck may be equipped with clear auxiliary lights which shall be used exclusively for lighting emergency scenes. Such lamps shall be of a type permitted by the superintendent and shall not be used in a manner which will tend to blind or interfere with the vision of the operators of approaching vehicles. In no event shall such lamps be lighted while the vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1981, § 13-148) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1028. 
Sec. 32-187. - Auxiliary lamps on police vehicles. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, any government-owned police vehicle may be equipped with clear auxiliary lamps of a type approved by the superintendent. Such lamps may be used to light emergency scenes and other areas for the purpose of detecting offenders, making apprehensions of violators of law and in performing such other functions of police duty as are reasonably necessary. Such lamps may be used when the vehicle on which they are mounted is standing or proceeding at a speed not to exceed 15 miles per hour. Such lamps shall not be used in a manner which will tend to blind or interfere with the vision of the operators of approaching vehicles. 
(b)  Any police officer may also use spotlights, as authorized in section 32-184, for the purpose and in the manner described herein. 
(Code 1981, § 13-149) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1029. 
Sec. 32-188. - Miscellaneous permissible lights. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle may be equipped with fog lights, not more than two of which can be illuminated at any time, one or two auxiliary driving lights if so equipped by the manufacturer, two daytime running lights, two side lights of not more than six candlepower, interior lights of not more than 15 candlepower each, and signal lights. 
(b)  The provision of this section limiting interior lights to no more than 15 candlepower shall not apply to: 
(1)  Alternating, blinking or flashing colored emergency lights mounted inside law enforcement motor vehicles which may otherwise legally be equipped with such colored emergency lights; or 
(2)  Flashing shielded red or red and white lights, authorized under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1024, mounted inside vehicles owned or used by: 
a.  Members of volunteer fire companies or volunteer rescue squads; 
b.  Professional firefighters; or 
c.  Police chaplains. 
A vehicle equipped with lighting devices as authorized in this section shall be operated by a police chaplain only if he has successfully completed a course of training in the safe operation of a motor vehicle under emergency conditions and a certificate attesting to such successful completion, signed by the course instructor, is carried at all times in the vehicle when operated by the police chaplain to whom the certificate applies. 
(c)  Unless such lighting device is both covered and unlit, no motor vehicle which is equipped with any lighting device other than lights required or permitted in this article, required or approved by the superintendent, or required by the federal department of transportation shall be operated on any highway in the commonwealth. Nothing in this section shall permit any vehicle, not otherwise authorized, to be equipped with colored emergency lights, whether blinking or steady-burning. 
(Code 1967, § 16-152; Code 1981, § 13-150) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1020. 
Sec. 32-189. - Flashing of headlights on certain vehicles. 
    Emergency vehicles, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-920C, may be equipped with the means to flash their headlights when their warning lights are activated if: 
(1)  The headlights are wired to allow either the high beam or low beam to flash, but not both; and 
(2)  The headlight system includes a switch or device which prevents flashing of headlights when headlights are required to be lighted under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1030. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1029.1. 
Sec. 32-190. - Certain vehicles may be equipped with secondary warning lights. 
    In addition to other lights authorized by this article any: 
(1)  Firefighting apparatus; 
(2)  Government-owned vehicle operated on official business by a local fire chief or other local fire official; and 
(3)  Rescue squad vehicle, ambulance, or any other emergency medical vehicle may be equipped with alternating, blinking, or flashing red or red and white secondary warning lights mounted inside the vehicle's taillights or marker lights of a type approved by the superintendent of state police. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1029.2. 
Sec. 32-191. - When lights to be lighted; number of lights to be lighted at one time; use of warning lights. 
(a)  Every vehicle in operation on a highway in the commonwealth shall display lighted headlights and illuminating devices as required by this article: 
(1)  From sunset to sunrise; 
(2)  During any other time when, because of rain, smoke, fog, snow, sleet, insufficient light or other unfavorable atmospheric conditions, visibility is reduced to a degree whereby persons or vehicles on the highway are not clearly discernible at a distance of 500 feet; and 
(3)  Whenever windshield wipers are in use as a result of fog, rain, sleet or snow. 
The provisions of this subsection, however, shall not apply to instances when windshield wipers are used intermittently in misting rain, sleet, or snow. 
(b)  Not more than four lights used to provide general illumination ahead of the vehicle, including at least two headlights and any other combination of fog lights or other auxiliary lights approved by the superintendent, shall be lighted at any time. However, this limitation shall not preclude the display of warning lights authorized in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1020 through 46.2-1027, or other lights as may be authorized by the superintendent. 
(c)  Vehicles equipped with warning lights authorized in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1020 through 46.2-1027 shall display lighted warning lights as authorized in such sections at all times when responding to emergency calls, towing disabled vehicles or constructing, repairing and maintaining public highways or utilities on or along public highways, except that amber lights on vehicles designed with a ramp on wheels and a hydraulic lift with a capacity to haul or tow another vehicle, commonly referred to as "rollbacks," need not be lit while the vehicle is in motion unless it is actually towing a vehicle. 
(d)  The failure to display lighted headlights and illuminating devices under the conditions set forth in subsection (a)(3) of this section shall not constitute negligence per se, nor shall violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section constitute a defense to any claim for personal injury or recovery of medical expenses for injuries sustained in a motor vehicle accident. 
(e)  No demerit points shall be assessed for failure to display lighted headlights and illuminating devices during periods of fog, rain, sleet, or snow in violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(f)  No citation for a violation of subsection (a)(3) of this section shall be issued unless the officer issuing such citation has cause to stop or arrest the driver of such motor vehicle for the violation of some other provision of this Code or local ordinance relating to the operation, ownership, or maintenance of a motor vehicle or any criminal statute. 
(Code 1967, § 16-153; Code 1981, § 13-151) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1030. 
Sec. 32-192. - Requirements as to single-beam headlights. 
    Approved single-beam headlights shall be aimed in accordance with requirements adopted by the superintendent, so as not to project a glaring or dazzling light to persons approaching such headlights, and shall be of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 200 feet. 
(Code 1967, § 16-154; Code 1981, § 13-152) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1031. 
Sec. 32-193. - Requirements as to multiple-beam headlights. 
    Approved multiple-beam headlights shall be aimed in accordance with requirements adopted by the superintendent, based on recommendations of the Society of Automotive Engineers. An uppermost distribution of light shall be provided of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and objects at least 350 feet ahead and at least one lower, nonglaring distribution of light shall be provided. All road lighting beams shall be of such intensity as to reveal persons and objects at least 100 feet ahead. 
(Code 1967, § 16-155; Code 1981, § 13-153) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1032. 
Sec. 32-194. - Indicator lamp. 
    Every new motor vehicle hereafter sold, when operated on a street or highway, shall be equipped with an indicator lamp in good condition which shall indicate to the operator when the uppermost distribution of light is being used. 
(Code 1967, § 16-156; Code 1981, § 13-154) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1033. 
Sec. 32-195. - Dimming headlights. 
    Whenever a vehicle is being operated upon a street or highway or a portion thereof which is sufficiently lighted to reveal any person or object upon such way at a distance of 350 feet ahead, the operator of such vehicle shall use one of the low beam of his vehicle's headlights or shall dim the headlights, if the vehicle has single-beam lamps. Whenever a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within 500 feet, the driver of such vehicle shall use the low beam of his vehicle's headlights so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver or dim the headlights, if the vehicle has single-beam lamps. Whenever the operator of any motor vehicle approaches from the rear or follows within 200 feet of another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, the driver shall use the low beam of his vehicle's headlights or shall dim the headlights, if the vehicle has single-beam lamps. 
(Code 1967, § 16-158; Code 1981, § 13-155) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1034. 
Sec. 32-196. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
    Whenever a vehicle is parked so that the beam from the headlights of such parked vehicle will glare into the eyes of the driver of a vehicle approaching upon a highway, the operator of the parked vehicle shall dim or use the low beam of such lights so that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of such approaching driver. 
(Code 1967, § 16-159; Code 1981, § 13-156) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1035. 
Sec. 32-197. - Acetylene lamps on antique motor vehicles. 
    Antique motor vehicles as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 may be equipped with acetylene headlights, taillights and lights to illuminate their rear license plates as provided in regulations promulgated by the superintendent. 
(Code 1981, § 13-157) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1036. 
Sec. 32-198. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
    Any vehicle parked or stopped upon a street or highway, whether attended or unattended, between sunrise and sunset, shall at least one light projecting a white or amber light visible in clear weather from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle and projecting a red light visible under like conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights, however, need be displayed upon any such vehicle when legally parked. 
(Code 1967, § 16-104; Code 1981, § 13-158) 
State Law reference- Lights on parked vehicles, and authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1037. 
Sec. 32-199. - Hazard lights. 
(a)  Motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers, when temporarily stopped on the traveled or paved portion of the highway so as to create a traffic hazard, shall flash all four turn signals simultaneously to signal approaching motorists of the existing hazard whenever such vehicle is equipped with a device which will cause the four turn signals to flash simultaneously. All four turn signals may be flashed simultaneously on a vehicle slowed or stopped at the scene of a traffic hazard, when traveling as part of a funeral procession, or when traveling at a speed of 30 miles per hour or less. Except for vehicles traveling as part of a funeral procession, all four turn signals shall not be flashed simultaneously while the vehicle is traveling faster than 30 miles per hour. 
(b)  School buses shall flash all four turn signals when approaching and stopping at railroad grade crossings. 
(Code 1967, § 16-132; Code 1981, § 13-159) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1040. 
Secs. 32-200-32-221. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BRAKES 

Sec. 32-222. - Brakes on motor vehicles. 
    Every motor vehicle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle. The brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall conform to the provisions in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 16-105; Code 1981, § 13-166) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1066. 
Sec. 32-223. - Efficiency of service braking system. 
    On a dry, hard, approximately level stretch of highway, free from loose material, the service braking system shall be capable of stopping a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles at all times and under all conditions of loading, at a speed of 20 miles per hour, within the following distances: 
(1)  Passenger motor vehicles, except buses and antique vehicles: 25 feet. 
(2)  Buses, trucks and tractor trucks: 40 feet. 
(3)  Motor vehicles registered or qualified to be registered as antique vehicles, when equipped with: 
a.  Two-wheel brakes: 45 feet; and 
b.  Four-wheel brakes: 25 feet. 
(4)  All combinations of vehicles: 40 feet. 
(5)  Motorcycles: 30 feet. 
(Code 1967, § 16-106; Code 1981, § 13-167) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1067. 
Sec. 32-224. - Emergency or parking brakes. 
    Every motor vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles, shall be equipped with emergency or parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle or vehicles on any grade on which it is operated, under all conditions of loading on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material. 
(Code 1967, § 16-107; Code 1981, § 13-168) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2068. 
Sec. 32-225. - Brakes on motorcycles. 
(a)  Every motorcycle manufactured after July 1, 1974, and driven on a highway in this city shall be equipped with either a split-service brake system or two independently actuated service brake systems which shall act on the front as well as the rear wheel or wheels. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motorcycle on a highway in this city which was originally equipped with a service brake system on both the front or rear wheel or wheels if the service brake system has been altered by removing or disconnecting any of the brake-system components from any of the wheels. 
(Code 1981, § 13-169) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1069. 
Sec. 32-226. - Brakes on trailers and other towed vehicles. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gross weight includes the weight of the vehicle and the load upon such semitrailer, trailer or separate vehicle. 
(b)  Every semitrailer or trailer or separate vehicle attached by a drawbar, chain or coupling to a towing vehicle, other than a farm tractor or a vehicle not required to obtain an annual registration certificate for license plates and having an actual gross weight of 3,000 pounds or more, shall be equipped with brakes controlled or operated by the driver of the towing vehicle which shall conform to the specifications set forth in section 32-223 and shall be of a type approved by the superintendent. Farm trailers used exclusively for hauling raw agricultural produce from farm to farm or farm to packing shed or processing plant, within the normal growing area of said packing shed or processing plant, and trailers or semitrailers drawn by a properly licensed motor vehicle which are exempt from registration, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any vehicle being towed for repairs or repossession, or in a bona fide emergency, or being moved by a tow truck when two wheels of the towed vehicle are off the ground. 
(Code 1967, § 16-108; Code 1981, § 13-170) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1070. 
Sec. 32-227. - Brakes on bicycles, electric power-assisted bicycles and mopeds. 
    Every bicycle, electric power-assisted bicycle, and moped, when operated on a highway, shall be equipped with a brake that will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. Every electric personal assistive mobility device, when operated on a highway, shall be equipped with a system that, when activated or engaged, will enable the operator to bring the device to a controlled stop. 
(Code 1967, § 16-105; Code 1981, § 13-171) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1066. 
Secs. 32-228-32-247. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TIRES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Tires, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1041-46.2-1043. 

Sec. 32-248. - Restrictions as to solid rubber tires. 
    Every tire, other than a pneumatic tire, on a vehicle moved on any street or highway in the city shall have rubber on its entire traction surface, at least one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery. No vehicle equipped with such tires shall be operated over any street or highway in this city unless a permit therefor is first secured from the state transportation board. 
(Code 1967, § 16-125; Code 1981, § 13-181) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1041. 
Sec. 32-249. - Sale of certain tires prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale, or have in his possession with intent to sell, any motor vehicle tire unless that tire meets or exceeds standards established by the Society of Automotive Engineers, the American National Standards Institute, Inc., or the federal department of transportation and is marked in accordance with those standards. 
(b)  No person shall operate a state-registered motor vehicle on any street or highway in the city with knowledge that such motor vehicle is equipped with any tire which has been regrooved or recut unless that tire meets or exceeds standards established by the Society of Automotive Engineers, the American National Standards Institute, Inc., or the federal department of transportation and is marked in accordance with those standards. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 16-127; Code 1981, § 13-182) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1042. 
Sec. 32-250. - Depths of treads. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer on any highway in the city, if such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is equipped with one or more tires which: 
(1)  When measured in any two adjacent major tread grooves where the tread is thinnest, at three equally spaced intervals around the circumference of the tire and exclusive of tiebars, by a tread depth gauge calibrated in 1/32 of an inch, is found to have tread depth of less than 2/32 of an inch at such locations; or 
(2)  When equipped with tread wear indicators, is found to have such indicators in contact with pavement at any two adjacent grooves at three equally spaced intervals around the circumference of the tire. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to tires mounted on dual wheels installed on motor vehicles having seats for more than seven passengers operated wholly within a city, or operated by urban and suburban bus lines. For purposes of this section, the terms "urban and suburban bus lines" mean bus lines operating over regular scheduled routes, the majority of whose passengers use the buses for traveling a distance of not exceeding 40 miles, measured one way, on the same day between their place of abode and their place of work, shopping areas or schools. 
(c)  The exemptions set forth in this section shall not apply to buses owned or operated by any public school district, private school or contract operator of school buses. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle not required to be registered or licensed. 
(Code 1967, § 16-128; Code 1981, § 13-183) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1043. 
Sec. 32-251. - Cleats and other protuberances prohibited. 
(a)  No tire on a vehicle moved on a highway shall have on its periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat or spike or any other protuberance of any material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire. It shall be permissible to use farm machinery having protuberances which will not injure the highway and to use tire chains of reasonable proportions, when required for safety because of snow, ice or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to slide or skid. It shall also be permissible to use, upon any vehicle whose gross weight does not exceed 10,000 pounds, tires with studs which project not more than 1/16 th of an inch beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire, when compressed, and which cover not more than three percent of the traction surface of the tire. The use of such studded tires shall be permissible only from October 15 to April 15. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any: 
(1)  Law enforcement vehicles operated by or under the direction of a federal, state or local law enforcement officer; 
(2)  Vehicles used to fight fire, including publicly owned state forest warden vehicles; 
(3)  Ambulances, rescue or life-saving vehicles; or 
(4)  Vehicles owned or operated by the state department of transportation or its contractors in maintenance and emergency response operations. 
(Code 1967, § 16-129; Code 1981, § 13-184) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1044. 
Sec. 32-252. - Sale of tires having cleats and other protuberances. 
    No person shall sell, within the city, a tire which has on its periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat or spike or any other protuberance of any material other than rubber, which projects beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire except that farm machinery having protuberances which will not injure the highway and tire chains of reasonable proportions may be sold. It shall also be permissible to sell studded tires whose use is permitted under the provisions of the preceding section. 
(Code 1967, § 16-130; Code 1981, § 13-185) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1045. 
Secs. 32-253-32-282. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD; COMBINATIONS OF VEHICLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Maximum size, weight and load of vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1101 et seq. 

Sec. 32-283. - Farm machinery, firefighting equipment, etc., exempt from certain size limitations. 
(a)  Except when restricted by bridge capacity in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1104, the vehicle size and weight limitations contained in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1101 et seq. (sections 13-202, 13-203, 13-204, 13-206 and 13-207) shall not apply to any farm machinery or agricultural multipurpose drying unit when such farm machinery or agricultural multipurpose drying unit is temporarily propelled, hauled, transported, or moved on the highway by a farm machinery distributor or dealer, fertilizer distributor, or farmer in the ordinary course of business. Nor shall those limitations apply to firefighting equipment of any county, city, town or firefighting company or association. Any farm tractor or agricultural multipurpose drying unit wider than 108 inches, however, which is so propelled, hauled, transported, or moved on the highway shall be equipped with a safety light of a type approved by the superintendent of state police. The light shall be plainly visible from the rear of the tractor or agricultural multipurpose drying unit. No overweight farm machinery or agricultural multipurpose drying unit under this section shall be operated on any interstate highway system component if the vehicle has: 
(1)  A single axle weight in excess of 20,000 pounds; 
(2)  A tandem axle weight in excess of 34,000 pounds; 
(3)  A gross weight, based on axle spacing, greater than that permitted in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1126; or 
(4)  A gross weight, regardless of axle spacing, in excess of 80,000 pounds. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, any farm tractor or other farm, agricultural or horticultural vehicle wider than 108 inches may be equipped with an amber flashing, blinking, or alternating warning light as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1025. Any such light may be installed in lieu of or in addition to the safety light described in subsection (a) of this section. The absence of amber flashing, blinking or alternating warning lights on any farm tractor or other farm, agricultural or horticultural vehicle, as authorized under this subsection, shall not: 
(1)  Constitute negligence; 
(2)  Be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature; 
(3)  Be admissible in evidence or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the operation, ownership or maintenance of any motor vehicle or farm tractor, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any such civil action. 
(Code 1981, § 13-201) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1102. 
Sec. 32-284. - Maximum width. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial vehicle. 
(1)  The term "commercial vehicle" means a loaded or empty motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, designed or regularly used for carrying freight, merchandise or more than ten passengers, including buses. 
(2)  The term "commercial vehicle" does not include vehicles used for vanpools. 
(b)  No vehicle, including any load thereon, but excluding the mirror required by section 13-104, shall exceed a total outside width as follows: 
(1)  Passenger bus operated in the city, when authorized pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300: 102 inches; 
(2)  Other vehicles: 96 inches; and 
(3)  School buses: 
a.  100 inches wide while in motion; and 
b.  118 inches wide when stopped to pickup or discharge students. 
(c)  No commercial vehicle shall exceed 102 inches in width when operating on any interstate highway or on any highway designated by the commonwealth transportation board. The width limitation in this section shall not include rearview mirrors, turn signal lights, handholds for cab entry and egress, splash suppressant devices, and load-induced tire bulge. Safety devices, with the exception of rearview mirrors, shall not extend more than three inches on each side of a vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 13-202) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1109. 
Sec. 32-285. - Maximum height; damage to overhead bridges or structures. 
(a)  No loaded or unloaded vehicle shall exceed a height of 13 feet, six inches. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require either the public authorities or railroad companies to provide vertical clearances of overhead bridges or structures in excess of 12 feet, six inches, or to make any changes in the vertical clearances of existing overhead bridges or structures crossing streets or highways. The operator or owner of vehicles operating on streets or highways shall be held financially responsible for any damage to overhead bridges or structures that results from collisions therewith. 
(c)  The driver or owner of any vehicle colliding with an overhead bridge or structure shall notify immediately, either in person or by telephone, the public authority or railroad company owning or maintaining such overhead bridge or structure, or a police officer, of the fact of such collision and his name, address, driver's license number and the registration number of his vehicle. Failure to give such notice immediately, either in person or by telephone, shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall be deemed for all purposes a moving violation. 
(Code 1981, § 13-203) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1110. 
Sec. 32-286. - Maximum length. 
(a)  Except for buses and motor homes, no motor vehicle longer than 40 feet shall be operated on any highway in the city. The actual length of any combination of vehicles coupled together including any load thereon shall not exceed a total of 65 feet. However, the length of a tractor truck semitrailer combination may exceed 65 feet in length, provided the semitrailer does not exceed 53 feet in length and the distance between the kingpin of the semitrailer and the rearmost axle or a point midway between the rear tandem axles does not exceed 41 feet. The commissioner of highways may impose restrictions on the operation of vehicles exceeding 65 feet in length on certain roads, based on a safety and engineering analysis. No bus or motor home longer than 45 feet shall be operated on any highway in the city. No tolerance shall be allowed that exceeds 12 inches. 
(b)  The commissioner, however, when good cause is shown, may issue a special permit for combinations either in excess of 65 feet, including any load thereon, or where the object or objects to be carried cannot be moved otherwise. Such permits may also be issued by the department when the total number of otherwise overdimensional loads of modular housing of no more than two units may be reduced by permitting the use of an overlength trailer not exceeding 54 feet. No permit shall be issued by the commissioner until an engineering analysis of a proposed routing has been conducted by the commissioner of highways to assess the ability of the roadway to be traversed to sustain the vehicle's size. 
(c)  No overall length restrictions, however, shall be imposed on any tractor truck semitrailer combinations drawing one trailer or any tractor truck semitrailer combinations when operated on any interstate highway or on any highway as designated by the commonwealth transportation board. No such designation shall be made, however, until notice of any proposed designation has been provided by the commissioner of highways to the governing body of every locality wherein any highway affected by the proposed designation is located. No individual semitrailer or trailer being drawn in a tractor truck semitrailer trailer combination, however, shall exceed 281/2 feet in length, and no semitrailer being operated in a tractor truck semitrailer combination shall exceed 48 feet in length, except when semitrailers have a distance of not more than 41 feet between the kingpin of the semitrailer and the rearmost axle or a point midway between the rear tandem axles, such semitrailer shall be allowed not more than 53 feet in length. 
(d)  The length limitations on semitrailers and trailers in the foregoing provisions of this section shall be exclusive of safety and energy conservation devices, steps and handholds for entry and egress, rubber dock guards, flexible fender extensions, mudflaps, refrigeration units, and air compressors. The commonwealth transportation board shall designate reasonable access to terminals, facilities for food, fuel, repairs and rest. Household goods carriers and any tractor truck semitrailer combination in which the semitrailer has a length of no more than 281/2 feet shall not be denied reasonable access to points of loading and unloading, except as designated, based on safety considerations, by the commonwealth transportation board. 
(e)  Any person operating a vehicle whose length is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter on a two-lane highway where passing is permitted shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and fined $250.00. 
(Code 1981, § 13-204) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1112. 
Sec. 32-287. - Mobile homes or house trailers. 
    The actual length of any combination of a towing vehicle and any manufactured home or house trailer, coupled together, shall not exceed a total length of 55 feet, including coupling. 
(Code 1981, § 13-205) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1115. 
Sec. 32-288. - Extension of loads beyond front of vehicles. 
    No vehicle shall carry any load extending more than three feet beyond the front thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 13-206) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1120. 
Sec. 32-289. - Extension of loads beyond line of fender or body. 
(a)  No vehicle shall carry any load extending more than six inches beyond the line of the fender or body; nor shall such load exceed the total outside width prescribed by section 32-284. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, it shall be lawful for watercraft carried on vehicles to extend more than six inches beyond the line of the fender or body of such vehicle provided the total width of watercraft and the carrier upon which the same is so carried does not exceed 76 inches. 
(Code 1981, § 13-207) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1111. 
Sec. 32-290. - Vehicles having more than one trailer, etc., attached thereto. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section and Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1117, no motor vehicle shall be driven upon a street or highway drawing or having attached thereto more than one motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, unless such vehicle is being operated under a special permit from the state highway commission. This limitation shall not apply, between sunrise and sunset, to farm trailers or semitrailers being moved from one farm to another farm owned or operated by the same person within a radius of ten miles. This limitation shall not apply to a combination of vehicles coupled together by a saddle mount device used to transport motor vehicles in a drive-away service, when not more than two saddle mounts are used. Vehicles coupled together by not more than three saddle mounts shall not exceed 75 feet when operated on any primary highway as designated by the commonwealth transportation board and shall not exceed 97 feet when operated on the National Network of interstate and primary highways as designated under 23 CFR 658.5, as amended. Use of saddle mounts as provided in this section shall be in conformity with safety regulations adopted by the United States Department of Transportation. The commonwealth transportation board shall designate reasonable access to terminals and facilities for food, fuel, repairs and rest. 
(b)  In an emergency as defined in section 32-294, the towing of disabled vehicles which cannot be separated for safety, physical or mechanical reasons and which exceed 55 feet in length shall be permissible for the purpose of towing any such vehicle to the nearest facility which can make the necessary repairs but not more than 50 miles from the point such vehicle became disabled. The city council may, in its discretion, by general ordinance, permit motor vehicles to be driven upon streets of the city drawing or having attached thereto more than one other vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. 
(Code 1981, § 13-208) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1116. 
Sec. 32-291. - Connection between vehicles. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Tow truck means any motor vehicle that is constructed and used primarily for towing, lifting, or otherwise moving illegally parked or disabled vehicles. 
(b)  The connection between any two vehicles, one of which is towing or drawing the other on a highway, shall consist of a fifth wheel, drawbar or other similar device not to exceed 15 feet in length from one vehicle to the other. Any such two vehicles shall, in addition to such drawbar or other similar device, be equipped, at all times when so operated on the highway, with an emergency chain or cable that is structurally adequate to securely stop and hold the trailer being towed. The fifth wheel, drawbar, trailer hitch, or similar device must be: 
(1)  Structurally adequate for the weight being drawn; 
(2)  Properly and securely mounted; 
(3)  Provide for adequate articulation at the connection without excessive slack at that location; and 
(4)  Provided with a locking device that prevents accidental separation of the towed and towing vehicles. 
The mounting of the fifth wheel, drawbar, trailer hitch, or similar device on the towing vehicle must include reinforcement or bracing of the frame sufficient to produce strength and rigidity of the frame to prevent its undue distortion. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (b) this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any farm tractor, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, when such farm tractor is towing any farm implement or farm machinery by means of a drawbar coupled with a safety hitch pin or manufacturer's coupling device; or 
(2)  Any tow truck towing a vehicle by means of a wheel lift apparatus that employs a safety strap to hold two of the towed vehicle's wheels within a wheel lift cradle in a manner consistent with instructions of the manufacturer of such wheel lift apparatus. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall not apply in case of a bona fide emergency resulting from a mechanical breakdown or an accident, when such vehicle is being towed to the nearest garage or repair shop which can furnish the required service. In any such case, such connection may consist solely of a chain, rope or cable of not over 15 feet in length between vehicles; provided that, a licensed operator shall be at the controls of the towed vehicle to brake and steer the vehicle and control the lights thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 13-209) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1118. 
Sec. 32-292. - Towing unlicensed or uninspected motor vehicle. 
(a)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit towing an unlicensed motor vehicle or motor vehicle which has not been inspected pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1157 et seq., or 46.2-1176 et seq. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the towing of an unlicensed trailer or semitrailer used on a construction site as an office or for storage or a trailer or semitrailer which has been used on a construction site as an office or for storage, but which has not been inspected pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1157 et seq., provided that any such unlicensed or uninspected trailer or semitrailer: 
(1)  Is towed by a tow truck or other vehicle designed and equipped for the towing of inoperable or disabled vehicles; 
(2)  Is operated only in intrastate commerce; 
(3)  Has an actual gross weight, including contents, of no more than 15,000 pounds; 
(4)  Is secured to the towing vehicle by means of safety chains; and 
(5)  Is equipped with rear-mounted bar lights which function as taillights, brakelights and turn signals as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1010 et seq. 
(b)  However, nothing in this section shall authorize the towing or drawing of an unlicensed or uninspected trailer or semitrailer by means of a tractor truck except for the purpose of having such trailer or semitrailer inspected as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1157. 
(Code 1981, § 13-210) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1150. 
Sec. 32-293. - Maximum weight. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Group of axles means all of the axles located under a vehicle or combination. 
    Single axle means an assembly of two or more wheels whose centers are in one transverse vertical plane or may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. 
    Single axle weight means the total weight transmitted to the road by all wheels whose centers may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. 
    Tandem axle means any two or more consecutive axles whose centers are more than 40 inches, but not more than 96 inches apart and are individually attached to or articulated from a common attachment to the vehicle, including a connecting mechanism designed to equalize the load between axles. 
    Tandem axle weight means the total weight transmitted to the road by two or more consecutive axles whose centers may be included between parallel transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches and not more than 96 inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. 
(b)  The maximum gross weight and axle weight to be permitted on the road surface of any highway in the city shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  The single axle weight of any vehicle or combination shall not exceed 20,000 pounds, nor shall it exceed 650 pounds per inch, width of tire, measured in contact with the surface of the highway. The tandem axle weight of any vehicle or combination shall not exceed 34,000 pounds, and no one axle of such tandem unit shall exceed the weight permitted for a single axle. The weight imposed upon the highway by two or more consecutive axles, individually attached to the vehicle and spaced not less than 40 inches, nor more than 96 inches apart shall not exceed 34,000 pounds, and no one axle of such unit shall exceed the weight permitted for a single axle. 
(d)  Except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1128, the gross weight imposed upon the highway by a vehicle or combination shall not exceed the maximum weight given for the respective distance between the first and last axle of the vehicle or combination, nor shall any two or more consecutive axles exceed the maximum weight given, when measured longitudinally with any fraction of a foot rounded to the next highest, as set forth in the following table: 
Distance in feet between the extremes of any group of axles Maximum weight in pounds on any group of axles 2 axles 3 axles 4 axles 5 axles 4 34,000 5 34,000 6 34,000 7 34,000 8 34,000 34,000 9 39,000 42,500 10 40,000 43,500 11 44,000 12 45,000 50,000 13 45,500 50,500 14 46,500 51,500 15 47,000 52,000 16 48,000 52,500 58,000 17 48,500 53,500 58,500 18 49,500 54,000 59,000 19 50,000 54,500 60,000 20 51,000 55,500 60,500 21 51,500 56,000 61,000 22 52,500 56,500 61,500 23 53,000 57,500 62,500 24 54,000 58,000 63,000 25 54,500 58,500 64,500 26 55,500 59,500 65,000 27 56,000 60,000 65,000 28 57,000 60,500 65,500 29 57,500 61,500 66,000 30 58,500 62,000 66,500 31 59,000 62,500 67,500 32 60,000 63,500 68,000 33 64,000 68,500 34 64,500 69,000 35 65,500 70,000 36 66,600 70,500 37 66,500 71,000 38 67,500 72,000 39 68,000 72,500 40 68,500 73,000 41 69,500 73,500 42 70,000 74,000 43 70,500 75,000 44 71,500 75,500 45 72,000 76,000  
(Code 1981, § 13-211; Code 1981, § 13-211) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1126. 
Sec. 32-294. - Weight limit exception as to certain vehicles. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency includes towing disabled inoperative vehicles to places designated by owners. 
(b)  The provisions of the preceding section including Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1122 through 46.2-1127 shall not apply to a vehicle designed for towing disabled vehicles, when towing such a vehicle in an emergency in such a manner that a part of the combined weight of the two vehicles rests upon an axle or axles of the towing vehicle, provided the towed and towing vehicles each are within the weight limits prescribed in such sections. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to permit the violation of any lawfully established load limit on any bridge. 
(Code 1981, § 13-212) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1151. 
Sec. 32-295. - Compliance with posted carrying capacity of bridges and culverts. 
(a)  No vehicle shall cross any bridge or culvert, if the gross weight of such vehicle is greater than the amount posted on the bridge or culvert as its carrying capacity. 
(b)  Signs stating the carrying capacity shall be erected and maintained near each end of the bridge or culvert on the approaches to such bridge or culvert. Whenever the weight capacity of any structure on the interstate or primary system is reduced below the weight limit permitted on the road of which it is a part, a sign indicating that there is a restricted structure shall be placed in advance of the last alternate route on the road upon which there is a restricted structure. Whenever the weight capacity of any structure is reduced below the weight limit permitted on the road of which it is a part, a sign indicating that there is a restricted structure, shall be placed in advance of the last alternate route on the road upon which there is a restricted structure. 
(Code 1981, § 13-213) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1130. 
Sec. 32-296. - Temporary reduction of weight limit. 
(a)  The city manager may make, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations decreasing the weight limits specified in section 32-293, for a total period not to exceed 90 days in any calendar year, when an engineering study discloses that the operation of vehicles over highways, by reason of deterioration or rain, snow or other climatic conditions, will seriously damage such highways unless such weights are reduced. The city manager shall cause to be erected signs stating the weight specified in such rule or regulation, at each end of the section of the highway affected, and no such rule or regulation shall be effective until such signs are erected. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle or combination of vehicles over or upon any highway or section thereof when the weight exceeds the maximum posted by authority of the city manager pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Any violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. Furthermore, the vehicle or combination of vehicles involved in such violation may be held upon an order of the court until all fines and costs have been satisfied. 
(Code 1981, § 13-214) 
State Law reference- Authority for subsection (a) and provisions similar to subsections (b) and (c), Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1104. 
Sec. 32-297. - Special permits for oversize and overweight vehicles. 
(a)  The city manager may, in his discretion, upon application in writing and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit, in writing, authorizing the applicant to operate or move, upon the highways of the city, a vehicle of a size or weight exceeding the maximum specified in this article. Every such permit may designate the route to be traversed and contain any other restrictions or conditions deemed necessary by the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager, upon application in writing made by the owner or operator of three-axle trucks hauling road construction materials and having a: 
(1)  Gross weight not exceeding 43,900 pounds; 
(2)  Single-axle weight not exceeding 20,000 pounds; and 
(3)  Tandem-axle weight not exceeding 34,000 pounds; 
shall issue to such owner or operator, without cost, a permit in writing authorizing the operation of such vehicles upon the highways. No such permit shall designate the route to be traversed nor contain restrictions or conditions not applicable to other vehicles in their general use of the highways. No permit issued under this section providing for a single axle weight in excess of 20,000 pounds or for a tandem axle weight in excess of 34,000 pounds shall be issued to include travel on the federal interstate system of highways. 
(c)  The city manager, upon application in writing made by the owner or operator of three-axle vehicles used exclusively for the mixing of concrete in transit or at a project site, or for transporting necessary components to produce concrete immediately upon arrival at the project site, and having a: 
(1)  Gross weight not exceeding 60,000 pounds; 
(2)  Single-axle weight not exceeding 20,000 pounds; and 
(3)  Tandem-axle weight not exceeding 40,000 pounds; 
shall issue to such owner or operator, without cost, a permit in writing authorizing the operation of such vehicles upon the highways. No such permit shall be issued authorizing the operation of the vehicles enumerated in this subsection for a distance of more than 25 miles from a batching plant; however, the said permit shall not designate the route to be traversed nor contain restrictions or conditions not applicable to other vehicles in their general use of the highways. 
(d)  The city manager, upon application in writing made by the owners or operators of motor vehicles not exceeding the axle and gross weight limitations set forth in section 32-294, shall issue, without cost, a permit authorizing the operation of such motor vehicles on the highways of this city, to transport items arriving at a commonwealth port by ship from overseas points of origin and consigned to an assembly plant in this state, or motor vehicles that do not exceed the: 
(1)  Height limitation set forth in section 32-285 by more than 11/2 feet; and 
(2)  Length limitation set forth in section 32-286 by more than three feet. 
The city manager may designate the routes such permittees must use in the city. 
(e)  Each vehicle, when loaded according to the provisions of a permit issued under this section, shall be operated at a reduced speed. The reduced speed limit is to be ten miles per hour slower than the legal speed limit in 55, 45 and 35 miles per hour speed limit zones. 
(f)  No permit issued under this section providing for a single axle weight in excess of 20,000 pounds or a tandem axle weight in excess of 34,000 pounds shall be issued to include travel on the federal interstate system of highways. 
(g)  Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any officer, and it shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the terms or conditions of such permit. 
(Code 1981, § 13-215) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1139. 
Sec. 32-298. - Restrictions as to travel on federal-aid highway. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 32-297, any permit heretofore or hereafter issued by the city manager pursuant to such section may be restricted so as to prevent travel on any federal-aid highway, if the continuation of travel on such highway would result in a loss of federal-aid funds. Before any such permit is so restricted, notice in writing must be given to the permittee. 
(Code 1981, § 13-216) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1139. 
Sec. 32-299. - Weighing vehicles; unloading excess load. 
(a)  Any officer or size and weight compliance agent authorized to enforce the law under this title, having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful, is authorized to weigh the load and the vehicle. If the place where the vehicle is stopped is ten road miles or less from a permanent weighing station, the officer may, and upon demand of the driver shall, require the vehicle to proceed to such station. If the distance to the nearest permanent weighing station is more than ten road miles such vehicle may be weighed by wheel load weighers. Any driver who fails or unreasonably refuses to drive his vehicle to such permanent weighing station or such scales or wheel load weighers upon the request and direction of the officer to do so shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. The penalty for such violation shall be in addition to any other penalties prescribed for exceeding the maximum weight permitted or for any other violation. 
(b)  In the event of such failure or unreasonable refusal, where the officer has reason to believe the vehicle is overweight, the officer may use whatever reasonable means are available to have the vehicle weighed, including the employment of a tow truck to move the vehicle to the weighing area. He may also use whatever means are necessary to reload the vehicle if the load is intentionally dumped. In such a case, any expenses incurred in having the vehicle weighed may be taxed as costs to be imposed upon the operator who failed or unreasonably refused to drive his vehicle to such weighing area, when he has been convicted of such failure or refusal and an overweight violation. In all cases where such failure or refusal or overweight charges are dismissed, payment shall be made from highway funds. 
(c)  Should the officer or size and weight compliance agent find that the weight of any vehicle and its load is greater than that permitted by this title or that the weight of the load carried in or on such vehicle is greater than that which the vehicle is licensed to carry under the provisions of this title, he may require the driver to unload, at the nearest place where the property unloaded may be stored or transferred to another vehicle, such portion of the load as may be necessary to decrease the gross weight of the vehicle to the maximum therefor permitted by this title. Any property so unloaded shall be stored or cared for by the owner or operator of the overweight vehicle at the risk of such owner or operator. 
(d)  However, notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1122 through 46.2-1127, should the officer or size and weight compliance agent find that the gross weight of the vehicle and its load is within limits permitted under this chapter and does not exceed the limit for which the vehicle is registered, but that the axle weight of any axle or axles of the vehicle exceeds that permitted under this chapter, the driver shall be allowed one hour to shift his load within or on that same vehicle in order to bring the axle weight or axle weights within proper limits. However, liquidated damages shall be assessed under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1135 based on the weight prior to shifting the load, unless the load can be successfully shifted to bring the vehicle's axle weight within limits permitted under this chapter by: 
(1)  Sliding the axle or axles of the semitrailer or the fifth wheel of the tractor truck; 
(2)  Repositioning the load if the motor vehicle is transporting off-the-road mobile construction equipment; or 
(3)  Adjusting the load if the vehicle is operating on noninterstate highways and qualifies for weight extensions pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1129. 
Such load shifting shall be performed at the site where the vehicle was weighed and found to exceed allowable axle weight limits. No such load shifting shall be allowed if such load is required to be placarded as defined in Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1450 and consists of hazardous material as defined in Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400. 
(e)  If the driver of an overloaded vehicle is convicted, forfeits bail, or purchases an increased license as a result of such weighing, the court in addition to all other penalties shall assess and collect a weighing fee of $2.00 from the owner or operator of the vehicle and shall forward such fee to the state treasurer. Upon receipt of the fee, the state treasurer shall allocate the same to the fund appropriated for the administration and maintenance of the department of state police. 
(f)  In any court or legal proceedings in which any question arises as to the calibration or accuracy of any such scales at permanent weighing stations or wheel load weighers, a certificate, executed and signed under oath by the inspector calibrating or testing such device as to its accuracy as well as to the accuracy of the test weights used in such test, and stating the date of such test, type of test and results of testing, shall be admissible when attested by one such inspector who executed and signed it as evidence of the facts therein stated and the results of such testing. 
(Code 1981, § 13-217) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1137. 
Sec. 32-300. - Securing loads. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be operated or moved on any highway unless such vehicle is so constructed, maintained and loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. No provision of this section, however, shall apply to any: 
(1)  Motor vehicle that is used exclusively for agricultural purposes as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-698 and is not licensed in any other state; 
(2)  Agricultural vehicle, tractor or other vehicle exempted from registration and licensing requirements pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-662 et seq.; or 
(3)  Motor vehicle transporting forest products, poultry or livestock. 
(b)  The loads of all trucks, trailers and semitrailers carrying gravel, sand, coal or other nonagricultural and nonforestry products on interstate, primary, or secondary highways or roads maintained by city shall be either: 
(1)  Secured to the vehicle in which they are being transported; or 
(2)  Covered. Covers used to prevent the escape of material from commercial vehicles used to transport solid waste shall be of such design, installation and construction as to contain the vehicle's cargo within the vehicle, regardless of the vehicle's speed or weather conditions. Public service company vehicles, pickup trucks and emergency snow removal equipment while engaged in snow removal operations shall be excluded from the provisions of this subsection. 
(Code 1967, § 16-136; Code 1981, § 13-218) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1156. 
Sec. 32-301. - Loads susceptible to shifting or rolling. 
(a)  No vehicle which is designed or used for the purpose of hauling logs, poles or lumber, barrels, hogsheads or other materials or containers which, by their nature, may shift or roll, shall be operated or moved over any highway unless its load is securely fastened by adequate log chains, metal cables, nylon webbing, steel straps or other restraining devices, so as to prevent the shifting or falling of such load from the vehicle. Tobacco hogsheads may, in lieu of chains or metal cables, be secured by manila or hemp rope of at least five-eighths-feet in diameter of sufficient strength to fasten securely the hogshead against shifting, falling or rolling, and in any case of not less than five-eighths inch in diameter. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to release the owner or operator from liability for failure to use reasonable care in securing or fastening such load from shifting or falling. 
(Code 1967, § 16-138; Code 1981, § 13-219) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1155. 
Sec. 32-302. - Flag or light at end of projecting load. 
    Whenever the load on any vehicle shall extend more than four feet beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof, there shall be displayed, at the end of such load in such position as to be clearly visible at all times from the rear of such load, a red flag not less than 12 inches, both in length and width. Between sunrise and sunset, there shall be displayed, at the end of such load, a red light, plainly visible in clear weather at least 500 feet to the sides and rear of such vehicle. 
(Code 1967, § 16-133; Code 1981, § 13-220) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1121. 
Secs. 32-303-32-322. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Rules of the road, Code of Virginia, § 45.2-800 et seq. 

Sec. 32-323. - General duty to drive on right side of highways. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, upon all highways of sufficient width, the driver of a vehicle shall drive the same upon the right half of the highway, unless it is impracticable to travel on such side of the highway and except when overtaking and passing another vehicle, subject to the limitations applicable in overtaking and passing set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-837 et seq., and this article. 
(Code 1967, § 16-56; Code 1981, § 13-236) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-802. 
Sec. 32-324. - Driving around rotary traffic islands. 
    A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of such island. 
(Code 1967, § 16-57; Code 1981, § 13-237) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-807. 
Sec. 32-325. - Keep to the right in crossing intersections or railroads. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, in crossing an intersection of highways or the intersection of a highway by a railroad right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall at all times cause such vehicle to travel on the right half of the highway unless such right side is obstructed or impassable; provided, however, that in crossing an intersection of highways, the driver of a vehicle may overtake or pass another vehicle in the intersection if such intersection is designated and marked as a passing zone by the state highway and transportation commission pursuant to its authority set out in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-830. 
(Code 1967, § 16-58; Code 1981, § 13-238) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 45.2-803. 
Sec. 32-326. - Driving on highways laned for traffic. 
    Whenever any highway has been divided into clearly marked lanes for traffic, drivers of vehicles shall obey the following regulations: 
(1)  Any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions existing shall be driven in the lane nearest the right-hand edge or curb of the highway when such lane is available for travel, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or in preparation for a left turn or as permitted in subsection (4) of this section; 
(2)  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as is practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has ascertained that such movement can be made with safety; 
(3)  Except as provided in subsection (5) of this section, upon a highway which is divided into three lanes, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle or in preparation for a left turn, or unless such center lane is, at the time, allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is sign-posted or marked to give notice of such allocation; provided that, official traffic control devices may be erected directing specified traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving a particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device; 
(4)  Whenever the city has designated right-hand lanes for slow-moving traffic and when such lanes are sign-posted or marked to give notice of such designation, a vehicle may be driven in any lane allocated to traffic moving in the direction such vehicle is proceeding, but when traveling within such inside lanes, vehicles shall be driven at approximately the speed authorized in such lanes and speed shall not unnecessarily be decreased so as to block, hinder or retard traffic; 
(5)  Wherever a highway is marked with double traffic lanes consisting of a solid line immediately adjacent to a broken line, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of such line if the solid line is on the right of the broken line, except that it shall be lawful to make a left turn for the purpose of entering or leaving a public, private or commercial road or entrance. Where the middle lane of a highway is marked on both sides with a solid line immediately adjacent to a broken line, such middle lane shall be considered a left-turn or holding lane and it shall be lawful to drive to the left of such line if the solid line is on the right of the broken line for the purpose of making a left turn into a public, private or commercial road or entrance, provided however that the vehicle may not travel in such lane for a distance greater than 150 feet; 
(6)  Wherever a highway is marked with double traffic lines consisting of two immediately adjacent solid lines, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of such lines, except that it shall be lawful to make a left. 
(Code 1967, § 16-59; Code 1981, § 13-239) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-804. 
Sec. 32-327. - Passing vehicle proceeding in opposite direction. 
    Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions on highways not marked to indicate traffic lanes shall pass each other to the right, each giving to the other, as nearly as possible, one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1967, § 16-60; Code 1981, § 13-240) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-837. 
Sec. 32-328. - Passing vehicle proceeding in same direction. 
    The driver of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass at least two feet to the left thereof and shall not again drive to the right side of the highway until safely clear of such overtaking vehicle, except as provided in this article. 
(Code 1967, § 16-61; Code 1981, § 13-241) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-838. 
Sec. 32-329. - Limitations on overtaking and passing. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of the centerline of a highway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety. 
(b)  No person operating a truck or tractor and trailer shall pass or attempt to pass any truck or tractor and trailer going in the same direction on an upgrade hill, if such passing will impede the passage of following traffic. 
(Code 1967, § 16-65; Code 1981, § 13-242) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-843. 
Sec. 32-330. - Overtaking and passing on right side. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn, and the driver of such vehicle has given a signal as required; 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction; 
(3)  Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. Except where driving on paved shoulders is permitted by lawfully placed signs, no such movement shall be made by driving on the shoulder of the highway or off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Code 1967, § 16-63; Code 1981, § 13-244) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-841. 
Sec. 32-331. - Driver to give way to overtaking vehicle. 
    Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. Any over-width, or slow-moving vehicle as defined by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1081 shall be removed from the traveled way at the nearest suitable location when necessary to allow traffic to pass. 
(Code 1967, § 16-64; Code 1981, § 13-245) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-842. 
Sec. 32-332. - Turning movements. 
(a)  Except where turning is prohibited, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection or other location on any highway, except where such turn is prohibited by any provision of this chapter, shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Right turn. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and bypassing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)  Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, and at any crossover from one roadway of a divided highway to another roadway thereof on which traffic moves in the opposite direction, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection or crossover shall approach the intersection or crossover in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle and, after entering the intersection or crossover, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection or crossover, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. 
(b)  The city manager may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at any intersection, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(Code 1967, § 16-68; Code 1981, § 13-246) 
State Law reference- Required position and method of turning at intersections, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-846. 
Sec. 32-333. - U-turns. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle in the city shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction, except at an intersection of highways. No driver shall cause any vehicle to make a turn to proceed in the opposite direction at any intersection where there is a sign or other marking prohibiting such action. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from any direction within 500 feet. 
(Code 1967, § 16-67; Code 1981, § 13-247) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-845. 
Sec. 32-334. - Signals for starting, backing, stopping or turning. 
    Every driver who intends to start, back, stop, turn or partly turn from a direct line shall first see that such movement can be made in safety and, whenever the operation of any other vehicle may be affected by such movement, shall give a signal, plainly visible to the driver of such other vehicle, of his intention to make such movement. 
(Code 1967, § 16-69; Code 1981, § 13-248) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-848. 
Sec. 32-335. - Signals how given. 
(a)  The signal required by the preceding section shall be given by means of the hand and arm or by some mechanical or electrical device approved by the superintendent, in the manner herein specified. Whenever the signal is given by means of the hand and arm, the driver shall indicate his intention to start, stop, turn or partly turn by extending the hand and arm from beyond the left side of the vehicle in the following manner: 
(1)  For a left turn or to pull to the left, the arm shall be extended in a horizontal position straight from and level with the shoulder; 
(2)  For a right turn or to pull to the right, the arm shall be extended upward; 
(3)  For slowing down or to stop, the arm shall be extended downward. 
(b)  Wherever the lawful speed is more than 35 miles per hour, such signals shall be given continuously for a distance of at least 100 feet, and in all other cases at least 50 feet, before slowing down, stopping, turning, partly turning or materially altering the course of the vehicle. 
(c)  A person riding a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped shall signal his intention to stop or turn. Such signals, however, need not be given continuously if both hands are needed in the control or operation of the bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, a person operating a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped may signal a right turn or pull to the right by extending the right hand and arm in a horizontal position straight from and level with the shoulder beyond the right side of the bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped, and may signal slowing down or stopping by extending the right arm downward. 
(Code 1967, § 16-70; Code 1981, § 13-249) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-849. 
Sec. 32-336. - Drivers of nonmoving vehicles. 
    Drivers of vehicles standing or stopped at the curb or edge, before moving such vehicles, shall give signals of their intention to move into traffic, as hereinbefore provided, before turning in the direction the vehicle will proceed from the curb. 
(Code 1967, § 16-73; Code 1981, § 13-250) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-851. 
Sec. 32-337. - Change of course. 
    Drivers having once given a hand, electrical or mechanical device signal must continue the course thus indicated, unless they alter the original signal. 
(Code 1967, § 16-71; Code 1981, § 13-251) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-850. 
Sec. 32-338. - Right-of-way at intersections generally and at traffic circles. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided, when two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. 
(b)  When vehicles arrive at approximately the same time at an uncontrolled T-intersection, the driver of the vehicle on the highway that intersects but does not cross the other highway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle traveling on the other highway. 
(c)  At traffic circles, vehicles already in the circle shall have the right-of-way over vehicles approaching and entering the circle. 
(d)  The driver of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit any right-of-way which he might otherwise have hereunder. 
(Code 1967, § 16-74; Code 1981, § 13-253) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-822, 46.2-823, 45.2-824. 
Sec. 32-339. - Right-of-way when turning left. 
    The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to constitute a hazard. Where there is an automatic signal device governing the flow of traffic at any intersection and allowing turns to the left while all other vehicular traffic is required to stop, any vehicle making such turn shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles approaching the intersection. At intersections controlled by traffic lights with separate left-turn signals, any vehicle making a left turn when so indicated by the signal shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles approaching the intersection. 
(Code 1967, § 16-75; Code 1981, § 13-254) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-825. 
Sec. 32-340. - Stop and yield intersections. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection on a highway controlled by a stop sign shall, immediately before entering such intersection, stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic in the intersecting roadway. Before proceeding, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to the driver of any vehicle approaching on such other highway from either direction. 
(b)  Where a yield right-of-way sign is posted, the driver of a vehicle entering such intersection shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway, and before proceeding shall yield the right-of-way to the driver of any vehicle approaching on such other highway from either direction. 
(Code 1981, § 13-255) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-821. 
Sec. 32-341. - Emerging from private road, driveway, alley or building. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle entering a public highway or sidewalk from a private road, driveway, alley or building shall stop immediately before entering such highway or sidewalk and, upon entering such highway or sidewalk, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such public highway or to all pedestrians or vehicles approaching on such public sidewalks. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply at an intersection of public and private roads controlled by a traffic signal. At any such intersection, all movement of traffic into and through the intersection shall be controlled by the traffic signal. 
(Code 1967, § 16-76; Code 1981, § 13-256) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 45.2-826. 
Sec. 32-342. - Right-of-way of United States forces, troops, national guard, etc. 
    United States forces or troops, or any portion of the state national guard or naval militia, parading or performing any duty according to law, or any civil defense personnel performing any duty according to law, shall have the right-of-way in any street or highway through which they may pass. Such passage, however, shall not interfere with the carrying of the United States mails, the legitimate functions of the police and firefighters or with the passage of emergency vehicles as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-920. 
(Code 1967, § 16-77; Code 1981, § 13-257) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-827. 
Sec. 32-343. - Right-of-way of funeral processions. 
(a)  Funeral processions traveling under police escort shall have the right-of-way in any street or highway through which they may pass. The city council may, by ordinance, provide for such escort service and provide for the imposition of reasonable fees to defray the cost of such service. 
(b)  The police department may provide traffic control for funeral processions when equipment and personnel are not otherwise engaged in law enforcement activities. 
(c)  Vehicles traveling as part of any funeral procession, whether escorted or unescorted, may display high beam headlights and flash all four turn signals or hazard lights to identify themselves as part of the procession. 
(d)  No vehicle that is not properly part of a funeral procession shall join, pass through, or interfere with the passage of any funeral procession under escort as provided in this section. 
(Code 1981, § 13-258) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions and authority of city to provide for police escort for funeral processions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-828. 
Sec. 32-344. - Impeding or disrupting certain funeral processions; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle intentionally to impede or disrupt a funeral procession. Any person convicted of violating this subsection shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and shall, in addition to a penalty assessed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113, be assessed four driver demerit points. 
(b)  This section shall apply only to funeral processions that are either: 
(1)  Travelling under police or sheriff's escort as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-828; or 
(2)  Escorted or led by vehicles displaying warning lights as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1025. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-828.1. 
Sec. 32-345. - Duty of drivers upon approach of emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Upon the approach of any vehicle listed in section 32-5(a) giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or air horn designed to give automatically intermittent signals, and displaying a flashing, blinking or alternating red light, or lights as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1022 through 46.2-1024, the driver of every other vehicle shall as quickly as traffic and other highway conditions permit, drive to the nearest edge of the roadway, clear of any intersection of streets or highways, and shall stop and remain in such position unless otherwise directed by a police or traffic officer until such emergency vehicle shall have passed. This provision shall not operate to relieve the driver of any such vehicle to which the right-of-way is to be yielded from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway, nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of an arbitrary exercise of such right-of-way. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall constitute failure to yield the right-of-way. Any violation of this section that involves overtaking or passing a moving emergency vehicle giving an audible signal and displaying activated warning lights as provided for in this section shall constitute reckless driving, punishable as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-868. 
(Code 1967, § 16-78; Code 1981, § 13-259) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-829. 
Sec. 32-346. - Driving through safety zone. 
    The driver of a vehicle shall not, at any time, drive through or over a safety zone. 
(Code 1981, § 13-260) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-814. 
Sec. 32-347. - Following too closely. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of both vehicles and the traffic upon, and conditions of, the highway at the time. 
(Code 1967, § 16-66; Code 1981, § 13-261) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-816. 
Sec. 32-348. - Following fire apparatus. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow any fire apparatus or rescue squad vehicle traveling in response to a fire alarm or emergency call at any distance closer than 500 feet to such apparatus or rescue squad vehicle or to park such vehicle within 500 feet of where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1967, § 16-80; Code 1981, § 13-262) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-921. 
Sec. 32-349. - Drivers to yield right-of-way or reduce speed when approaching stationary emergency vehicles on highways; penalties. 
(a)  The driver of any motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary vehicle that is displaying a flashing, blinking or alternating blue, red or amber lights as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1022, 46.2-1023, or 46.2-1024 or 46.2-1025.A.1 or A.2 shall: 
(1)  On a highway having at least four lanes, at least two of which are intended for traffic proceeding as the approaching vehicle, proceed with caution and, if reasonable, with due regard for safety and traffic conditions, yield the right-of-way by making a lane change into a lane not adjacent to the stationary vehicle; or 
(2)  If changing lanes would be unreasonable or unsafe, proceed with due caution and maintain a safe speed for highway conditions. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable as a traffic infraction, except that a second or subsequent violation of any provision of this section, when such violation involves a vehicle with flashing, blinking, or alternating blue or red lights, shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  If the violation resulted in damage to property of another person, the court may, in addition, order the suspension of the driver's privilege to operate a motor vehicle for not more than one year. If the violation resulted in injury to another person, the court may, in addition to any other penalty imposed, order the suspension of the driver's privilege to operate a motor vehicle for not more than two years. If the violation resulted in the death of another person, the court may, in addition to any other penalty imposed, order the suspension of the driver's privilege to operate a motor vehicle for two years. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply in highway work zones as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-878.1. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-921.1. 
Sec. 32-350. - Driving over fire hose. 
    It shall be unlawful, without the consent of the fire department official in command, for the driver of any vehicle to drive over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down for use at any fire or alarm of fire. 
(Code 1967, § 16-81; Code 1981, § 13-263) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-922. 
Sec. 32-351. - Driving on sidewalks. 
    If any person shall drive any vehicle other than: 
(1)  An emergency vehicle, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-920; 
(2)  A vehicle engaged in snow or ice removal and control operations; 
(3)  A wheelchair or wheelchair conveyance, whether self-propelled or otherwise; 
(4)  A bicycle; 
(5)  An electric personal assistive mobility device; or 
(6)  An electric power-assisted bicycle; 
on the sidewalks of the city, he shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $5.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(Code 1967, § 16-82; Code 1981, § 13-264) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-903. 
Sec. 32-352. - Duty of drivers to obey railroad warning signals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to fail to obey a clearly visible or audible crossing signal at a highway and railway grade crossing, which signal gives warning of the immediate approach of a railway train. 
(Code 1967, § 16-42; Code 1981, § 13-265) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-884. 
Sec. 32-353. - Driving through, around or under crossing gates. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Code 1967, § 16-43; Code 1981, § 13-266) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-885B. 
Sec. 32-354. - Coasting. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle, when traveling upon a downgrade upon any highway, shall not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral. 
(Code 1981, § 13-267) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-811. 
Sec. 32-355. - Driving more than 13 hours in 24 hours. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle on the highways of this city for more than 13 hours in any period of 24 hours or for a period which, when added to the time such person may have driven a motor vehicle over the highways outside the city would make an aggregate of more than 13 hours in any period of 24 hours; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the operation of motor vehicles used in snow or ice removal or similar emergency situations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any such vehicle to cause or permit the same to be driven in violation of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 13-268) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-812. 
Sec. 32-356. - Driving while using earphones. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Earphones means any device worn on or in both ears which converts electrical energy to sound waves or which impairs or hinders the person's ability to hear, but shall not include any prosthetic device which aids the hard of hearing; earphones installed in helmets worn by motorcycle operators and riders and used as part of a communications system; or nonprosthetic, closed-ear, open-back, electronic noise-cancellation devices designed and used to enhance the hearing ability of persons who operate vehicles in high-noise environments, provided any such device is being worn by the operator of a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,000 pounds or more. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle or moped on the highways of this city while using earphones on or in both ears. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the driver of any emergency vehicle as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-920. 
(Code 1981, § 13-269) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1078. 
Secs. 32-357-32-385. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 32-386-32-413. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ONE-WAY STREETS 

Sec. 32-414. - Established. 
(a)  The following streets are hereby established and designated as one-way streets and, except as provided in section 32-415, it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven or moved on such street in a direction other than as herein set forth: 
(1)  Alley running between Twenty-first Street and Twenty-second Street in the block between Magnolia and Sycamore Avenue, for traffic moving in a northerly direction. 
(2)  36th Street between 36th and 37th at Catalpa for traffic moving in a northerly direction. 
(3)  28th Street located at Hardee's for traffic moving in an easterly direction. 
(b)  This section shall become effective as to any such one-way street when signs have been provided therefor as set out in section 32-415. 
(Code 1967, § 16-90; Code 1981, § 13-270) 
Sec. 32-415. - Erection of signs. 
    The city manager is authorized and directed to provide signs on the one-way streets designated under this article as will apprise an ordinarily observant person of such one-way streets. 
(Code 1967, § 16-91; Code 1981, § 13-271) 
Sec. 32-416. - Variances. 
    When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager or his duly authorized representative that the strict enforcement of section 32-414 will cause an unreasonable hardship on some particular person or persons relative to the loading or unloading of trucks or other vehicles on such one-way streets, then in such event the city manager, or his duly authorized representative, is authorized to issue a special permit to such person or persons permitting a variance from the provisions of section 32-414. Any such special permit shall be in writing and shall specify the nature of such variance and the place and period of time when such variance shall be permitted. Such permit shall only be issued when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager, or his duly authorized representative, that the granting of such permit will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience to the person or persons who seek such permit. 
(Code 1967, § 16-91; Code 1981, § 13-272) 
Secs. 32-417-32-445. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - STATE DRIVER'S LICENSE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Licensure of drivers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300 et seq.; authority to prosecute, under city warrant, person charged with violation of ordinance prohibiting operation of motor vehicle without state operator's license or while such license is suspended or revoked, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310. 

Sec. 32-446. - Required. 
(a)  No person, except those expressly exempted in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-303 through 46.2-308, shall drive any motor vehicle on any street or highway in this city until such person has applied for a driver's license from the state, satisfactorily passed the examination required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-325, and obtained a driver's license nor unless such license issued to such person is valid. 
(b)  A violation of this section is a Class 2 misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor. Upon conviction under this section, the court may suspend the person's privilege to drive for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
(Code 1967, § 16-40; Code 1981, § 13-291) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300. 
Sec. 32-447. - Driving while license, permit or privilege to drive suspended or revoked. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalty provided by this section, any motor vehicle administratively impounded or immobilized under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-301.1 may, in the discretion of the court, be impounded or immobilized for an additional period of up to 90 days upon conviction of an offender for driving while his driver's license, learner's permit, or privilege to drive a motor vehicle has been suspended or revoked for: 
(1)  A violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-36.1, 18.2-51.4, 18.2-266, 18.2-272, or 46.2-341.24 or a substantially similar ordinance or law in any other jurisdiction; or 
(2)  Driving after adjudication as an habitual offender, where such adjudication was based in whole or in part on an alcohol-related offense, or where such person's license has been administratively suspended under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391.2. However, if, at the time of the violation, the offender was driving a motor vehicle owned by another person, the court shall have no jurisdiction over such motor vehicle but may order the impoundment or immobilization of a motor vehicle owned solely by the offender at the time of arrest. All costs of impoundment or immobilization, including removal or storage expenses, shall be paid by the offender prior to the release of his motor vehicle. 
(b)  Except as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-304 and 46.2-357, no resident or nonresident whose driver's license, learner's permit, or privilege to drive a motor vehicle has been suspended or revoked, who has been directed not to drive by any court or by the commissioner, or who has been forbidden, as prescribed by operation of any statute of the commonwealth or a substantially similar ordinance of any county, city or town, to operate a motor vehicle in the commonwealth shall thereafter drive any motor vehicle or any self-propelled machinery or equipment on any highway in the commonwealth until the period of such suspension or revocation has terminated or the privilege has been reinstated or a restricted license is issued pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. A clerk's notice of suspension of license for failure to pay fines or costs given in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-395 shall be sufficient notice for the purpose of maintaining a conviction under this section. For the purposes of this section, the phrase "motor vehicle or any self-propelled machinery or equipment" shall not include mopeds. 
(c)  A violation of subsection (b) of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor. A third or subsequent offense occurring within a ten-year period shall include a mandatory minimum term of confinement in jail of ten days. However, the court shall not be required to impose a mandatory minimum term of confinement in any case where a motor vehicle is operated in violation of this section in a situation of apparent extreme emergency which requires such operation to save life or limb. 
(d)  Upon a violation of subsection (b) of this section, the court shall suspend the person's license or privilege to drive a motor vehicle for the same period for which it had been previously suspended or revoked. In the event the person violated subsection (b) of this section by driving during a period of suspension or revocation which was not for a definite period of time, the court shall suspend the person's license, permit or privilege to drive for an additional period not to exceed 90 days, to commence upon the expiration of the previous suspension or revocation or to commence immediately if the previous suspension or revocation has expired. 
(e)  Any person who is otherwise eligible for a restricted license may petition each court that suspended his license pursuant to subsection (d) of this section for authorization for a restricted license, provided that the period of time for which the license was suspended by the court pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, if measured from the date of conviction, has expired, even though the suspension itself has not expired. A court may, for good cause shown, authorize the department of motor vehicles to issue a restricted license for any of the purposes set forth in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1E. No restricted license shall be issued unless each court that issued a suspension of the person's license pursuant to subsection (d) of this section authorizes the department to issue a restricted license. Any restricted license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be in effect until the expiration of any and all suspensions issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, except that it shall automatically terminate upon the expiration, cancellation, suspension, or revocation of the person's license or privilege to drive for any other cause. No restricted license issued pursuant to this subsection shall permit a person to operate a commercial motor vehicle as defined in the Commercial Driver's License Act, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.1 et seq. The court shall forward to the commissioner a copy of its authorization entered pursuant to this subsection, which shall specifically enumerate the restrictions imposed and contain such information regarding the person to whom such a license is issued as is reasonably necessary to identify the person. The court shall also provide a copy of its authorization to the person, who may not operate a motor vehicle until receipt from the commissioner of a restricted license. A copy of the restricted license issued by the commissioner shall be carried at all times while operating a motor vehicle. 
(f)  Any person who operates a motor vehicle or any self-propelled machinery or equipment in violation of the terms of a restricted license issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1E is not guilty of a violation of this section but is guilty of a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-272. 
(Code 1981, § 13-292) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-301. 
Sec. 32-448. - Driving while restoration of license is contingent upon furnishing proof of financial responsibility. 
(a)  No resident or nonresident whose driver's license or learner's permit has been suspended or revoked by any court or by the commissioner or by operation of law, pursuant to the provisions of this title or of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271, or who has been disqualified pursuant to the provisions of the Virginia Commercial Driver's License Act, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.1 et seq., or who has been forbidden as prescribed by law by the commissioner, the state corporation commission, the commissioner of highways, or the superintendent of state police, to drive a motor vehicle in the commonwealth shall drive any motor vehicle in the commonwealth during any period wherein the restoration of license or privilege is contingent upon the furnishing of proof of financial responsibility, unless he has given proof of financial responsibility in the manner provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-435 et seq.) and this section. Any person who drives a motor vehicle on the roads of the commonwealth and has furnished proof of financial responsibility but who has failed to pay a reinstatement fee, shall be tried under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300. 
(b)  A first offense violation of this section shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 13-293) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-302. 
Sec. 32-449. - Disposition of surrendered license upon revocation or suspension. 
(a)  In any case in which the accused is convicted of an offense, upon the conviction of which the law requires or permits revocation or suspension of the driver's license of the person so convicted, the court shall order the surrender of such license, which shall remain in the custody of the court during the period of such revocation or suspension, if such period does not exceed 30 days. 
(b)  If the revocation or suspension period exceeds 30 days, and the conviction was obtained in a court not of record, the license shall remain in the custody of that court: 
(1)  Until the time allowed by law for an appeal to the circuit court has elapsed, when it shall be forwarded to the commissioner; or 
(2)  Until an appeal to the circuit court is noted, at which time it shall be returned to the accused. 
(c)  If the revocation or suspension period exceeds 30 days, and the conviction was obtained in the circuit court, the circuit court shall forward the license to the commissioner forthwith upon the conviction. 
(d)  For any revocation or suspension of a privilege to drive in the state of a person who does not have a state driver's license but who does have a valid driver's license from another jurisdiction, the court shall not order the physical surrender of such license. 
(Code 1981, § 13-294) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398. 
Sec. 32-450. - Possession and exhibition of registration and license. 
(a)  The operator of any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer being operated on the highways in the commonwealth, shall have in his possession: 
(1)  The registration card issued by the department or the registration card issued by the state or country in which the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is registered; and 
(2)  His driver's license, learner's permit, or temporary driver's permit. 
(b)  The owner or operator of any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer shall stop on the signal of any law enforcement officer who is in uniform or shows his badge or other sign of authority and shall, on the officer's request, exhibit his registration card, driver's license, learner's permit, or temporary driver's permit and write his name in the presence of the officer, if so required, for the purpose of establishing his identity. 
(c)  Every person licensed by the department as a driver or issued a learner's or temporary driver's permit who fails to carry his license or permit, and the registration card for the vehicle which he operates, shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and upon conviction punished by a fine of $10.00. However, if any person summoned to appear before a court for failure to display his license, permit, or registration card presents, before the return date of the summons, to the court a license or permit issued to him prior to the time the summons was issued or a registration card, as the case may be, or appears pursuant to the summons and produces before the court a license or permit issued to him prior to the time the summons was issued or a registration card, as the case may be, he shall, upon payment of all applicable court costs, have complied with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 16-12; Code 1981, § 13-296) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-104. 
Sec. 32-451. - Violation of restrictions on license. 
(a)  Any person issued a driver's license on which there are printed or stamped restrictions, as provided by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-329, who drives a motor vehicle in violation of such restrictions shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who operates a motor vehicle or any self-propelled machinery or equipment in violation of the terms of a restricted license issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1E is not guilty of a violation of this section but is guilty of a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-272. 
(Code 1981, § 13-297) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-329. 
Sec. 32-452. - Miscellaneous offenses relating to licenses. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Display, cause or permit to be displayed, or have in his possession any driver's license which he knows to be fictitious or to have been cancelled, revoked, suspended, or altered, or photographed for the purpose of evading the intent of this chapter; 
(2)  Lend to, or knowingly permit the use of by one not entitled thereto, any driver's license issued to the person so lending or permitting the use thereof; 
(3)  Display or represent as his own any driver's license not issued to him; 
(4)  Reproduce by photograph or otherwise, any driver's license, temporary driver's permit, learner's permit, or special identification card issued by the department with the intent to commit an illegal act; 
(5)  Fail or refuse to surrender to the department, on demand, any driver's license issued in the commonwealth or any other state when the license has been suspended, cancelled, or revoked by proper authority in the commonwealth, or any other state as provided by law, or to fail or refuse to surrender the suspended, cancelled, or revoked license to any court in which a driver has been tried and convicted for the violation of any law or ordinance of the commonwealth or any county, city, or town thereof, regulating or affecting the operation of a motor vehicle. 
(b)  Any law enforcement officer empowered to enforce the provisions of this title may retain any driver's license held in violation of this section and shall submit the license to the appropriate court for evidentiary purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 13-298) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-346. 
Sec. 32-453. - Owner of vehicle not to permit violation of article. 
    No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven by any person who has no legal right to do so or in violation of any of the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-300 et seq. 
(Code 1967, § 16-41; Code 1981, § 13-299) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-349. 
Sec. 32-454. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Notwithstanding Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113, except as otherwise provided any violation of any provision of this article not declared to be a felony shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 13-300) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-350. 
Secs. 32-455-32-476. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to erect appropriate traffic signs and markers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300. 

Sec. 32-477. - Required obedience. 
    The driver of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall obey and comply with the requirements of road signs, signals, markings or lights erected upon the authority of the state transportation board, proper agencies of the federal government or the city. 
(Code 1967, § 16-33; Code 1981, § 13-316) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-830. 
Sec. 32-478. - Legend for signals by lights or semaphores. 
(a)  Signals by traffic lights shall be as follows: 
(1)  Steady red indicates that moving traffic shall stop and remain stopped as long as the red signal is shown, except in the direction indicated by a lighted green arrow. 
(2)  Green indicates the traffic shall move in the direction of the signal and remain in motion as long as the green signal is given, except that such traffic shall yield to other vehicles and pedestrians lawfully within the intersection. 
(3)  Steady amber indicates that a change is about to be made in the direction of the moving of traffic. When the amber signal is shown, traffic which has not already entered the intersection, including the crosswalks, shall stop if it is not reasonably safe to continue, but traffic which has already entered the intersection shall continue to move until the intersection has been cleared. The amber signal is a warning that the steady red signal is imminent. 
(4)  Flashing red indicates that traffic shall stop before entering an intersection. 
(5)  Flashing amber indicates that traffic may proceed through the intersection or past such signal with reasonable care under the circumstances. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if a driver of a motorcycle or moped or a bicycle rider approaches an intersection that is controlled by a traffic light, the driver or rider may proceed through the intersection on a steady red light only if the driver or rider: 
(1)  Comes to a full and complete stop at the intersection for two complete cycles of the traffic light or for two minutes, whichever is shorter; 
(2)  Exercises due care as provided by law; 
(3)  Otherwise treats the traffic control device as a stop sign; 
(4)  Determines that it is safe to proceed; and 
(5)  Yields the right-of-way to the driver of any vehicle approaching on such other highway from either direction. 
(c)  If the traffic lights controlling an intersection are out of service because of a power failure or other event that prevents the giving of signals by the traffic lights, the drivers of vehicles approaching such an intersection shall proceed as though such intersection were controlled by a stop sign on all approaches. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to intersections: 
(1)  Controlled by portable stop signs; 
(2)  With law enforcement officers or other authorized persons directing traffic; or 
(3)  Controlled by traffic lights displaying flashing red or flashing amber lights as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  The driver of any motor vehicle may be detained or arrested for a violation of this section if the detaining law enforcement officer is in uniform, displays his badge of authority, and has: 
(1)  Observed the violation; or 
(2)  Received a message by radio or other wireless telecommunication device from another law enforcement officer who observed the violation. 
In the case of a person being detained or arrested based on a radio message, the message shall be sent immediately after the violation is observed, and the observing officer shall furnish the license number or other positive identification of the vehicle to the detaining officer. 
(e)  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of no more than $350.00. 
(Code 1967, § 16-35; Code 1981, §§ 13-317, 13-318) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-833. 
Sec. 32-479. - Unauthorized signs, signals, etc. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall erect or maintain on any highway any warning or direction sign, signal, or light in imitation of any official sign, signal, or light erected as provided by law. No person shall erect or maintain on any highway any traffic or highway sign or signal bearing any commercial advertising. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the erection or maintenance of signs or signals bearing the name of an organization authorized to erect it by the commonwealth transportation board or by the local authorities of the city as provided by law. Nor shall this section be construed to prohibit the erection by contractors or public utility companies of temporary signs approved by the state department of transportation warning motorists that work is in progress on or adjacent to the highway. 
(c)  Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 16-38; Code 1981, § 13-319) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-831. 
Sec. 32-480. - Defacing, injuring, etc., signs. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Highway sign includes, but is not limited to, an electrically powered or electronic device installed or erected by the state department of transportation or a local governmental agency to prevent collisions, control traffic, or provide guidance or warning to operators of motor vehicles. 
(b)  Any person who intentionally defaces, damages, knocks down, or removes any legally posted highway sign or a street address sign posted to assist in address identification in connection with enhanced 9-1-1 service as defined in Code of Virginia, § 56-484.12 shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 16-39; Code 1981, § 13-320) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-832. 
Secs. 32-481-32-498. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RECKLESS DRIVING; SPEEDING 

Sec. 32-499. - General rule as to reckless driving. 
    Irrespective of the maximum speeds provided for in this article, any person who drives a vehicle upon a street or highway recklessly or at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person shall be guilty of reckless driving. Reckless driving shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1967, § 16-44; Code 1981, § 13-336) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-852. 
Sec. 32-500. - Specific instances of reckless driving. 
    A person shall be guilty of reckless driving who shall: 
(1)  Drive a vehicle when not under proper control or with inadequate or improperly adjusted brakes upon any street or highway in this city. 
(2)  While driving a vehicle, overtake and pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, upon or approaching the crest of a grade or upon or approaching a curve in the street or highway, where the driver's view along the street or highway is obstructed, except where the overtaking vehicle is being operated on a street or highway having two or more designated lanes of roadway for each direction of travel or on a designated one-way street or highway. 
(3)  Drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(4)  Pass or attempt to pass two other vehicles abreast, moving in the same direction, except on streets or highways having separate roadways of three or more lanes for each direction of travel, or on designated one-way streets or highways. This section shall not apply, however, to a motor vehicle passing two other vehicles when one or both of such other vehicles is a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped; nor shall this section apply to a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped passing two other vehicles. 
(5)  Drive any motor vehicle so as to be abreast of another vehicle in a lane designed for one vehicle, or drives any motor vehicle so as to travel abreast of any other vehicle traveling in a lane designed for one vehicle. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit two two-wheeled motorcycles from traveling abreast while traveling in a lane designated for one vehicle. In addition, this section shall not apply to: 
a.  Any validly authorized parade, motorcade or motorcycle escort; 
b.  A motor vehicle traveling in the same lane of traffic as a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped; 
c.  Any vehicle when lawfully overtaking and passing one or more vehicles traveling in the same direction in a separate lane. 
(6)  Overtake or pass any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any railroad grade crossing or at any intersection of highways unless such vehicles are being operated on a highway having two or more designated lanes of roadway for each direction of travel or unless such intersection is designated and marked as a passing zone or on a designated one-way street or highway, or while pedestrians are passing or about to pass in front of either of such vehicles, unless permitted so to do by a traffic light or law enforcement officer. 
(7)  Fail to stop, when approaching, from any direction, a school bus, whether publicly or privately owned, which is stopped on any highway, private road or school driveway for the purpose of taking on or discharging children, the elderly, or mentally or physically handicapped persons, and shall remain stopped until all the persons are clear of the highway, private road or school driveway and the bus is put in motion; any person violating the foregoing is guilty of reckless driving. The driver of a vehicle, however, need not stop when approaching a school bus if the school bus is stopped on the other roadway of a divided highway, on an access road, or on a driveway when the other roadway, access road, or driveway is separated from the roadway on which he is driving by a physical barrier or an unpaved area. The driver of a vehicle also need not stop when approaching a school bus which is loading or discharging passengers from or onto property immediately adjacent to a school if the driver is directed by a law enforcement officer or other duly authorized uniformed school crossing guard to pass the school bus. This section shall apply to school buses which are equipped with warning devices prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1090 and are painted yellow with the words "School Bus" in black letters at least eight inches high on the front and rear thereof. Only school buses which are painted yellow and equipped with the required lettering and warning devices shall be identified as school buses. The testimony of the school bus driver, the supervisor of school buses or a law enforcement officer that the vehicle was yellow, conspicuously marked as a school bus, and equipped with warning devices as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1090 is prima facie evidence that the vehicle is a school bus. 
(8)  Fail to give adequate and timely signals of intention to turn, partly turn, slow down or stop, as required by section 32-334 and Code of Virginia, § 46.2-848 et seq. 
(9)  Exceed a reasonable speed under the circumstances and traffic conditions existing at the time, regardless of any posted speed limit. 
(10)  Drive a motor vehicle upon the streets or highways in this city at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour over the applicable maximum speed limit or in excess of 80 miles per hour, regardless of the posted speed limit. 
(11)  Fail to bring his vehicle to a stop immediately before entering a street or highway from a side road when there is traffic approaching upon such street or highway within 500 feet of such point of entrance, unless a "Yield Right-of-Way" sign is posted; or where such sign is posted, fail, upon entering such street or highway, to yield the right-of-way to the driver of a vehicle approaching on such street or highway from either direction. 
(12)  Operates any motor vehicle at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person: 
a.  On any driveway or premises of a church, school, recreational facility, or business or governmental property open to the public; 
b.  On the premises of any industrial establishment providing parking space for customers, patrons, or employees; or 
c.  On any highway under construction or not yet open to the public. 
(13)  Drive or operate any automobile or other motor vehicle in a race between two or more motor vehicles on the highways in the city or upon any driveway or premises of a church or school, or of any recreational facilities, or of any business property open to the public, or on the premises of any industrial establishment providing parking space for customers, patrons or employees, or upon any street or highway under construction or not yet open to the public, recklessly or at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person. When any person is convicted of reckless driving under this subsection, in addition to any other penalties provided by law the driver's license of such person shall be suspended by the court for a period of not less than six months nor more than two years. In case of conviction the court shall order the surrender of the license to the court where it shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398. 
(Code 1967, §§ 16-45, 16-46; Code 1981, §§ 13-337, 13-338) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-853-46.2-865. 
Sec. 32-501. - Aiding or abetting racing. 
    Any person, although not engaged in a race, as defined in the preceding section and Code of Virginia, § 46.2-865, who aids or abets any such race, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 13-339) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-866. 
Sec. 32-502. - Penalty. 
    Every person convicted of reckless driving under the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1967, § 16-47; Code 1981, § 13-340) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-868. 
Sec. 32-503. - Suspension of license generally. 
    In addition to the penalties prescribed in the preceding section, if any person is convicted of reckless driving under the sections referred to therein, the court may suspend any license issued to such convicted person under chapter 5 of title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, for a period of not less than ten days nor more than six months, and the court shall require such convicted person to surrender his license so suspended. If such person so convicted has not obtained the license required by such chapter or is a nonresident, the court may direct, in the judgment of conviction, that such person shall not, for a period of not less than ten days nor more than six months as may be prescribed in the judgment, drive or operate any motor vehicle in this state. 
(Code 1967, § 16-50; Code 1981, § 13-341) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-392. 
Sec. 32-504. - Aggressive driving; penalties. 
(a)  A person is guilty of aggressive driving if: 
(1)  The person violates one or more of the following: 
a.  Code of Virginia, § 46.2-802, drive on right side of highways; 
b.  Code of Virginia, § 46.2-804, failure to observe lanes marked for traffic; 
c.  Code of Virginia, § 46.2-816, following too closely; 
d.  Code of Virginia, § 46.2-821, vehicles before entering certain highways shall stop or yield right-of-way; 
e.  Code of Virginia, § 46.2-833.1, evasion of traffic control devices; 
f.  Code of Virginia, § 46.2-838, passing when overtaking a vehicle; 
g.  Code of Virginia, § 46.2-841, when overtaking vehicle may pass on right; 
h.  Code of Virginia, § 46.2-842, driver to give way to overtaking vehicle, 
i.  Code of Virginia, § 46.2-842.1 driver to give way to certain overtaking vehicles on divided highway; 
j.  Code of Virginia, § 46.2-843, limitations on overtaking and passing; 
(2)  Any provision of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-870 et seq., speed, or Code of Virginia, § 46.2-888, stopping on highways; and 
(3)  The person is a hazard to another person or commits an offense in subsection (a)(1) of this section with the intent to harass, intimidate, injure or obstruct another person. 
(b)  Aggressive driving shall be punished as a Class 2 misdemeanor. However, aggressive driving with the intent to injure another person shall be punished as a Class 1 misdemeanor. In addition to the penalties described in this subsection, the court may require successful completion of an aggressive driving program. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-868.1. 
Sec. 32-505. - Suspension of license on conviction of certain reckless offenses; restricted licenses. 
(a)  When any person is convicted of reckless driving as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-853 through 46.2-864, in addition to any penalties provided by law, the driver's license of the person may be suspended by the court for a period of not less than 60 days nor more than six months. In case of conviction the court shall order the surrender of the license to the court where it shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398. If the person so convicted has not obtained a license required by this chapter or is a nonresident, the court shall direct in the judgment of conviction that the person shall not drive any motor vehicle in the commonwealth for a period of not less than 60 days nor more than six months. 
(b)  The court may, in its discretion and for good cause shown, provide that such person be issued a restricted permit to operate a motor vehicle during the period of suspension for any of the purposes set forth in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1E. The court shall forward to the commissioner a copy of its order entered pursuant to this section, which shall specifically enumerate the restrictions imposed and contain such information regarding the person to whom such a permit is issued as is reasonably necessary to identify such person. The court shall also provide a copy of its order to the person who may operate a motor vehicle on the order until receipt from the commissioner of a restricted license. A copy of such order and, after receipt thereof, the restricted license shall be carried at all times while operating a motor vehicle. Any person who operates a motor vehicle in violation of any restrictions imposed pursuant to this section shall be punished as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-301C. No restricted license issued pursuant to this section shall permit any person to operate a commercial motor vehicle as defined in the Virginia Commercial Driver's License Act, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.1 et seq. 
(Code 1967, § 16-51; Code 1981, § 13-342) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-393. 
Sec. 32-506. - Disregarding signal to stop by police officers. 
    Any person who, having received a visible or audible signal from any law enforcement officer to bring his motor vehicle to a stop, drives such motor vehicle in a willful and wanton disregard of such signal or who attempts to escape or elude such law enforcement officer whether on foot, in the vehicle, or by any other means, is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of this subsection if the defendant shows he reasonably believed he was being pursued by a person other than a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1967, § 16-48; Code 1981, § 13-343) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-817. 
Sec. 32-507. - Finding accused guilty of improper driving rather than reckless driving. 
    Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, upon the trial of any person charged with reckless driving where the degree of culpability is slight, the court in its discretion may find the accused not guilty of reckless driving but guilty of improper driving. However, an attorney for the commonwealth may reduce a charge of reckless driving to improper driving at any time prior to the court's decision and shall notify the court of such change. Improper driving shall be punishable as a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(Code 1967, § 16-49; Code 1981, § 13-345) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-869. 
Sec. 32-508. - Speed-Maximum limit. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, the maximum speed limit on streets and highways within the city shall be 35 miles per hour and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of such limit. 
(Code 1967, § 16-52; Code 1981, § 13-346) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-8705. 
Sec. 32-509. - Same-In business or residence districts. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle at a speed of more than 25 miles per hour on any street or highway in a business or residence district within the city. 
(Code 1967, § 16-52; Code 1981, § 13-347) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-875. 
Sec. 32-510. - Same-In school crossing zones. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    School crossing zone means an area located within the vicinity of a school at or near a highway where the presence of children on such school property or going to and from school reasonably requires a special warning to motorists. Such zones are marked and operated in accordance with the requirements of this section with appropriate warning signs or other traffic control devices indicating that a school crossing is in progress. 
(b)  The maximum speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour between portable signs, tilt-over signs, or fixed blinking signs placed in or along any highway and bearing the word "school" or "school crossing." Any signs erected under this section shall be placed not more than 600 feet from the limits of the school property or crossing in the vicinity of the school. However, school crossing signs may be placed in any location if the department of transportation or the city council of the city or town or the board of supervisors of a county maintaining its own system of secondary roads approves the crossing for such signs. If the portion of the highway to be posted is within the limits of a city or town, such portable signs shall be furnished and delivered by such city or town. If the portion of highway to be posted is outside the limits of a city or town, such portable signs shall be furnished and delivered by the department of transportation. The principal or chief administrative officer of each school or a school board designee, preferably not a classroom teacher, shall place such portable signs in the highway at a point not more than 600 feet from the limits of the school property and remove such signs when their presence is no longer required by this section. Such portable signs, tilt-over signs, or fixed blinking signs shall be placed in a position plainly visible to vehicular traffic approaching from either direction, but shall not be placed so as to obstruct the roadway. 
(c)  Such portable signs, tilt-over signs, or blinking signs shall be in a position, or be turned on, for 30 minutes preceding regular school hours, for 30 minutes thereafter, and during such other times as the presence of children on such school property or going to and from school reasonably requires a special warning to motorists. The city may, however, decrease the period of time preceding and following regular school hours during which such portable signs, tilt-over signs, or blinking signs shall be in position or lit if it determines that no children will be going to or from school during the period of time that it subtracts from the 30-minute period. 
(d)  The city council may, if the portion of the highway to be posted is within the limits of the city, increase or decrease the speed limit provided in this section only after justification for such increase or decrease has been shown by an engineering and traffic investigation, and no such increase or decrease in speed limit shall be effective unless such increased or decreased speed limit is conspicuously posted on the portable signs, tilt-over signs, or fixed blinking signs required by this section. 
(e)  Any person operating any motor vehicle in excess of a maximum speed limit established specifically for a school crossing zone, when such school crossing zone is: 
(1)  Indicated by appropriately placed signs displaying the maximum speed limit; and 
(2)  In operation pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00, in addition to other penalties provided by law. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the maximum speed limit in school zones in residential areas may be decreased to 15 miles per hour if: 
(1)  The school board having jurisdiction over the school nearest to the affected school zone passes a resolution requesting the reduction of the maximum speed limit for such school zone from 25 miles per hour to 15 miles per hour; and 
(2)  The local governing body of the jurisdiction in which such school is located enacts an ordinance establishing the speed-limit reduction requested by the school board. 
(Code 1967, § 16-52; Code 1981, § 13-348) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions and authority of city council to increase or decrease speed limit prescribed above, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-873. 
Sec. 32-511. - Speed on specific streets, bridges, etc. 
(a)  Upon certain streets and portions of streets and upon certain causeways, bridges and viaducts, the maximum speed limit shall be as provided by ordinance in reference to the particular street, portion of street, causeway, bridge or viaduct, and no person shall drive a vehicle on such particular street, portion of street, causeway, bridge or viaduct in excess of the maximum speed limit so established. 
(b)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance referred to in subsection (a) of this section and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 13-349) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to alter speed limits established by state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300. 
Sec. 32-512. - Minimum speed limits. 
(a)  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(b)  Whenever the city determines, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that slow speeds on any part of a street or highway consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the city may determine and declare a minimum speed limit to be set forth on signs posted on such street or highway below which no person shall drive a vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(Code 1967, § 16-52; Code 1981, § 13-350) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-877. 
Sec. 32-513. - Necessity for speed limit signs. 
    No person shall be convicted of a violation of an ordinance enacted by the city council pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300, decreasing the speed limits established in sections 13-346, 13-347 and 13-348, when such person has exceeded the speed limit in an area where the speed limit has been decreased, unless such area is clearly indicated by a conspicuous marker at the termini of such area. 
(Code 1981, § 13-351) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-879. 
Sec. 32-514. - Certain vehicles exempt from speed limits. 
(a)  The driver of any emergency vehicle, when such vehicle is being used in the performance of public services, and when such vehicle is operated under emergency conditions, may, without subjecting himself to criminal prosecution: 
(1)  Disregard speed limits, while having due regard for safety of persons and property; 
(2)  Proceed past any steady or flashing red signal, traffic light, stop sign, or device indicating moving traffic shall stop if the speed of the vehicle is sufficiently reduced to enable it to pass a signal, traffic light, or device with due regard to the safety of persons and property; 
(3)  Park or stop notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing a direction of movement of vehicles turning in specified directions so long as the operator does not endanger life or property; 
(5)  Pass or overtake, with due regard to the safety of persons and property, another vehicle at any intersection; 
(6)  Pass or overtake with due regard to the safety of persons and property, while en route to an emergency, stopped or slow-moving vehicles, by going to the left of the stopped or slow-moving vehicle either in a no-passing zone or by crossing the highway centerline; or 
(7)  Pass or overtake with due regard to the safety of persons and property, while en route to an emergency, stopped or slow-moving vehicles, by going off the paved or main traveled portion of the roadway on the right. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, vehicles exempted in this instance will not be required to sound a siren or any device to give automatically intermittent signals. 
(b)  The exemptions granted to emergency vehicles by subsections (a)(1) (3), (4), (5), and (6) of this section shall apply only when the operator of such vehicle displays a flashing, blinking, or alternating emergency light or lights as provided in Code of Virginia §§ 46.2-1022 and 46.2-1023 and sounds a siren, exhaust whistle, or air horn designed to give automatically intermittent signals, as may be reasonably necessary. The exemption granted under subsection (a)(2) of this section shall apply only when the operator of such emergency vehicle displays a flashing, blinking, or alternating emergency light or lights as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1022 and 46.2-1023 and either sounds a siren, exhaust whistle, or air horn designed to give automatically intermittent signals or slows the vehicle down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, yields right-of-way to the driver of another vehicle approaching or entering the intersection from another direction or, if required for safety, brings the vehicle to a complete stop before proceeding with due regard for the safety of persons and property. In addition, the exemptions granted to emergency vehicles by subsection (a) of this section shall apply only when there is in force and effect for such vehicle either: 
(1)  Standard motor vehicle liability insurance covering injury or death to any person in the sum of at least $100,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident and, subject to the limit for one person, to a limit of $300,000.00 because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and to a limit of $20,000.00 because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident; or 
(2)  A certificate of self-insurance issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-368. Such exemptions shall not, however, protect the operator of any such vehicle from criminal prosecution for conduct constituting reckless disregard of the safety of persons and property. Nothing in this section shall release the operator of any such vehicle from civil liability for failure to use reasonable care in such operation. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "emergency vehicle" shall mean: 
(1)  Any law-enforcement vehicle operated by or under the direction of a federal, state, or local law-enforcement officer in the chase or apprehension of violators of the law or persons charged with or suspected of any such violation, or in response to an emergency call; 
(2)  Any regional detention center vehicle operated by or under the direction of a correctional officer responding to an emergency call or operating in an emergency situation; 
(3)  Any vehicle used to fight fire, including publicly owned state forest warden vehicles, when traveling in response to a fire alarm or emergency call; 
(4)  Any ambulance, rescue, or life-saving vehicle designed or used for the principal purpose of supplying resuscitation or emergency relief where human life is endangered; 
(5)  Any department of emergency management vehicle or office of emergency medical services vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or operating in an emergency situation; 
(6)  Any department of corrections vehicle designated by the director of the department of corrections, when: 
a.  Responding to an emergency call at a correctional facility, 
b.  Participating in a drug-related investigation, 
c.  Pursuing escapees from a correctional facility, or 
d.  Responding to a request for assistance from a law-enforcement officer; and 
(7)  Any vehicle authorized to be equipped with alternating, blinking, or flashing red or red and white secondary warning lights under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1029.2. 
(d)  Any law-enforcement vehicle operated by or under the direction of a federal, state, or local law-enforcement officer may disregard speed limits, while having due regard for safety of persons and property: 
(1)  In testing the accuracy of speedometers of such vehicles; 
(2)  In testing the accuracy of speed measuring devices specified in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-882; or 
(3)  In following another vehicle for the purpose of determining its speed. 
(e)  A department of environmental quality vehicle, while en route to an emergency and with due regard to the safety of persons and property, may overtake and pass stopped or slow-moving vehicles by going off the paved or main traveled portion of the highway on the right or on the left. These department of environmental quality vehicles shall not be required to sound a siren or any device to give automatically intermittent signals, but shall display red or red and white warning lights when performing such maneuvers. 
(f)  Any law-enforcement vehicle operated by or under the direction of a federal, state, or local law-enforcement officer while conducting a funeral escort, wide-load escort, dignitary escort, or any other escort necessary for the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians may, without subjecting himself to criminal prosecution: 
(1)  Disregard speed limits, while having due regard for safety of persons and property; 
(2)  Proceed past any steady or flashing red signal, traffic light, stop sign, or device indicating moving traffic shall stop if the speed of the vehicle is sufficiently reduced to enable it to pass a signal, traffic light, or device with due regard for the safety of persons and property; 
(3)  Park or stop notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing a direction of movement of vehicles turning in specified directions so long as the operator does not endanger life or property; or 
(5)  Pass or overtake, with due regard for the safety of persons and property, another vehicle. 
(g)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, vehicles exempted in this subsection may sound a siren or any device to give automatically intermittent signals. 
(Code 1967, § 16-53; Code 1981, § 13-352) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-918. 
Sec. 32-515. - Use of electrical devices to check speed; arrest without warrant. 
(a)  The speed of any motor vehicle may be determined by the use of: 
(1)  A laser speed determination device; 
(2)  Radar; 
(3)  A microcomputer device that is physically connected to an odometer cable and both measures and records distance traveled and elapsed time to determine the average speed of a motor vehicle; or 
(4)  A microcomputer device that is located aboard an airplane or helicopter and measures and records distance traveled and elapsed time to determine the average speed of a motor vehicle being operated on highways within the "interstate system of highways" as defined in Code of Virginia, § 33.1-48. The results of such determinations shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the speed of such motor vehicle in any court or legal proceeding where the speed of the motor vehicle is at issue. 
(b)  In any court or legal proceeding in which any question arises about the calibration or accuracy of any laser speed determination device, radar, or microcomputer device as described in this section used to determine the speed of any motor vehicle, a certificate, or a true copy thereof, showing the calibration or accuracy of: 
(1)  The speedometer of any vehicle; 
(2)  Any tuning fork employed in calibrating or testing the radar or other speed determination device; or 
(3)  Any other method employed in calibrating or testing any laser speed determination device, and when and by whom the calibration was made, shall be admissible as evidence of the facts therein stated. 
No calibration or testing of such device shall be valid for longer than six months. 
(c)  The driver of any such motor vehicle may be arrested without a warrant under this section if the arresting officer is in uniform and displays his badge of authority and if the officer has observed the registration of the speed of such motor vehicle by the laser speed determination device, radar, or microcomputer device as described in this section, or has received a radio message from the officer who observed the speed of the motor vehicle registered by the laser speed determination device, radar, or microcomputer device as described in this section. However, in case of an arrest based on such a message, such radio message shall have been dispatched immediately after the speed of the motor vehicle was registered and furnished the license number or other positive identification of the vehicle and the registered speed to the arresting officer. 
(Code 1967, § 16-54; Code 1981, § 13-353) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions and authority of city to use electrical devices to measure speed, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-882. 
Sec. 32-516. - Use or sale of devices to pick up radar. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on the highways of the city when such vehicle is equipped with any device or mechanism, passive or active, to detect or purposefully interfere with or diminish the measurement capabilities of any radar, laser, or other device or mechanism employed by law enforcement personnel to measure the speed of motor vehicles on the highways of the commonwealth for law enforcement purposes. It shall be unlawful to use any such device or mechanism on any such motor vehicle on the highways. It shall be unlawful to sell any such device or mechanism in the commonwealth. However, provisions of this section shall not apply to any receiver of radio waves utilized for lawful purposes to receive any signal from a frequency lawfully licensed by any state or federal agency. This section shall not be construed to authorize the forfeiture to the city of any such device or mechanism. Any such device or mechanism may be taken by the arresting officer if needed as evidence, and, when no longer needed, shall be returned to the person charged with a violation of this section, or at that person's request, and his expense, mailed to an address specified by him. Any unclaimed devices may be destroyed on court order after six months have elapsed from the final date for filing an appeal. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the presence of any such prohibited device or mechanism in or on a motor vehicle on the highways of the city shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation of this section. The city need not prove that the device or mechanism in question was in an operative condition or being operated. 
(b)  A person shall not be guilty of a violation of this section when the device or mechanism in question, at the time of the alleged offense, had no power source and was not readily accessible for use by the driver or any passenger in the vehicle. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to motor vehicles owned by the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof and used by law enforcement officers in their official duties, nor to the sale of any such device or mechanism to law enforcement agencies for use in their official duties. 
(d)  No demerit points shall be awarded by the commissioner for violations of this section. Any demerit points awarded by the commissioner prior to July 1, 1992, for any violation of this section shall be rescinded and the driving record of any person awarded demerit points for a violation of this section shall be amended to reflect such rescission. 
(Code 1981, § 13-354) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1079. 
Sec. 32-517. - Admissibility of results of speedometer test in prosecution for speeding. 
    In the trial of any person charged with exceeding any maximum speed limit in this city, the court shall receive as evidence a sworn report of the results of a calibration test of the accuracy of the speedometer in the motor vehicle operated by the defendant or the arresting officer at the time of the alleged offense. Such report shall be considered by the court or jury in both determining guilt or innocence and in fixing punishment. 
(Code 1967, § 16-55; Code 1981, § 13-355) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-942. 
Sec. 32-518. - Table of speed and stopping distances. 
(a)  All courts shall take notice of the table of speed and stopping distances of motor vehicles in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-880, which shall not raise a presumption, in actions in which inquiry thereon is pertinent to the issues. 
(b)  The courts shall further take notice that such table has been constructed, using scientific reasoning, to provide factfinders with an average baseline for motor vehicle stopping distances: 
(1)  For a vehicle in good condition; and 
(2)  On a level, dry stretch of highway, free from loose material. 
(c)  Deviations from these circumstances do not negate the usefulness of the table, but rather call for additional site-specific examination and/or explanation. Site-specific research may be utilized under any circumstances. 
(Code 1981, § 13-356) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-880. 
Secs. 32-519-32-544. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - DRIVING WHILE UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUG[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt state law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313; authority to adopt provisions for reimbursement of expenses for activities as set out in this article, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1716; driving while intoxicated, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 et seq. 

Sec. 32-545. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol or drug means alcohol, drug or any combination of alcohol and drugs. 
    Blood or breath means either or both. 
    Chief police officer means the chief of police of the city, or the sergeant or chief of police of the town in which the charge will be heard or authorized representatives. 
    Department means the department of forensic science. 
    Director means the director of the department of forensic science. 
    License means any driver's license, temporary driver's license or instruction permit authorizing the operation of a motor vehicle upon the highways. 
    Motor vehicle includes mopeds, while operated on the public highways of this commonwealth. 
Sec. 32-546. - Penalty. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, any person violating any provision of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor with a mandatory minimum fine of $250.00. If the person's blood alcohol level as indicated by the chemical test administered as provided in this article or by any other scientifically reliable chemical test performed on whole blood under circumstances reliably establishing the identity of the person who is the source of the blood and the accuracy of the results: 
(1)  Was at least 0.15, but not more than 0.20, he shall be confined in jail for an additional mandatory minimum period of five days; or 
(2)  If the level was more than 0.20, for an additional mandatory minimum period of ten days. 
(b)  Convicted of second offense 
(1)  Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five years after a prior offense under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 shall upon conviction of the second offense be punished by a mandatory minimum fine of $500.00 and by confinement in jail for not less than one month nor more than one year. Twenty days of such confinement shall be a mandatory minimum sentence. 
(2)  Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five to ten years of a prior offense under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 shall upon conviction of the second offense be punished by a mandatory minimum fine of $500.00 and by confinement in jail for not less than one month. Ten days of such confinement shall be a mandatory minimum sentence. 
(3)  Upon conviction of a second offense within ten years of a prior offense, if the person's blood alcohol level as indicated by the chemical test administered as provided in this article or by any other scientifically reliable chemical test performed on whole blood under circumstances reliably establishing the identity of the person who is the source of the blood and the accuracy of the results: 
a.  Was at least 0.15, but not more than 0.20, he shall be confined in jail for an additional mandatory minimum period of ten days; or 
b.  If the level was more than 0.20, for an additional mandatory minimum period of 20 days. In addition, such person shall be fined a mandatory minimum fine of $500.00. 
(c)  Person convicted of three offenses. 
(1)  Any person convicted of three offenses of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 committed within a ten-year period shall upon conviction of the third offense be guilty of a Class 6 felony. The sentence of any person convicted of three offenses of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 committed within a ten-year period shall include a mandatory minimum sentence of 90 days, unless the three offenses were committed within a five-year period, in which case the sentence shall include a mandatory minimum sentence of confinement for six months. In addition, such person shall be fined a mandatory minimum fine of $1,000.00. 
(2)  The punishment of any person convicted of a fourth or subsequent offense of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 committed within a ten-year period shall, upon conviction, include a mandatory minimum term of imprisonment of one year. In addition, such person shall be fined a mandatory minimum fine of $1,000.00. Unless otherwise modified by the court, the defendant shall remain on probation and under the terms of any suspended sentence for the same period as his operator's license was suspended, not to exceed three years. 
(3)  The vehicle solely owned and operated by the accused during the commission of a felony violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 shall be subject to seizure and forfeiture. After an arrest for a felony violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266, the commonwealth may file an information in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 19.2-386.34. 
(d)  In addition to the penalty otherwise authorized by this section or Code of Virginia, § 16.1-278.9, any person convicted of a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 committed while transporting a person 17 years of age or younger shall be: 
(1)  Fined an additional minimum of $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
(2)  Sentenced to a mandatory minimum period of confinement of five days. 
(e)  For the purpose of determining the number of offenses committed by, and the punishment appropriate for, a person under this section, an adult conviction of any person, or finding of guilty in the case of a juvenile, under the following shall be considered a conviction of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266: 
(1)  The provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-36.1 or the substantially similar laws of any other state or of the United States; 
(2)  The provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-51.4 and 18.2-266, former Code of Virginia § 18.1-54 (formerly § 18-75), the ordinance of any county, city or town in this commonwealth or the laws of any other state or of the United States substantially similar to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-51.4 or 18.2-266; or 
(3)  The provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24A or the substantially similar laws of any other state or of the United States. 
(f)  Mandatory minimum punishments imposed pursuant to this section shall be cumulative, and mandatory minimum terms of confinement shall be served consecutively. However, in no case shall punishment imposed hereunder exceed the applicable statutory maximum Class 1 misdemeanor term of confinement or fine upon conviction of a first or second offense, or Class 6 felony term of confinement or fine upon conviction of a third or subsequent offense. 
(Code 1967, § 16-87; Code 1981, § 13-375) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-270. 
Sec. 32-547. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle, engine or train while such person: 
(1)  Has a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or more by weight by volume or 0.08 grams or more per 210 liters of breath as indicated by a chemical test administered as provided in this article; 
(2)  Is under the influence of alcohol; 
(3)  Is under the influence of any narcotic drug or any other self-administered intoxicant or drug of whatsoever nature, or any combination of such drugs, to a degree which impairs his ability to drive or operate any motor vehicle, engine or train safely; 
(4)  Is under the combined influence of alcohol and any drug or drugs to a degree which impairs his ability to drive or operate any motor vehicle, engine or train safely; or 
(5)  Has a blood concentration of any of the following substances at a level that is equal to or greater than: 
a.  0.02 milligrams of cocaine per liter of blood; 
b.  0.1 milligrams of methamphetamine per liter of blood; 
c.  0.01 milligrams of phencyclidine per liter of blood; or 
d.  0.1 milligrams of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine per liter of blood. 
A charge alleging a violation of this section shall support a conviction under subsections (1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this section. 
(Code 1967, § 16-83; Code 1981, § 13-371) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266. 
Sec. 32-548. - Persons under age 21 driving after illegally consuming alcohol; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 to operate any motor vehicle after illegally consuming alcohol. Any such person with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.02 percent or more by weight by volume or 0.02 grams or more per 210 liters of breath but less than 0.08 by weight by volume or less than 0.08 grams per 210 liters of breath as indicated by a chemical test administered as provided in this article shall be in violation of this section. 
(b)  A violation of this section is a Class 1 misdemeanor. Punishment shall include: 
(1)  Forfeiture of such person's license to operate a motor vehicle for a period of one year from the date of conviction; and 
(2)  A mandatory minimum fine of $500.00 or performance of a mandatory minimum of 50 hours of community service. 
This suspension period shall be in addition to the suspension period provided under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391.2. The penalties and license forfeiture provisions set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-278.9, 18.2-270 and 18.2-271 shall not apply to a violation of this section. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be eligible to attend an alcohol safety action program under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1 and may, in the discretion of the court, be issued a restricted license during the term of license suspension. 
(c)  Notwithstanding Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-278.8 and 16.1-278.9, upon adjudicating a juvenile delinquent based upon a violation of this section, the juvenile and domestic relations district court shall order disposition as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266.1. 
Sec. 32-549. - Preliminary breath analysis to determine alcoholic content of blood. 
(a)  Any person who is suspected of a violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1, 18.2-272B, or this section shall be entitled, if such equipment is available, to have his breath analyzed to determine the probable alcoholic content of his blood. The person shall also be entitled, upon request, to observe the process of analysis and to see the blood-alcohol reading on the equipment used to perform the breath test. His breath may be analyzed by any police officer in the normal discharge of his duties. 
(b)  The department of forensic science shall determine the proper method and equipment to be used in analyzing breath samples taken pursuant to this section and shall advise the respective police and sheriff's departments of the same. 
(c)  Any person who has been stopped by a police officer of the city and is suspected by such officer to be guilty of an offense listed in subsection (a) of this section, shall have the right to refuse to permit his breath to be so analyzed, and his failure to permit such analysis shall not be evidence in any prosecution for an offense listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Whenever the breath sample analysis indicates that alcohol is present in the person's blood, the officer may charge the person with a violation of an offense listed in subsection (a) of this section. The person so charged shall then be subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-268.1 through 18.2-268.12, or of a similar ordinance. 
(e)  The results of the breath analysis shall not be admitted into evidence in any prosecution for an offense listed in subsection (a) of this section, the purpose of this section being to permit a preliminary analysis of the alcoholic content of the blood of a person suspected of having committed an offense listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  Police officers or members of any sheriff's department shall, upon stopping any person suspected of having committed an offense listed in subsection (a) of this section, advise the person of his rights under the provisions of this section. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-268.1 through 18.2-268.12. 
(Code 1967, § 16-85; Code 1981, § 13-372) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-267. 
Sec. 32-550. - Chemical test to determine alcoholic content of blood; definitions; implied consent. 
(a)  Any person, whether licensed by Virginia or not, who operates a motor vehicle upon a highway, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, in the commonwealth shall be deemed thereby, as a condition of such operation, to have consented to have samples of his blood, breath, or both blood and breath taken for a chemical test to determine the alcohol, drug, or both alcohol and drug content of his blood, if he is arrested for violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1, or 18.2-272B or of a similar ordinance within three hours of the alleged offense. 
(b)  Any person so arrested for a violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266(i), (ii) or both, 18.2-266.1 or 18.2-272B or of a similar ordinance shall submit to a breath test. If the breath test is unavailable or the person is physically unable to submit to the breath test, a blood test shall be given. The accused shall, prior to administration of the test, be advised by the person administering the test that he has the right to observe the process of analysis and to see the blood-alcohol reading on the equipment used to perform the breath test. If the equipment automatically produces a written printout of the breath test result, the printout, or a copy, shall be given to the accused. 
(c)  A person, after having been arrested for a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266(iii), (iv) or (v), 18.2-266.1 or 18.2-272B or of a similar ordinance, may be required to submit to a blood test to determine the drug or both drug and alcohol content of his blood. When a person, after having been arrested for a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266(i), (ii) or both, submits to a breath test in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, refuses to take or is incapable of taking such a breath test, he may be required to submit to tests to determine the drug or both drug and alcohol content of his blood if the law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was driving under the influence of any drug or combination of drugs, or the combined influence of alcohol and drugs. 
(Code 1967, § 16-84; Code 1981, § 13-373) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions and authority of city to adopt above section, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-268.1, 18.2-268.2. 
Sec. 32-551. - Refusal of tests; penalties; procedures. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person who is arrested for a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1 or 18.2-272B or of a similar ordinance to unreasonably refuse to have samples of his blood or breath or both blood and breath taken for chemical tests to determine the alcohol or drug content of his blood as required by Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.2 and any person who so unreasonably refuses is guilty of a violation of this section. 
(b)  When a person is arrested for a violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-51.4, 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1 or 18.2-272B or of a similar ordinance and such person refuses to permit blood or breath or both blood and breath samples to be taken for testing as required by Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.2, the arresting officer shall advise the person, from a form provided by the office of the executive secretary of the supreme court, that: 
(1)  A person who operates a motor vehicle upon a highway in the commonwealth is deemed thereby, as a condition of such operation, to have consented to have samples of his blood and breath taken for chemical tests to determine the alcohol or drug content of his blood; 
(2)  A finding of unreasonable refusal to consent may be admitted as evidence at a criminal trial; 
(3)  The unreasonable refusal to do so constitutes grounds for the revocation of the privilege of operating a motor vehicle upon the highways of the commonwealth; 
(4)  The criminal penalty for unreasonable refusal within ten years of a prior conviction for driving while intoxicated or unreasonable refusal is a Class 2 misdemeanor; and 
(5)  The criminal penalty for unreasonable refusal within ten years of any two prior convictions for driving while intoxicated or unreasonable refusal is a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
The form from which the arresting officer shall advise the person arrested shall contain a brief statement of the law requiring the taking of blood or breath samples, a statement that a finding of unreasonable refusal to consent may be admitted as evidence at a criminal trial, and the penalties for refusal. The office of the executive secretary of the supreme court shall make the form available on the internet and the form shall be considered an official publication of the commonwealth for the purposes of Code of Virginia, § 8.01-388. 
(c)  The arresting officer shall, under oath before the magistrate, execute the form and certify that: 
(1)  The defendant has refused to permit blood or breath or both blood and breath samples to be taken for testing; 
(2)  The officer has read the portion of the form described in subsection (b) of this section to the arrested person; 
(3)  The arrested person, after having had the portion of the form described in subsection (b) of this section read to him, has refused to permit such sample or samples to be taken; and 
(4)  How many, if any, violations of this section, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266, or any offense described in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-270E the arrested person has been convicted of within the last ten years. 
Such sworn certification shall constitute probable cause for the magistrate to issue a warrant or summons charging the person with unreasonable refusal. The magistrate shall attach the executed and sworn advisement form to the warrant or summons. The warrant or summons for a first offense under this section shall be executed in the same manner as a criminal warrant or summons. If the person arrested has been taken to a medical facility for treatment or evaluation of his medical condition, the arresting officer may read the advisement form to the person at the medical facility, and issue, on the premises of the medical facility, a summons for a violation of this section in lieu of securing a warrant or summons from the magistrate. The magistrate or arresting officer, as the case may be, shall forward the executed advisement form and warrant or summons to the appropriate court. 
(d)  A first violation of this section is a civil offense and subsequent violations are criminal offenses. For a first offense the court shall suspend the defendant's privilege to drive for a period of one year. This suspension period is in addition to the suspension period provided under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391.2. If a person is found to have violated this section and within ten years prior to the date of the refusal he was found guilty of any of the following: a violation of this section, a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266, or a violation of any offense listed in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-270E, arising out of separate occurrences or incidents, he is guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor and the court shall suspend the defendant's privilege to drive for a period of three years. This suspension period is in addition to the suspension period provided under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391.2. If a person is found guilty of a violation of this section and within ten years prior to the date of the refusal he was found guilty of any two of the following: 
(1)  A violation of this section; 
(2)  A violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266; or 
(3)  A violation of any offense listed in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-270E arising out of separate occurrences or incidents; 
he is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and the court shall suspend the defendant's privilege to drive for a period of three years. This suspension period is in addition to the suspension period provided under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391.2. 
(Code 1967, § 16-84; Code 1981, § 13-373) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.3. 
Sec. 32-552. - Trial and appeal for refusal. 
(a)  Venue for the trial of the warrant or summons shall lie in the court of the county or city in which the offense of driving under the influence of intoxicants or other offense listed in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.3A is to be tried. 
(b)  The procedure for appeal and trial of a first offense of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.3 shall be the same as provided by law for misdemeanors; if requested by either party on appeal to the circuit court, trial by jury shall be as provided in Code of Virginia, § 19.2-260 et seq., and the commonwealth shall be required to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(c)  If the defendant pleads guilty to a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1 or 18.2-272B or of a similar ordinance, the court may dismiss the warrant or summons. 
(d)  The court shall dispose of the defendant's license in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398; however, the defendant's license shall not be returned during any period of suspension imposed under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391.2. 
(Code 1967, § 16-84; Code 1981, § 13-373) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.4. 
Sec. 32-553. - Qualifications and liability of persons authorized to take blood sample; procedure for taking samples. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, only a physician, registered nurse, licensed practical nurse, phlebotomist, graduate laboratory technician or a technician or nurse designated by order of a circuit court acting upon the recommendation of a licensed physician, using soap and water, polyvinylpyrrolidone iodine, pvp iodine, povidone iodine or benzalkonium chloride to cleanse the part of the body from which the blood is taken and using instruments sterilized by the accepted steam sterilizer or some other sterilizer which will not affect the accuracy of the test, or using chemically clean sterile disposable syringes, shall withdraw blood for the purpose of determining its alcohol or drug or both alcohol and drug content. It is a Class 3 misdemeanor to reuse single-use-only needles or syringes. No civil liability shall attach to any person authorized to withdraw blood as a result of the act of withdrawing blood as provided in this section from any person submitting thereto, provided the blood was withdrawn according to recognized medical procedures. However, the person shall not be relieved from liability for negligence in the withdrawing of any blood sample. 
(b)  No person arrested for a violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1 or 18.2-272B, or a similar ordinance shall be required to execute in favor of any person or corporation a waiver or release of liability in connection with the withdrawal of blood and as a condition precedent to the withdrawal of blood as provided for in this section. 
(Code 1967, § 16-84; Code 1981, § 13-373) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.5. 
Sec. 32-554. - Transmission of blood samples. 
    The blood sample withdrawn pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.5 shall be placed in vials provided or approved by the department of forensic science. The vials shall be sealed by the person taking the sample or at his direction. The person who seals the vials shall complete the prenumbered certificate of blood withdrawal forms and attach one form to each vial. The completed withdrawal certificate for each vial shall show the name of the accused, the name of the person taking the blood sample, the date and time the blood sample was taken and information identifying the arresting or accompanying officer. The vials shall be placed in a container provided by the department, and the container shall be sealed to prevent tampering with the vials. The arresting or accompanying officer shall take possession of the container as soon as the vials are placed in the container and sealed, and shall promptly transport or mail the container to the department. 
(Code 1967, § 16-84; Code 1981, § 13-373) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.6. 
Sec. 32-555. - Transmission of blood test samples; use as evidence. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a blood sample forwarded to the department for analysis pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.6, the department shall have it examined for its alcohol or drug or both alcohol and drug content and the director shall execute a certificate of analysis indicating the name of the accused; the date, time and by whom the blood sample was received and examined; a statement that the seal on the vial had not been broken or otherwise tampered with; a statement that the container and vial were provided or approved by the department and that the vial was one to which the completed withdrawal certificate was attached; and a statement of the sample's alcohol or drug or both alcohol and drug content. The director shall remove the withdrawal certificate from the vial, attach it to the certificate of analysis and state in the certificate of analysis that it was so removed and attached. The certificate of analysis with the withdrawal certificate shall be returned to the clerk of the court in which the charge will be heard. 
(b)  After completion of the analysis, the department shall preserve the remainder of the blood until 90 days have lapsed from the date the blood was drawn. During this 90-day period, the accused may, by motion filed before the court in which the charge will be heard, with notice to the department, request an order directing the department to transmit the remainder of the blood sample to an independent laboratory retained by the accused for analysis. The department shall destroy the remainder of the blood sample if no notice of a motion to transmit the remaining blood sample is received during the 90-day period. 
(c)  When a blood sample taken in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-268.2 through 18.2-268.6 is forwarded for analysis to the department, a report of the test results shall be filed in that office. Upon proper identification of the certificate of withdrawal, the certificate of analysis, with the withdrawal certificate attached, shall, when attested by the director, be admissible in any court as evidence of the facts therein stated and of the results of such analysis: 
(1)  In any criminal proceeding, provided the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 19.2-187.1A have been satisfied and the accused has not objected to the admission of the certificate pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 19.2-187.1B; or 
(2)  In any civil proceeding. 
a.  On motion of the accused, the report of analysis prepared for the remaining blood sample shall be admissible in evidence provided the report is duly attested by a person performing such analysis and the independent laboratory that performed the analysis is accredited or certified to conduct forensic blood alcohol or drug testing by one or more of the following bodies: 
1.  American Society of Crime Laboratory Directors/Laboratory Accreditation Board (ASCLD/LAB); 
2.  College of American Pathologists (CAP); 
3.  United States Department of Health and Human Services Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA); or 
4.  American Board of Forensic Toxicology (ABFT). 
b.  Upon request of the person whose blood was analyzed, the test results shall be made available to him. 
(d)  The director may delegate or assign these duties to an employee of the department. 
(Code 1967, § 16-84; Code 1981, § 13-373) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.7. 
Sec. 32-556. - Fees. 
(a)  Payment for withdrawing blood shall not exceed $25.00, which shall be paid out of the appropriation for criminal charges. If the person whose blood sample was withdrawn is subsequently convicted for a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1 or 18.2-272B or of a similar ordinance, or is placed under the purview of a probational, educational, or rehabilitational program as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1, the amount charged by the person withdrawing the sample shall be taxed as part of the costs of the criminal case and shall be paid to the city. 
(b)  If the person whose blood sample was withdrawn is subsequently convicted for violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1 or 18.2-272B or a similar ordinance, a fee of $25.00 for testing the first blood sample by the department shall be taxed as part of the costs of the criminal case and shall be paid into the general fund of the state treasury. 
(Code 1967, § 16-84; Code 1981, § 13-373) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.8. 
Sec. 32-557. - Assurance of breath-test validity; use of results as evidence. 
(a)  To be capable of being considered valid as evidence in a prosecution under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1 or 18.2-272B, or a similar ordinance, chemical analysis of a person's breath shall be performed by an individual possessing a valid license to conduct such tests, with a type of equipment and in accordance with methods approved by the department. 
(b)  The department shall establish a training program for all individuals who are to administer the breath tests. Upon a person's successful completion of the training program, the department may license him to conduct breath-test analyses. Such license shall identify the specific types of breath test equipment upon which the individual has successfully completed training. Any individual conducting a breath test under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.2 shall issue a certificate which will indicate that the test was conducted in accordance with the department's specifications, the name of the accused, that prior to administration of the test the accused was advised of his right to observe the process and see the blood alcohol reading on the equipment used to perform the breath test, the date and time the sample was taken from the accused, the sample's alcohol content, and the name of the person who examined the sample. This certificate, when attested by the individual conducting the breath test on equipment maintained by the department, shall be admissible in any court as evidence of the facts therein stated and of the results of such analysis: 
(1)  In any criminal proceeding, provided that the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 19.2-187.1A have been satisfied and the accused has not objected to the admission of the certificate pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 19.2-187.1B; or 
(2)  In any civil proceeding. 
Any such certificate of analysis purporting to be signed by a person authorized by the department shall be admissible in evidence without proof of seal or signature of the person whose name is signed to it. A copy of the certificate shall be promptly delivered to the accused. Copies of department records relating to any breath test conducted pursuant to this section shall be admissible provided such copies are authenticated as true copies either by the custodian thereof or by the person to whom the custodian reports. 
(c)  The officer making the arrest, or anyone with him at the time of the arrest, or anyone participating in the arrest of the accused, if otherwise qualified to conduct such test as provided by this section, may administer the breath test and analyze the results. 
(Code 1967, § 16-84; Code 1981, § 13-373) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.9. 
Sec. 32-558. - Evidence of violation of driving under the influence offenses. 
(a)  In any trial for a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1 or 18.2-272B or a similar ordinance, the admission of the blood or breath test results shall not limit the introduction of any other relevant evidence bearing upon any question at issue before the court, and the court shall, regardless of the result of any blood or breath tests, consider other relevant admissible evidence of the condition of the accused. If the test results indicate the presence of any drug other than alcohol, the test results shall be admissible, except in a prosecution under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266(v), only if other competent evidence has been presented to relate the presence of the drug or drugs to the impairment of the accused's ability to drive or operate any motor vehicle, engine or train safely. 
(b)  The failure of an accused to permit a blood or breath sample to be taken to determine the alcohol or drug content of his blood is not evidence and shall not be subject to comment by the city at the trial of the case, except in rebuttal or pursuant to subsection (c) of this section; nor shall the fact that a blood or breath test had been offered the accused be evidence or the subject of comment by the city, except in rebuttal or pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Evidence of a finding against the defendant under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.3 for his unreasonable refusal to permit a blood or breath sample to be taken to determine the alcohol or drug content of his blood shall be admissible into evidence, upon the motion of the city or the defendant, for the sole purpose of explaining the absence at trial of a chemical test of such sample. When admitted pursuant to this subsection such evidence shall not be considered evidence of the accused's guilt. 
(d)  The court or jury trying the case involving a violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266(ii), (iii) or (iv), or 18.2-266.1, or a similar ordinance shall determine the innocence or guilt of the defendant from all the evidence concerning his condition at the time of the alleged offense. 
(Code 1967, § 16-84; Code 1981, § 13-373) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.10. 
Sec. 32-559. - Substantial compliance. 
    The steps set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-268.2 through 18.2-268.9 relating to taking, handling, identifying, and disposing of blood or breath samples are procedural and not substantive. Substantial compliance shall be sufficient. Failure to comply with any steps or portions thereof shall not of itself be grounds for finding the defendant not guilty, but shall go to the weight of the evidence and shall be considered with all the evidence in the case; however, the defendant shall have the right to introduce evidence on his own behalf to show noncompliance with the aforesaid procedures or any part thereof, and that as a result his rights were prejudiced 
(Code 1967, § 16-84; Code 1981, § 13-373) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.11. 
Sec. 32-560. - Presumptions from alcoholic content of blood. 
(a)  In any prosecution for a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-36.1 or 18.2-266(ii), (iii) or (iv), or any similar ordinance, the amount of alcohol or drugs in the blood of the accused at the time of the alleged offense as indicated by a chemical analysis of a sample of the accused's blood or breath to determine the alcohol or drug content of his blood in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-268.1 through 18.2-268.12 shall give rise to the following rebuttable presumptions: 
(1)  If there was at that time 0.05 percent or less by weight by volume of alcohol in the accused's blood or 0.05 grams or less per 210 liters of the accused's breath, it shall be presumed that the accused was not under the influence of alcohol intoxicants at the time of the alleged offense; 
(2)  If there was at that time in excess of 0.05 percent but less than 0.08 percent by weight by volume of alcohol in the accused's blood or 0.05 grams but less than 0.08 grams per 210 liters of the accused's breath, such facts shall not give rise to any presumption that the accused was or was not under the influence of alcohol intoxicants at the time of the alleged offense, but such facts may be considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the accused; 
(3)  If there was at that time 0.08 percent or more by weight by volume of alcohol in the accused's blood or 0.08 grams or more per 210 liters of the accused's breath, it shall be presumed that the accused was under the influence of alcohol intoxicants at the time of the alleged offense; or 
(4)  If there was at that time an amount of the following substances at a level that is equal to or greater than: 
a.  0.02 milligrams of cocaine per liter of blood; 
b.  0.1 milligrams of methamphetamine per liter of blood; 
c.  0.01 milligrams of phencyclidine per liter of blood; or 
d.  0.1 milligrams of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine per liter of blood; 
it shall be presumed that the accused was under the influence of drugs at the time of the alleged offense to a degree which impairs his ability to drive or operate any motor vehicle, engine or train safely. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to and shall not affect any prosecution for a violation of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24. 
(Code 1967, § 16-86; Code 1981, § 13-374) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-269. 
Sec. 32-561. - Ignition interlock system. 
(a)  For purposes of this section and Code of Virginia, § 18.2-270.2: 
    Commission means the commission on VASAP. 
    Department means the department of motor vehicles. 
    Ignition interlock system means a device that: 
(1)  Connects a motor vehicle ignition system to an analyzer that measures a driver's blood alcohol content; 
(2)  Prevents a motor vehicle ignition from starting if a driver's blood alcohol content exceeds 0.02 percent; and 
(3)  Is equipped with the ability to perform a rolling retest and to electronically log the blood alcohol content during ignition, attempted ignition and rolling retest. 
    Rolling retest means a test of the vehicle operator's blood alcohol content required at random intervals during operation of the vehicle, which triggers the sounding of the horn and flashing of lights if: 
(1)  The test indicates that the operator has a blood alcohol content which exceeds 0.02 percent; or 
(2)  The operator fails to take the test. 
(b)  In addition to any penalty provided by law for a conviction under Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-51.4 or 18.2-266 or a substantially similar ordinance of any county, city or town, any court of proper jurisdiction shall, as a condition of a restricted license, prohibit an offender from operating a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a functioning, certified ignition interlock system for any period of time not to exceed the period of license suspension and restriction, not less than six consecutive months without alcohol-related violations of the interlock requirements. The court shall, for a conviction under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-51.4, a second or subsequent offense of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 or a substantially similar ordinance of any county, city or town, or as a condition of license restoration pursuant to subsection C of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1 or Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391, require that such a system be installed on each motor vehicle, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, owned by or registered to the offender, in whole or in part, for such period of time. Such condition shall be in addition to any purposes for which a restricted license may be issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1. The court may order the installation of an ignition interlock system to commence immediately upon conviction. A fee of $20.00 to cover court and administrative costs related to the ignition interlock system shall be paid by any such offender to the clerk of the court. The court shall require the offender to install an electronic log device with the ignition interlock system on a vehicle designated by the court to measure the blood alcohol content at each attempted ignition and random rolling retest during operation of the vehicle. The offender shall be enrolled in and supervised by an alcohol safety action program pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1 and to conditions established by regulation under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-270.2 by the commission during the period for which the court has ordered installation of the ignition interlock system. The offender shall be further required to provide to such program, at least quarterly during the period of court ordered ignition interlock installation, a printout from such electronic log indicating the offender's blood alcohol content during such ignitions, attempted ignitions, and rolling retests, and showing attempts to circumvent or tamper with the equipment. 
(c)  In any case in which the court requires the installation of an ignition interlock system, the court shall order the offender not to operate any motor vehicle that is not equipped with such a system for the period of time that the interlock restriction is in effect. The clerk of the court shall file with the department of motor vehicles a copy of the order, which shall become a part of the offender's operator's license record maintained by the department. The department shall issue to the offender for the period during which the interlock restriction is imposed a restricted license which shall appropriately set forth the restrictions required by the court under this subsection and any other restrictions imposed upon the offender's driving privilege, and shall also set forth any exception granted by the court under subsection (f) of this section. 
(d)  The offender shall be ordered to provide the appropriate ASAP program, within 30 days of the effective date of the order of court, proof of the installation of the ignition interlock system. The program shall require the offender to have the system monitored and calibrated for proper operation at least every 30 days by an entity approved by the commission under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-270.2 and to demonstrate proof thereof. The offender shall pay the cost of leasing or buying and monitoring and maintaining the ignition interlock system. Absent good cause shown, the court may revoke the offender's driving privilege for failing to: 
(1)  Timely install such system; or 
(2)  Have the system properly monitored and calibrated. 
(e)  No person shall start or attempt to start a motor vehicle equipped with an ignition interlock system for the purpose of providing an operable motor vehicle to a person who is prohibited under this section from operating a motor vehicle that is not equipped with an ignition interlock system. No person shall tamper with, or in any way attempt to circumvent the operation of, an ignition interlock system that has been installed in the motor vehicle of a person under this section. Except as authorized in subsection (g) of this section, no person shall knowingly furnish a motor vehicle not equipped with a functioning ignition interlock system to any person prohibited under subsection (b) of this section from operating any motor vehicle which is not equipped with such system. A violation of this subsection is punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(f)  Any person prohibited from operating a motor vehicle under subsection (b) of this section may, solely in the course of his employment, operate a motor vehicle which is owned or provided by his employer without installation of an ignition interlock system, if the court expressly permits such operation as a condition of a restricted license at the request of the employer, but such person may not operate a school bus, school vehicle, or a commercial motor vehicle as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.4. This subsection shall not apply if such employer is an entity wholly or partially owned or controlled by the person otherwise prohibited from operating a vehicle without an ignition interlock system. 
(g)  The commission shall promulgate such regulations and forms as are necessary to implement the procedures outlined in this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-270.1. 
Sec. 32-562. - Forfeiture of right to drive; suspension of sentence. 
(a)  Except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1, the judgment of conviction if for a first offense under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 or for a similar offense under any county, city, or town ordinance, or for a first offense under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24 A, shall of itself operate to deprive the person so convicted of the privilege to drive or operate any motor vehicle, engine or train in the commonwealth for a period of one year from the date of such judgment. This suspension period shall be in addition to the suspension period provided under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391.2. 
(b)  If a person is tried on a process alleging a second offense of violating Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 or Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24 A, or any substantially similar local ordinance, or law of any other jurisdiction, within ten years of a first offense for which the person was convicted, or found guilty in the case of a juvenile, under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 or Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24 A or any valid local ordinance or any law of any other jurisdiction substantially similar to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 or Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24 A and is convicted thereof, such conviction shall of itself operate to deprive the person so convicted of the privilege to drive or operate any motor vehicle, engine or train in the commonwealth for a period of three years from the date of the judgment of conviction and such person shall have his license revoked as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391 A. The court trying such case shall order the surrender of the person's driver's license, to be disposed of in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398, and shall notify such person that his license has been revoked for a period of three years and that the penalty for violating that revocation is as set out in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391. This suspension period shall be in addition to the suspension period provided under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391.2. Any period of license suspension or revocation imposed pursuant to this section, in any case, shall run consecutively with any period of suspension for failure to permit a blood or breath sample to be taken as required by Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-268.1 through 18.2-268.12 or Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-341.26:1 through 46.2-341.26:11 or any period of suspension for a previous violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1, or 46.2-341.24. 
(c)  If a person (i) is tried on a process alleging a third or subsequent offense of violating Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266 or Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24 A, or any substantially similar local ordinance, or law of any other jurisdiction, within ten years of two other offenses for which the person was convicted, or found not innocent in the case of a juvenile, under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 or Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24 A or any valid local ordinance or any law of any other jurisdiction substantially similar to Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266 or Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24 A and (ii) is convicted thereof, such conviction shall of itself operate to deprive the person so convicted of the privilege to drive or operate any motor vehicle, engine or train in the commonwealth and such person shall not be eligible for participation in a program pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1 and shall, upon such conviction, have his license revoked as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391 B. The court trying such case shall order the surrender of the person's driver's license, to be disposed of in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398, and shall notify such person that his license has been revoked indefinitely and that the penalty for violating that revocation is as set out in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the period of license revocation or suspension shall not begin to expire until the person convicted has surrendered his license to the court or to the department of motor vehicles. 
(e)  provisions of this section shall not apply to, and shall have no effect upon, any disqualification from operating a commercial motor vehicle imposed under the provisions of the Commercial Driver's License Act, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.1 et seq. 
(Code 1967, § 16-88; Code 1981, § 13-376) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271. 
Sec. 32-563. - Driving after forfeiture of right to drive. 
(a)  Any person who drives or operates any motor vehicle, engine or train in the commonwealth during the time for which he was deprived of the right to do so: 
(1)  Upon conviction of a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.3 or of an offense set forth in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-270E; 
(2)  By Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271 or 46.2-391.2; 
(3)  After his license has been revoked pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-389 or 46.2-391; or 
(4)  In violation of the terms of a restricted license issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1E is: 
a.  Guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor except as otherwise provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391; and 
b.  Subject to administrative revocation of his driver's license pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-389 and 46.2-391. 
Any person convicted of three violations of this section committed within a ten-year period is guilty of a Class 6 felony. Nothing in this section or Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266, 18.2-270 or 18.2-271, shall be construed as conflicting with or repealing this city ordinance or any ordinance or resolution of any city, town or county which restricts still further the right of such persons to drive or operate any such vehicle or conveyance. 
(b)  Regardless of compliance with any other restrictions on his privilege to drive or operate a motor vehicle, it shall be a violation of this section for any person whose privilege to drive or operate a motor vehicle has been restricted, suspended or revoked because of a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-36.1, 18.2-51.4, 18.2-266, 18.2-268.3, 46.2-341.24, or a similar ordinance or law of another state or the United States to drive or operate a motor vehicle while he has a blood alcohol content of 0.02 percent or more. Any person suspected of a violation of this subsection shall be entitled to a preliminary breath test in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-267, shall be deemed to have given his implied consent to have samples of his blood, breath or both taken for analysis pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-268.2, and, when charged with a violation of this subsection, shall be subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-268.1 through 18.2-268.12. 
(c)  Any person who drives or operates a motor vehicle without a certified ignition interlock system as required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-391.01 is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and is subject to administrative revocation of his driver's license pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-389 and 46.2-391. 
(Code 1967, § 16-89; Code 1981, § 13-1377) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-272. 
Sec. 32-564. - Probation, education and rehabilitation of person charged. 
(a)  Any person convicted of a first or second offense of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266(i), (ii), (iii) or (iv), or any ordinance of a county, city or town similar to the provisions thereof, or provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24A, shall be required by court order, as a condition of probation or otherwise, to enter into and successfully complete an alcohol safety action program in the judicial district in which such charge is brought or in any other judicial district upon such terms and conditions as the court may set forth. However, upon motion of a person convicted of any such offense following an assessment of the person conducted by an alcohol safety action program, the court, for good cause, may decline to order participation in such a program if the assessment by the alcohol safety action program indicates that intervention is not appropriate for such person. In no event shall such persons be permitted to enter any such program which is not certified as meeting minimum standards and criteria established by the commission on the Virginia Alcohol Safety Action Program (VASAP) pursuant to subsection (h) of this section and Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.2. However, any person charged with a violation of a first or second offense of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266(i), (ii), (iii) or (iv), or any ordinance of a county, city or town similar to the provisions thereof, or provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24A, may, at any time prior to trial, enter into an alcohol safety action program in the judicial district in which such charge is brought or in any other judicial district. Any person who enters into such program prior to trial may prequalify with the program to have an ignition interlock system installed on any motor vehicle owned or operated by him. However, no ignition interlock company shall install an ignition interlock system on any such vehicle until a court issues to the person a restricted license with the ignition interlock restriction. 
(b)  The court shall require the person entering such program under the provisions of this section to pay a fee of no less than $250.00 but no more than $300.00. A reasonable portion of such fee, as may be determined by the commission on VASAP, but not to exceed ten percent, shall be forwarded monthly to be deposited with the state treasurer for expenditure by the commission on VASAP, and the balance shall be held in a separate fund for the city's administration of driver alcohol rehabilitation programs. Upon a positive finding that the defendant is indigent, the court may reduce or waive the fee. In addition to the costs of the proceeding, fees as may reasonably be required of defendants referred for intervention under any such program may be charged. 
(c)  Upon conviction of a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 or city ordinance or any ordinance of a county, city or town similar to the provisions thereof, or Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.24A, the court shall impose the sentence authorized by Code of Virginia, § 18.2-270 or 46.2-341.28 and the license revocation as authorized by Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271. In addition, if the conviction was for a second offense committed within less than ten years after a first such offense, the court shall order that restoration of the person's license to drive be conditioned upon the installation of an "ignition interlock system" on each motor vehicle, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, owned by or registered to the person, in whole or in part, for a period of six months beginning at the end of the three-year license revocation, unless such a system has already been installed for six months prior to that time pursuant to a restricted license order under subsection (e) of this section. Upon a finding that a person so convicted is required to participate in the program described herein, the court shall enter the conviction on the warrant, and shall note that the person so convicted has been referred to such program. The court may then proceed to issue an order in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, if the court finds that the person so convicted is eligible for a restricted license. If the court finds good cause for a person not to participate in such program or subsequently that such person has violated, without good cause, any of the conditions set forth by the court in entering the program, the court shall dispose of the case as if no program had been entered, in which event the revocation provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-389 and 46.2-391A shall be applicable to the conviction. The court shall, upon final disposition of the case, send a copy of its order to the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles. If such order provides for the issuance of a restricted license, the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles, upon receipt thereof, shall issue a restricted license. Appeals from any such disposition shall be allowed as provided by law. The time within which an appeal may be taken shall be calculated from the date of the final disposition of the case or any motion for rehearing, whichever is later. 
(d)  Any person who has been convicted in another state of the violation of a law of such state substantially similar to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 or 46.2-341.24A, and whose privilege to operate a motor vehicle in this commonwealth is subject to revocation under the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-389 and 46.2-391A, may petition the general district court of the county or city in which he resides that he be given probation and assigned to a program as provided in subsection (a) of this section and that, upon entry into such program, he be issued an order in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. If the court finds that such person would have qualified therefor if he had been convicted in this commonwealth of a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 or 46.2-341.24A, the court may grant the petition and may issue an order in accordance with subsection (e) of this section as to the period of license suspension or revocation imposed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-389 or 46.2-391A. Such order shall be conditioned upon the successful completion of a program by the petitioner. If the court subsequently finds that such person has violated any of the conditions set forth by the court, the court shall dispose of the case as if no program had been entered and shall notify the commissioner, who shall revoke the person's license in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-389 or 46.2-391A. A copy of the order granting the petition or subsequently revoking or suspending such person's license to operate a motor vehicle shall be forthwith sent to the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles. No period of license suspension or revocation shall be imposed pursuant to this subsection which, when considered together with any period of license suspension or revocation previously imposed for the same offense in any state, results in such person's license being suspended for a period in excess of the maximum periods specified in this subsection. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided herein, whenever a person enters a certified program pursuant to this section, and such person's license to operate a motor vehicle, engine or train in the commonwealth has been suspended or revoked: 
(1)  The court may, in its discretion and for good cause shown, provide that such person be issued a restricted permit to operate a motor vehicle for any of the following purposes: 
a.  Travel to and from his place of employment; 
b.  Travel to and from an alcohol rehabilitation or safety action program; 
c.  Travel during the hours of such person's employment if the operation of a motor vehicle is a necessary incident of such employment; 
d.  Travel to and from school if such person is a student, upon proper written verification to the court that such person is enrolled in a continuing program of education; 
e.  Travel for health care services, including medically necessary transportation of an elderly parent or, as designated by the court, any person residing in the person's household with a serious medical problem upon written verification of need by a licensed health professional; 
f.  Travel necessary to transport a minor child under the care of such person to and from school, day care, and facilities housing medical service providers; 
g.  Travel to and from court-ordered visitation with a child of such person; 
h.  Travel to a screening, evaluation and education program entered pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-251 or 18.2-258.1H; 
i.  Travel to and from court appearances in which he is a subpoenaed witness or a party and appointments with his probation officer and to and from any programs required by the court or as a condition of probation; 
j.  Travel to and from a place of religious worship one day per week at a specified time and place; 
k.  Travel to and from appointments approved by the division of child support enforcement of the department of social services as a requirement of participation in a court-ordered intensive case monitoring program for child support for which the participant maintains written proof of the appointment, including written proof of the date and time of the appointment, on his person; 
l.  Travel to and from jail to serve a sentence when such person has been convicted and sentenced to confinement in jail and pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 53.1-131.1 the time to be served is on weekends or nonconsecutive days; or 
m.  Travel to and from the facility that installed or monitors the ignition interlock in the person's vehicle. 
(2)  No restricted license issued pursuant to this subsection shall permit any person to operate a commercial motor vehicle as defined in the Virginia Commercial Driver's License Act, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.1 et seq. The court shall order the surrender of such person's license to operate a motor vehicle to be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-398 and shall forward to the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles a copy of its order entered pursuant to this subsection, which shall specifically enumerate the restrictions imposed and contain such information regarding the person to whom such a permit is issued as is reasonably necessary to identify such person. The court shall also provide a copy of its order to the person so convicted who may operate a motor vehicle on the order until receipt from the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles of a restricted license, if the order provides for a restricted license for that time period. A copy of such order and, after receipt thereof, the restricted license shall be carried at all times while operating a motor vehicle. Any person who operates a motor vehicle in violation of any restrictions imposed pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a violation of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-272. Such restricted license shall be conditioned upon enrollment within 15 days in, and successful completion of, a program as described in subsection (a) of this section. No restricted license shall be issued during the first four months of a revocation imposed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271B or 46.2-391A for a second offense of the type described therein committed within ten years of a first such offense. No restricted license shall be issued during the first year of a revocation imposed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271B or 46.2-391A for a second offense of the type described therein committed within five years of a first such offense. No restricted license shall be issued during any revocation period imposed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271C or 46.2-391B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-411, the fee charged pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-411 for reinstatement of the driver's license of any person whose privilege or license has been suspended or revoked as a result of a violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266 or 46.2-341.24A or of any ordinance of a county, city or town, or of any federal law or the laws of any other state similar to the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266 or 46.2-341.24A shall be $105.00: 
a.  $40.00 of such reinstatement fee shall be retained by the department of motor vehicles as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-411; 
b.  $40.00 shall be transferred to the commission on VASAP; and 
c.  $25.00 shall be transferred to the Commonwealth Neurotrauma Initiative Trust Fund. 
(f)  The court shall have jurisdiction over any person entering such program under any provision of this section until such time as the case has been disposed of by either successful completion of the program, or revocation due to ineligibility or violation of a condition or conditions imposed by the court, whichever shall first occur. Revocation proceedings shall be commenced by notice to show cause why the court should not revoke the privilege afforded by this section. Such notice shall be made by first class mail to the last known address of such person, and shall direct such person to appear before the court in response thereto on a date contained in such notice, which shall not be less than ten days from the date of mailing of the notice. Failure to appear in response to such notice shall of itself be grounds for revocation of such privilege. Notice of revocation under this subsection shall be sent forthwith to the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles. 
(g)  For the purposes of this section, any court which has convicted a person of a violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266, 46.2-341.24A or any ordinance of a county, city or town similar to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 shall have continuing jurisdiction over such person during any period of license revocation related to that conviction, for the limited purposes of: 
(1)  Referring such person to a certified alcohol safety action program; 
(2)  Providing for a restricted permit for such person in accordance with the provisions of subsection (e) of this section; and 
(3)  Imposing terms, conditions and limitations for actions taken pursuant to subsections (g)(1) and (2) of this section, whether or not it took either such action at the time of the conviction. 
This continuing jurisdiction is subject to the limitations of subsection (e) of this section that provide that no restricted license shall be issued during a revocation imposed pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-271C or 46.2-391B or during the first four months or first year, whichever is applicable, of the revocation imposed pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-271B or 46.2-391A. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to a person convicted of a violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-266, 46.2-341.24A or this article or any ordinance of a county, city or town similar to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 on, after and at any time prior to July 1, 2003. 
(h)  The city is authorized to accept any gifts or bequests of money or property, and any grant, loan, service, payment or property from any source, including the federal government, for the purpose of driver alcohol education. Any such gifts, bequests, grants, loans or payments shall be deposited in the separate fund provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(i)  The commission on VASAP, or any county, city, town or any combination thereof may establish and, if established, shall operate, in accordance with the standards and criteria required by this subsection, alcohol safety action programs in connection with highway safety. Each such program shall operate under the direction of a local independent policy board chosen in accordance with procedures approved and promulgated by the commission on VASAP. Local sitting or retired district court judges who regularly hear or heard cases involving driving under the influence and are familiar with their local alcohol safety action programs may serve on such boards. The commission on VASAP shall establish minimum standards and criteria for the implementation and operation of such programs and shall establish procedures to certify all such programs to ensure that they meet the minimum standards and criteria stipulated by the commission. The commission shall also establish criteria for the administration of such programs for public information activities, for accounting procedures, for the auditing requirements of such programs and for the allocation of funds. Funds paid to the commonwealth hereunder shall be utilized in the discretion of the commission on VASAP to offset the costs of state programs and local programs run in conjunction with any county, city or town and costs incurred by the commission. The commission shall submit an annual report as to actions taken at the close of each calendar year to the governor and the general assembly. 
(j)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section or of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271, nothing in this section shall permit the court to suspend, reduce, limit, or otherwise modify any disqualification from operating a commercial motor vehicle imposed under the provisions of the Virginia Commercial Driver's License Act, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-341.1 et seq. 
(Code 1981, § 13-378) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-271.1. 
Secs. 32-565-32-593. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- General parking regulations and authority of city to regulate parking, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220 et seq. 

Sec. 32-594. - General penalty for parking violations. 
    Every person convicted of parking or permitting a vehicle owned by such person to be parked in violation of this article shall be guilty of a traffic infraction punishable as prescribed in section 32-2. 
(Code 1967, § 16-9; Code 1981, § 13-391; Ord. of 5-11-1989; Ord. of 5-11-2006) 
Sec. 32-595. - Procedure for parking violations; payment of fine without trial. 
(a)  Police officers and other persons authorized by the chief of police to enforce the provisions of this article shall post a written notice of violation on the windshield of each vehicle found illegally parked on city streets, city-operated parking lots or other such properly posted places. Such notice of violation shall state that the recipient of the notice may elect to waive his right to appear and be tried for the offense indicated in the notice. 
(b)  A person desiring to waive trial for a parking violation may do so by voluntarily remitting to the city treasurer's office the amount of the fine stipulated for each violation marked on the notice given pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. Such fine shall be levied in accordance with the schedule set forth in subsection (f) of this section. If the required amount is not received in the city treasurer's office or mailed and postmarked within 96 hours after the notice of violation is issued, the amount of the applicable fine shall be doubled. 
(c)  Whenever a fine is paid by mail pursuant to this section, the responsibility for receipt of the payment by the parking enforcement bureau of the treasurer's office shall lie with the registered owner of the vehicle involved. Payment may be made by personal check; provided, that if such check is returned for insufficient funds, the vehicle owner shall remain liable for the parking violation and shall likewise be subject to a service charge of $30.00 for processing the returned check. Where the date on which a payment is due falls on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or any other day on which the treasurer's office is closed, the payment shall be made on the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or day on which the treasurer's office is closed. 
(d)  Any recipient of a notice of a parking violation desiring to contest the charges cited in the notice shall appear at the city police department and, on forms provided by the police department, file a written request for administrative review and nolle prosequi of the charges. The facts of the request shall be reviewed and commented upon by a representative of the police department, who shall recommend whether the request should be approved or denied. Acting on such request and recommendation, an attorney for the commonwealth shall decide whether the charge shall be nolle prossed. The recipient of the notice shall indicate on the request for review whether a hearing in court is demanded in the event the request for nolle prosequi is denied. If the request for review is made within 96 hours of the violation, the recipient shall have an additional 96 hours after denial of the request to remit the fine before the amount thereof is doubled. 
(e)  The issuing officer shall cause complaints, summons, or warrants to be issued for delinquent parking citations. 
(f)  The schedule of fines which may be paid under this section shall be as follows: 
Description of Offense Fine After 96 Hours Expired state tag $ 10.00 $ 20.00 No city tag displayed 10.00 20.00 No parking 15.00 30.00 Parking in loading zone 15.00 30.00 Parking overtime 10.00 20.00 Blocking crossing 15.00 30.00 Angle parking 10.00 20.00 Double parking 10.00 20.00 Too close to intersection 10.00 20.00 Less than 15 feet from hydrant 10.00 20.00 Parking on left side of street 10.00 20.00 Abandoned auto violation 25.00 50.00 Too far from curb 10.00 20.00 Parking on yellow line 15.00 30.00 Expired inspection sticker 15.00 30.00 Illegal parking in residential zone 15.00 30.00 Blocking sidewalk 15.00 30.00 Blocking alley 15.00 30.00 Illegal parking in handicapped zone 100.00 200.00 Parking in a fire lane 25.00 50.00  
(Code 1981, § 13-392; Ord. of 5-11-1989; Ord. of 5-11-2006) 
State Law reference- Duty of city to provide for uncontested payment of parking violation penalties, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1225. 
Sec. 32-596. - Presumption in prosecution for parking violation. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any provisions of this article regulating parking, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons, parking violation notice or warrant was parked in violation of this article, together with proof that the defendant was, at the time, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation. 
(Code 1981, § 13-393; Ord. of 5-11-2006) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 32-597. - Stopping or parking on highways. 
(a)  No person shall stop a vehicle in such a manner as to impede or render dangerous the use of the highway by others, except in the case of an emergency, an accident or mechanical breakdown. In the event of such an emergency, accident or breakdown, the emergency flashing lights of such vehicle shall be turned on, if the vehicle is equipped with such lights and such lights are in working order. If the driver is capable of safely doing so and the vehicle is movable, the driver may move the vehicle from the roadway to prevent obstructing the regular flow of traffic; provided, however, that the movement of the vehicle to prevent the obstruction of traffic shall not relieve the law enforcement officer of his duty pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-373. A report of the vehicle's location shall be made to the nearest police officer as soon as practicable and the vehicle shall be removed from the roadway to the shoulder as soon as possible without unnecessary delay. If such vehicle is not promptly removed, such removal may be ordered by a police officer, at the expense of the owner, if the disabled vehicle creates a traffic hazard. 
(b)  No person shall leave any vehicle, attended or unattended, upon the paved, improved or main-traveled portion of any highway, outside of a business or residence district, when it is practicable to leave such vehicle standing off the paved, improved or main-traveled portion of such highway. 
(c)  No vehicle shall be stopped except close to and parallel to the right edge of the curb or roadway, except that a vehicle may be stopped close to and parallel to the left curb or edge of the roadway on one-way streets or may be parked at an angle where permitted by the city. 
(d)  No vehicle shall be stopped at or in the vicinity of a fire, vehicle or airplane accident or other area of emergency, in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard or interfere with the necessary procedures of police, firefighters, rescue workers or others whose duty it is to deal with such emergencies. Any vehicle found unlawfully parked in the vicinity of such fire, accident or area of emergency may be removed by order of a police officer at the risk and expense of the owner, if such vehicle creates a traffic hazard or interferes with the necessary procedures of police, firefighters, rescue workers or others whose assigned duty it is to deal with such emergencies by order of the uniformed fire or rescue officer in charge, at the risk and expense of the owner if such vehicle creates a traffic hazard or interferes with the necessary procedures of law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue workers, or others whose assigned duty it is to deal with such emergencies. The charge for such removal shall not exceed the actual and necessary cost. Vehicles being used by accredited information services, such as press, radio, and television, when being used for the gathering of news, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, except when actually obstructing the law enforcement officers, firefighters, and rescue workers dealing with such emergencies. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned or controlled by the state department of highways and transportation or the city, while actually engaged in the construction, reconstruction. maintenance or emergency road clearance of highways. 
(Code 1967, § 16-94; Code 1981, § 13-394) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-888-46.2-891. 
Sec. 32-598. - Warning signals when vehicle disabled on highway; flares, torches, etc. 
(a)  Whenever any commercial vehicle is stopped on any street or highway in this city at any time for any cause, other than stops necessary to comply with traffic control devices, lawfully installed signs, or signals of law enforcement officers, shall immediately activate the vehicular hazard warning signal flashers and as soon as possible, but in any event within ten minutes of stopping, place or cause to be placed on the roadway or shoulder three red reflectorized triangular warning devices of a type approved by the superintendent. One of the red reflectorized triangular warning devices shall be placed in the center of the lane of traffic or shoulder occupied by the stopped vehicle and not less than 100 feet therefrom in the direction of traffic approaching in that lane, a second not less than 100 feet from such vehicle in the opposite direction and a third at the traffic side of such vehicle not closer than ten feet from its front or rear. However, if such vehicle is stopped within 500 feet of a curve or crest of a hill, or other obstruction to view, the red reflectorized triangular warning devices in that direction shall be so placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the highway, but in no case less than 500 feet from the stopped vehicle. Vehicular hazard warning signal flashers shall continue to flash until the operator has placed the three red reflectorized triangular warning devices required in this subsection. The placement of red reflectorized triangular warning devices is not required within the corporate limits of cities unless, during the time which lights are required to be illuminated on motor vehicles by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1030, the street or highway lighting is insufficient to make such vehicle clearly discernable at a distance of 500 feet to a person on the highway. Flares or torches of a type approved by the superintendent may be used in lieu of red reflectorized warning devices. In the event that the operator of the stopped vehicle elects to use flares or torches in lieu of red reflectorized triangular warning devices, the operator shall ensure that at least one flare or torch remains lighted at each of the prescribed locations as long as the vehicle is stopped. If gasoline or any other flammable liquid or combustible liquid or gas seeps or leaks from a fuel container or a commercial motor vehicle stopped upon a highway, no emergency warning signal producing a flame shall be lighted or placed except at such a distance from any such liquid or gas as will ensure the prevention of a fire or explosion. 
(b)  The exception provided in this subsection with respect to highways within the corporate limits of cities shall not apply to any portion of any interstate highway within the corporate limits of any city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle in a work zone protected by flagmen or approved temporary traffic control channeling devices, as required by the Virginia Work Area Protection Manual or to any vehicle displaying a flashing amber light authorized by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1025 when such vehicle is: 
(1)  Used for the principal purpose of towing or servicing disabled vehicles; or 
(2)  Engaged in road or utility construction or maintenance. 
(Code 1967, § 16-100; Code 1981, § 13-395) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-111A. 
Sec. 32-599. - Reflector flares or lanterns. 
    If any such vehicle is used for the transportation of flammable liquids in bulk, whether loaded or empty, or for transporting flammable gases, red reflectorized triangular warning devices or red electric lanterns of a type approved by the superintendent of state police shall be used. Such reflectors or lanterns shall be lighted and placed on the roadway in the manner provided in such section. 
(Code 1967, § 16-101; Code 1981, § 13-396) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-111B. 
Sec. 32-600. - Use of all four turn signals when vehicle stopped in hazardous position. 
(a)  Motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers, when temporarily stopped on the traveled or paved portion of the highway so as to create a traffic hazard, shall flash all four turn signals simultaneously to signal approaching motorists of the existing hazard whenever such vehicle is equipped with a device which will cause the four turn signals to flash simultaneously. All four turn signals may be flashed simultaneously on a vehicle slowed or stopped at the scene of a traffic hazard, when traveling as part of a funeral procession, or when traveling at a speed of 30 miles per hour or less. Except for vehicles traveling as part of a funeral procession, all four turn signals shall not be flashed simultaneously while the vehicle is traveling faster than 30 miles per hour. 
(b)  School buses shall flash all four turn signals when approaching and stopping at railroad grade crossings. 
(Code 1967, § 16-132; Code 1981, § 13-398) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1040. 
Sec. 32-601. - Brake to be set, motor stopped and wheels turned to curb when leaving vehicle unattended. 
    No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any highway unattended, without first effectively setting the hand brake thereon, stopping the motor and turning the front wheels into the curb or side of the highway. 
(Code 1967, § 16-109; Code 1981, § 13-399) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1071. 
Sec. 32-602. - Prohibited in specified places. 
    No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; provided, however, that where there is no crosswalk at an intersection, no persons shall so park a vehicle within 20 feet from the intersection of curblines or, if none, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines; 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by official signs or markings; 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing; 
(10)  Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when properly signposted; 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic; 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or within a tunnel; 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking or where a curb has been painted yellow. 
(15)  Within 15 feet of a building housing rescue squad equipment or ambulances. 
(16)  On or in any parking facility, parking lot or other area designated for parking, public or private, where parking, standing or stopping is prohibited and official signs or other markers to that effect have been erected or installed and are clearly visible to an ordinary observant person, or where oral notice to the same effect has been given. 
In addition to the remedies as contained within this chapter, a violation of this subsection will result in a fine of $25.00. 
(Code 1967, § 16-92; Code 1981, § 13-400; Ord. of 3-10-2005) 
State Law reference- Parking in front of driveways, near fire hydrants, etc., Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1239. 
Sec. 32-603. - Moving vehicle into prohibited area, etc. 
    No person other than a police officer shall move a vehicle into any area prohibited under the provisions of this chapter or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful, or start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or shift, change or move the levers, brake, starting device, gears or other mechanism of a parked motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver thereof, or attempt to do so. 
(Code 1967, § 16-93; Code 1981, § 13-401) 
Sec. 32-604. - Parking near scene of fire. 
    It shall be unlawful, in any county, city or town for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow any fire apparatus or rescue squad vehicle traveling in response to a fire alarm or emergency call at any distance closer than 500 feet to such apparatus or rescue squad vehicle or to park such vehicle within 500 feet of where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1967, § 16-80; Code 1981, § 13-402) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-921. 
Sec. 32-605. - Long-term parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motor vehicle to allow such vehicle to remain continuously parked upon any street of the city or in any municipal parking lot for a period of more than 15 days. 
(Code 1967, § 16-95; Code 1981, § 13-403) 
Sec. 32-606. - Trucks on residential streets. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to protect the safety of persons and to promote the free passage of motor vehicles upon the streets of the city. 
(b)  No person shall park a truck, tractor or trailer on the streets of the city in residential zones if such truck, tractor or trailer is classified as a 21/2-ton or more vehicle for licensing purposes. 
(c)  This section shall not apply when the vehicle is parked for the immediate purpose of loading or unloading of cargo. 
(Code 1981, § 13-404; Ord. No. 78-03, 4-27-1978) 
Sec. 32-607. - Municipal parking lots. 
    Between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. no use shall be made of the municipal parking lots located within the city, except that people may expeditiously walk to and from their motor vehicles for the sole purpose of parking same in or removing same from the municipal parking lot. 
(Code 1981, § 13-405; Ord. of 8-23-1979) 
Sec. 32-608. - Unattended or immobile vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is found on the public streets or public grounds unattended by the owner or operator and constitutes a hazard to traffic or is parked in such manner as to be in violation of law or whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is left unattended for more than ten days upon any public property or privately owned property other than the property of the owner of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, within the city, or is abandoned upon such public property or privately owned property, without the permission of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof, or is immobilized on a public roadway by weather conditions or other emergency situation, any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may be removed for safekeeping by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage garage or area; provided, however, that no such vehicle shall be so removed from privately owned premises without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof. The person at whose request such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is removed from privately owned property shall indemnify the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(b)  It shall be presumed that such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part thereof, is abandoned if: 
(1)  It lacks either: 
a.  A current license plate; or 
b.  A current city plate or sticker, or 
c.  A valid state inspection certificate or sticker; and 
(2)  It has been in a specific location for four days without being moved. 
Each removal shall be reported immediately to the office of the city manager or his designee, and notice thereof given to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as promptly as possible. 
(c)  The owner of such vehicle or trailer or semitrailer, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the city all reasonable costs incidental to the removal, storage and locating the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the cost or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search has been made, and after notice to him at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the department of motor vehicles in the state against the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, the officer designated by the city council may, after holding the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer 40 days and after due notice of sale dispose of the same at public sale and the proceeds from the sale shall be forwarded by the selling officer to the treasurer of the city, provided, that if the value of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is determined by three disinterested dealers or garagemen to be less than $150.00 it may be disposed of by private sale or junked. The treasurer shall pay from the proceeds of sale the cost of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens and notice of sale, and the balance of such funds shall be held by him for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. 
(d)  If no claim has been made by the owner for the proceeds of such sale, the remaining funds may be deposited to the general fund or any special fund of the city. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the city within three years from the date of such sale and if timely application is made therefor, the city shall pay the same to the owner without interest or other charges. No claim shall be made nor shall any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after three years from the date of such sale. 
(Code 1967, § 16-96; Code 1981, § 13-406) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213. 
Sec. 32-609. - Removal or immobilization of motor vehicles, vehicles, and trailers against which there are outstanding parking violations; ordinances. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer parked on the public highways or public grounds against which there are three or more unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices may be removed to a place within the city or in an adjacent locality designated by the chief of police for the temporary storage of the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer, or the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer may be immobilized in a manner which will prevent its removal or operation except by authorized law enforcement personnel. 
(b)  No such motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer parked on private property may be removed or immobilized unless written authorization to enforce this section has been given by the owner of the property or an association of owners formed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 55-79.1 et seq., or 55-79.39 et seq., and that the city council has provided written assurance to the owner of the property that he will be held harmless from all loss, damage, or expense, including costs and attorney fees, that may be incurred as a result of the towing or otherwise of any motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer pursuant to this section. The motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer shall be by or under the direction of, an officer or employee of the police department. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the law enforcement personnel removing or immobilizing the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer or under whose direction such motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer is removed or immobilized, to inform as soon as practicable the owner of the removed or immobilized motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violation notices for which the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer was removed or immobilized. In any case involving immobilization of a motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer pursuant to this section, there shall be placed on the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer, in a conspicuous manner, a notice warning that the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer has been immobilized and that any attempt to move the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer might damage it. 
(d)  The owner of an immobilized motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer, or other person acting on his behalf, shall be allowed at least 24 hours from the time of immobilization to repossess or secure the release of the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer. Failure to repossess or secure the release of the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer within that time period may result in the removal of the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer to a storage area for safekeeping under the direction of law enforcement personnel. 
(e)  The owner of the removed or immobilized motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer or other person acting on his behalf, shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer by payment of the outstanding parking violation notices for which the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer was removed or immobilized and by payment of all costs incidental to the immobilization, removal, and storage of the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer and the efforts to locate the owner of the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer. Should the owner fail or refuse to pay such fines and costs, or should the identity or whereabouts of the owner be unknown and unascertainable, the motor vehicle, vehicle or trailer in accordance with the procedures shall be sold as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1216. 
Sec. 32-610. - Leaving vehicles upon private property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof on the private property of any other person without his consent. Upon complaint of the owner of the property on which such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof, has been abandoned for more than 72 hours, such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof, may be removed by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage garage or area. The person at whose request such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof, is so removed shall indemnify the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage or sale thereof. 
(b)  The owners of private property which is normally open to the public for parking shall post or cause to be posted signs warning that vehicles left on the property for more than 72 hours will be towed or removed at their owners' expense. The person at whose request the vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof is so removed shall indemnify the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage, or sale thereof. 
(c)  In the case of the removal of a motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof from private property, when the same cannot be readily sold, such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof may be disposed of in such manner as the city council may provide. 
(d)  In all other respects, the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1213 and 46.2-1217 shall apply to such removals. The disposal of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may at the option of the city council be carried out under either the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213 or under the provisions hereof after a diligent search for the owner, after notice to him at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the department against such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, and after the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer has been held at least 60 days. 
(Code 1967, § 16-97; Code 1981, § 13-407) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1215. 
Sec. 32-611. - Notice of disposition. 
    The department of motor vehicles shall be notified of the disposition of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer under sections 32-608 through 32-610. 
(Code 1967, § 16-98; Code 1981, § 13-408) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1215. 
Sec. 32-612. - Cruising prohibited. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Traffic control point means any point or points within the no-cruising area established by the local law enforcement agency for the purpose of monitoring cruising. 
(b)  No person shall drive or permit a motor vehicle under his care, custody or control to be driven past a traffic control point three or more times within a two-hour period from 6:00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday, in or around a posted no-cruising area so as to contribute to: 
(1)  Traffic congestion; 
(2)  Obstruction of streets, sidewalks, parking lots, or public vehicular areas; 
(3)  Impediment of access to shopping centers or other buildings open to the public; or 
(4)  Interference with the use of property or conduct of business in the area adjacent thereto. 
(c)  At every point where a public street or alley becomes or provides ingress to a no-cruising area, there shall be posted a sign which designates "No Cruising" areas and times. 
(d)  No violations shall occur except upon the third passage past the same traffic control point within a two-hour period. 
(e)  No area shall be designated or posted as a no-cruising area except upon the passage of a resolution by the city council specifically requiring such designation and posting for a particular area. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to in-service emergency vehicles, taxicabs for hire, buses, and other vehicles being used for business purposes. 
(g)  Where there is a violation of any provision of this section, a law enforcement officer shall charge such violation on the uniform traffic summons form. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of $25.00. 
(h)  Any person convicted of a second or subsequent violation of this section may be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00 for each succeeding violation. No assignment of demerit points shall be made under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-489 et seq., for any violation of this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1219.1. 
Sec. 32-613. - Removal of vehicles from parking lots, buildings, etc. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for any owner, operator or lessee of any parking lot or parking area or space therein or part thereof, or of any other lot or building, including the city or any authorized agent of the person having control of such premises, to have any motor or other vehicle occupying such lot, area, space or building or part thereof, without the permission of such owner, operator, lessee or authorized agent of the one having the control of such premises, removed by towing or otherwise, to a licensed garage for storage until called for by the owner or his agent; provided that, notice of such action shall be first or simultaneously therewith given to at least one of the local law enforcement officers, and provided further that, in the event of such removal and storage the owner of the vehicle involved shall be chargeable with, and such vehicle may be held for, a reasonable charge for its removal and storage. In lieu of having such vehicle removed by towing or otherwise, it shall be lawful for such owner, operator, lessee or authorized agent to cause to have a duly authorized official or officer issue, on such premises, a notice of the violation of a parking ordinance, regulation or rule created pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220, to the registered owner of such vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever a trespassing vehicle is removed or towed as permitted by this section, notice of this action shall forthwith be given by the tow truck operator to the state police or the police department. It shall be unlawful to fail to report such tow as required by this section and violation of the reporting requirement of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. Such failure to report shall limit the amount which may be charged for the storage and safekeeping of the towed vehicle to an amount no greater than that charged for one day of storage and safekeeping. If the vehicle is removed and stored, the vehicle owner may be charged and the vehicle may be held for a reasonable fee for the removal and storage. 
(c)  All businesses engaged in towing vehicles without the consent of their owners shall prominently display at their main place of business and any other location where towed vehicles may be reclaimed a comprehensive list of all their fees for towing, recovery and storage services, or the basis of such charges. This requirement to display a list of fees may also be satisfied by providing, when the towed vehicle is reclaimed, a written list of such fees, either as part of a receipt or separately, to the person who reclaims the vehicle. Charges in excess of those posted shall not be collectable from any motor vehicle owner whose vehicle is towed, recovered, or stored without his consent. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, if the owner or representative or agent of the owner of the trespassing vehicle is present and removes the trespassing vehicle from the premises before it is actually towed, the trespassing vehicle shall not be towed, but the owner or representative or agent of the owner of the trespassing vehicle shall be liable for a reasonable fee, not to exceed $25.00 or such other limit as the city council may set by ordinance, in lieu of towing. 
(e)  In lieu of having a trespassing vehicle removed by towing or otherwise, the owner, operator, lessee or authorized agent of the premises on which the trespassing vehicle is parked may cause the vehicle to be immobilized by a boot or other device that prevents a vehicle from being moved by preventing a wheel from turning, provided that the boot or other device does not damage the vehicle or wheel. The charge for the removal of any boot or device shall not exceed $25.00 or such other limit as the governing body of the county, city or town may set by ordinance. In lieu of having the vehicle removed by towing or otherwise, or in lieu of causing the vehicle to be immobilized, the owner, operator, lessee or authorized agent of the premises on which the trespassing vehicle is parked may cause to have an authorized local government official or law enforcement officer issue, on the premises, a notice of the violation of a parking ordinance or regulation created pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220 or 46.2-1221 to the registered owner of the vehicle. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to police, fire or public health vehicles or when a vehicle shall, because of a wreck or other emergency, be parked or left temporarily upon the property of another. 
(Code 1981, § 13-409) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1231. 
Sec. 32-614. - Limitation on liability of persons maintaining free parking accommodations. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Free parking accommodations means parking accommodations for which no specific charge is made and the patronage of the business by customers and the performance of the regular services for the business by employees shall not constitute the payment of any consideration for the use of the parking accommodations. 
(b)  No action shall lie or proceeding be brought against any person conducting any business and maintaining a parking lot, at which free parking accommodations are provided for customers or employees of such business, when a motor vehicle is parked in such parking lot, for the total or partial loss of such motor vehicle by reason of theft or damage by any person other than an employee or for the total or partial loss of property left in such motor vehicle by reason of theft or damage by any person other than an employee. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall relieve any person of liability resulting from his own wrongdoing. 
(Code 1967, § 16-103; Code 1981, § 13-410) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1234. 
Sec. 32-615. - Parking for persons with disabilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle not displaying disabled parking license plates, or an organizational removable windshield placard, a permanent removable windshield placard, or a temporary removable windshield placard issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1241, or DV disabled parking license plates issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-739B, to be parked in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities. 
(b)  No person without a disability that limits or impairs his ability to walk shall park a vehicle with disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards, temporary removable windshield placards, or DV disabled parking license plates issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-739B in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk except when transporting a disabled person in the vehicle. 
(c)  A summons or parking ticket for the offense may be issued by law enforcement officers, uniformed law enforcement department employees, or volunteers acting pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1244 without the necessity of a warrant's being obtained by the owner of any private parking area. 
(d)  Persons violating this section may be fined in an amount not to exceed $250.00. 
(Ord. of 10-24-1996, § 13-411) 
State Law reference- Parking in spaces reserved for persons with disabilities, local ordinances authorized, penalty, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1242. 
Secs. 32-616-32-633. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - OPERATION OF MOTORCYCLES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of motor driven cycles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-900 et seq. 

Sec. 32-634. - Operator to ride only on permanent seat; carrying passengers. 
(a)  A person operating a motorcycle, as defined in section 13-1, excluding three-wheeled vehicles, shall ride only upon the permanent seat attached to the motorcycle, and such operator shall not carry any other person. No other person shall ride on a motorcycle, unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event, a passenger may ride upon the permanent seat, if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the seat for the operator. If such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, it shall also be equipped with a footrest, for the use of such passenger. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1981, § 13-431) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-909. 
Sec. 32-635. - Face shield for operators; windshield; protective helmets for operators and passengers. 
(a)  A person operating a motorcycle shall wear a face shield, safety glasses or goggles or have his motorcycle equipped with safety glass or a windshield, at all times while operating such vehicle, and operators and passengers thereon, if any, shall wear protective helmets. Operators and passengers riding on motorcycles with wheels of eight inches or less in diameter, or in three-wheeled motorcycles which have nonremovable roofs, windshields and enclosed bodies shall not be required to wear protective helmets. The windshields, face shields, glasses or goggles, and protective helmets required by this section shall meet or exceed the standards and specifications of the Snell Memorial Foundation, the American National Standards Institute, Inc., or the federal department of transportation. Failure to wear a face shield, safety glasses or goggles, or protective helmets shall not constitute negligence per se in any civil proceeding. The provisions of this section requiring the wearing of protective helmets shall not apply to operators of or passengers on motorcycles being operated: 
(1)  As part of an organized parade authorized by the department of transportation or the locality in which the parade is being conducted and escorted, accompanied, or participated in by law enforcement officers of the jurisdiction wherein the parade is held; and 
(2)  At speeds of no more than 15 miles per hour. 
(b)  No motorcycle operator shall use any face shield, safety glasses or goggles or have his motorcycle equipped with safety glass or a windshield, unless of a type either approved by the superintendent or that meets or exceeds the standards and specifications of the Snell Memorial Foundation, the American National Standards Institute, Inc., or the federal department of transportation and is marked in accordance with such standards. 
(c)  Any person who knowingly violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as a Class 4 misdemeanor as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1981, § 13-432) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-910. 
Secs. 32-636-32-658. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - OPERATION OF MOPEDS 

Sec. 32-659. - Protective helmet required. 
    Every person 14 years of age or younger operating a "moped," as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, on a public street or highway in the city, as well as passengers on such mopeds, shall wear protective helmets of a type approved by the superintendent of state police. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2003) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt requirement to wear protective helmets, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-906.1; protective helmets, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-910. 
Secs. 32-660-32-676. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - BICYCLES, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES, OR ELECTRIC POWER-ASSISTED BICYCLES[13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Bicycle license authorized, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1720; regulations regarding bicycles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-677. - Bicycle operated on street, etc. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, this article shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(Code 1967, § 16-177; Code 1981, § 13-446) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish bicycle paths, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2001. 
Sec. 32-678. - Application of traffic regulations to riders. 
    Every person riding a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motor-driven cycles, and mopeds upon a roadway shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and shall have all of the rights and all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application. 
(Code 1981, § 13-447) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800. 
Sec. 32-679. - Responsibility of parents, etc. 
    No parent of any minor child and no guardian of any minor ward shall authorize or knowingly permit any such minor child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1967, § 16-176; Code 1981, § 13-448) 
Sec. 32-680. - Detention of bicycle. 
    Upon the recommendation of a judge of a juvenile court or a court having jurisdiction over the person of a minor, the chief of police may remove or, in lieu of such removal, may detain the bicycle of a minor guilty of a violation of this chapter for such period as the court in question may determine. 
(Code 1967, § 16-178; Code 1981, § 13-449) 
Secs. 32-681-32-727. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATION OF BICYCLES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of bicycles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-800 et seq. 

Sec. 32-728. - Number of persons that may ride. 
    No bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motor-driven cycles and mopeds shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code 1967, § 16-185; Code 1981, § 13-481) 
Sec. 32-729. - Manner of riding. 
    No person propelling a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, motor-driven cycles and mopeds shall ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(Code 1967, § 16-184; Code 1981, § 13-482) 
Sec. 32-730. - Riding on right side of highway. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, on all highways of sufficient width, the driver of a vehicle shall drive on the right half of the highway, unless it is impracticable to travel on such side of the highway and except when overtaking and passing another vehicle, subject to the provisions applicable to overtaking and passing set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-837 et seq. 
(Code 1981, § 13-483) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 45.2-802. 
Sec. 32-731. - Riding. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle or moped on a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place under conditions then existing shall ride as close as safely practicable to the right curb or edge of the roadway, except under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction; 
(2)  When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway; 
(3)  When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right curb or edge; 
(4)  When avoiding riding in a lane that must turn or diverge to the right; and 
(b)  When riding upon a one-way road or highway, a person may also ride as near the left-hand curb or edge of such roadway as safely practicable. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a "substandard width lane" is a lane too narrow for a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, motorized skateboard or scooter, or moped and another vehicle to pass safely side by side within the lane. 
(d)  Persons riding bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, or electric power-assisted bicycles on a highway shall not ride more than two abreast. Persons riding two abreast shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, shall move into a single file formation as quickly as is practicable when being overtaken from the rear by a faster moving vehicle, and, on a laned roadway, shall ride in a single lane. 
(Code 1967, § 16-186; Code 1981, § 13-484) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-905. 
Sec. 32-732. - Required use of paths. 
    Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Code 1967, § 16-187; Code 1981, § 13-485) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-905. 
Sec. 32-733. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall use roller skates and skateboards and/or ride bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, motorized skateboards or scooters, motor-driven cycles, or electric power-assisted bicycles on any sidewalk within the city. 
(b)  Signs indicating such prohibition shall be conspicuously posted in general areas where use of roller skates and skateboards, and/or bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility devices, motorized skateboards or scooters, motor-driven cycles, or electric power-assisted bicycle riding is prohibited. 
(c)  No person shall ride a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, motorized skateboard or scooter, motor-driven cycle, or an electric power-assisted bicycle on a sidewalk, or across a roadway on a crosswalk, where such use of bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, motorized skateboards or scooters, motor-driven cycles, or electric power-assisted bicycles is prohibited by official traffic control devices. 
(d)  A person riding a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, motorized skateboard or scooter, motor-driven cycle, or an electric power-assisted bicycle on a sidewalk, shared-use path, or across a roadway on a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and duties of a pedestrian under the same circumstances. 
(e)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $5.00 not more than $50.00. 
(Code 1981, § 13-486) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-904. 
Sec. 32-734. - Carrying articles or passengers on bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, and mopeds. 
(a)  No person operating a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped on a highway shall carry any package, bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand on the handlebars. 
(b)  No bicycle or moped shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number of persons for which it was designed or is equipped, except that an adult bicycle rider may carry a child less than six years old if such child is securely attached to the bicycle in a seat or trailer designed for carrying children. 
(Code 1967, § 16-189; Code 1981, § 13-487) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-906. 
Sec. 32-735. - Speed. 
(a)  No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(b)  All electric personal assistive mobility devices, electrically powered toy vehicles, and electric power-assisted bicycles shall be equipped with spillproof, sealed or gelled electrolyte batteries. No person shall at any time or at any location drive an electric personal assistive mobility device, or an electric power-assisted bicycle faster than 25 miles per hour. No person less than 14 years old shall drive any electric personal assistive mobility device, motorized skateboard or scooter, or electric power-assisted bicycle unless under the immediate supervision of a person who is at least 18 years old. 
(c)  An electric personal assistive mobility device or motorized skateboard or scooter may be operated on any highway with a maximum speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less. An electric personal assistive mobility device shall only operate on any highway authorized by this section if a sidewalk is not provided along such highway or if operation of the electric personal assistive mobility device on such sidewalk is prohibited pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-904. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the operation of an electric personal assistive mobility device or motorized skateboard or scooter in the crosswalk of any highway where the use of such crosswalk is authorized for pedestrians, bicycles, or electric power-assisted bicycles. 
(Code 1967, § 16-188; Code 1981, § 13-488) 
Sec. 32-736. - Riders not to cling to other vehicles. 
    No person riding upon any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, roller skates, skateboards or other devices on wheels or runners shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than $2.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(Code 1967, § 16-167; Code 1981, § 13-489) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-932. 
Sec. 32-737. - Manner of parking. 
    No person shall stand or park a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, roller skates, skateboards or other devices on wheels or runners, upon a street other than as follows: 
(1)  Upon the roadway against the curb; 
(2)  Upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, roller skates, skateboards or other devices on wheels or runners; 
(3)  Against a building or at a curb in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1967, § 16-190; Code 1981, § 13-490) 
Secs. 32-738-32-757. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPOUNDING[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1720. 

Sec. 32-758. - Authority of police. 
    Any police officer may impound any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, roller skates, skateboards or other devices on wheels or runners: 
(1)  Which is without a serial number; 
(2)  Which is abandoned; 
(3)  Which is parked in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard. 
(Code 1967, § 16-191; Code 1981, § 13-506) 
Sec. 32-759. - Notice to owner. 
    The chief of police shall use due diligence to ascertain the name and address of the owner of a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, roller skates, skateboards or other devices on wheels or runners impounded under this division and notify him that it is being held. 
(Code 1967, § 16-192; Code 1981, § 13-507) 
Sec. 32-760. - Right of owner. 
    The owner of a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, roller skates, skateboards or other devices on wheels or runners impounded under this division, or his agent, may claim such bicycle at the place it is held and, upon proof of ownership, obtain possession thereof without the payment of any fee or charge on account of the impoundment. 
(Code 1967, § 16-193; Code 1981, § 13-508) 
Sec. 32-761. - Disposition when not claimed. 
    If a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, roller skates, skateboards or other devices on wheels or runners impounded under this division is not claimed by the owner or his agent within 30 after the final date of publication as required herein may be given to the finder, if applicable, or may be sold at public auction by the chief of police and the net proceeds of such sale shall be paid into the city treasury. However, the location and description of the bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped shall be published at least once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the locality. In addition, if there is a license, tag, or adhesive license decal affixed to the bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, or electric power-assisted bicycle, or moped, the record owner shall be notified directly. 
(Code 1967, § 16-194; Code 1981, § 13-509) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1720. 
Secs. 32-762-32-790. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - PEDESTRIANS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
State Law reference- Pedestrians, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-923-46.2-929. 

Sec. 32-791. - Pedestrian control signals. 
    Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the highway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Don't walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the highway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the "Don't Walk" signal is showing. 
(Code 1967, § 16-162; Code 1981, § 13-526) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-925. 
Sec. 32-792. - Crossing streets generally. 
(a)  When crossing highways or streets, pedestrians shall not carelessly or maliciously interfere with the orderly passage of vehicles. They shall cross, wherever possible, only at intersections or marked crosswalks. Where intersections of streets contain no marked crosswalks, pedestrians shall not be guilty of negligence as a matter of law for crossing at any such intersection or between intersections, when crossing by the most direct route. 
(b)  Pedestrians may cross an intersection diagonally when all traffic entering the intersection has been halted by lights or semaphores or signals by a peace or police officer. 
(Code 1967, § 16-160; Code 1981, § 13-527) 
State Law reference- Provisions similar to subsection (a) and authority for subsection (b), Code of Virginia, § 46.2-923. 
Sec. 32-793. - Right-of-way. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle upon a street or highway shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing such street or highway within any clearly marked crosswalk, whether at midblock or at the end of a block, or any regular pedestrian crossing included in the prolongation of the lateral boundary lines of the adjacent sidewalk at the end of a block, or at any intersection when the driver is approaching on a street or highway where the legal maximum speed does not exceed 35 miles per hour, except at intersections or crosswalks where the movement of traffic is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic direction devices where the driver shall yield according to the direction of such officers or devices. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall enter or cross an intersection in disregard of approaching traffic. 
(c)  The drivers of vehicles entering, crossing or turning at intersections shall change their course, slow down or come to a complete stop if necessary to permit pedestrians to safely and expeditiously cross such intersection. 
(d)  Pedestrians crossing highways or streets, at intersections shall at all times have the right-of-way over vehicles making turns into the highways or streets being crossed by the pedestrians. 
(Code 1967, § 16-161; Code 1981, § 13-528) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-924. 
Sec. 32-794. - Stepping into street where approaching driver's vision obscured. 
    Pedestrians shall not step into that portion of a highway or street open to moving vehicular traffic at any point between intersections where their presence would be obscured from the vision of drivers of approaching vehicles by a vehicle or other obstruction at the curb or side, except to board a passenger bus or to enter a safety zone, in which event they shall cross the highway or street only at right angles. 
(Code 1967, § 16-163; Code 1981, § 13-529) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-926. 
Sec. 32-795. - Boarding or alighting from buses. 
    When actually boarding or alighting from passenger buses, pedestrians shall have the right-of-way over vehicles, but shall not, in order to board or alight from passenger buses, step into the highway or street sooner nor remain there longer than is absolutely necessary. 
(Code 1967, § 16-164; Code 1981, § 13-530) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-927. 
Sec. 32-796. - Walking on roadway; hitchhiking. 
(a)  Pedestrians shall not use the roadways or streets, other than the sidewalk thereof, for travel, except when necessary to do so because of the absence of sidewalks, reasonably suitable and passable for their use, in which case, if they walk upon the hard surface, or the main-traveled portion of the roadway, they shall keep to the extreme left side or edge thereof, or where the shoulders of the highway or street are of sufficient width to permit, they may walk on either shoulder thereof. 
(b)  Pedestrians shall not stand or stop in any roadway or street for the purpose of soliciting rides. 
(Code 1967, § 16-165; Code 1981, § 13-531) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-928, 46.2-929. 
Sec. 32-797. - Playing on streets; use of roller skates, toys or other devices on wheels or runners. 
(a)  No person shall play on a highway or street, other than upon the sidewalks thereof, within the city. No person shall use any toy vehicle on the roadway of any highway that (i) has a speed limit greater than 25 miles per hour, (ii) has more than two travel lanes, or (iii) is located outside a residence district as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. The city council may designate areas on highways under their control where play is permitted and may impose reasonable restrictions on play on such highways. Persons using such devices, except bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, mopeds, and motorcycles, shall keep as near as safely practicable to the far right side or edge of the right traffic lane so that they will be proceeding in the same direction as other traffic. 
(b)  No person riding on any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, roller skates, skateboard, toy or other device on wheels or runners shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(c)  No person riding upon any roller-skates, toys or runners shall ride in areas zoned B-1 upon the city's zoning map where such riding is prohibited by signs. 
(Code 1967, § 16-166; Code 1981, § 13-532; Ord. of 9-13-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-932. 
Sec. 32-798. - Penalty for violating sections 32-792 through 32-797. 
    Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of sections 32-729 through 32-797 shall be fined not less than $2.00 nor more than $25.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1967, § 16-167; Code 1981, § 13-533) 
Sec. 32-799. - Duty of drivers approaching pedestrian with guide dog or carrying metallic or white cane. 
    The driver of a vehicle approaching a totally or partially blind pedestrian who is carrying a cane predominantly white or metallic in color (with or without a red tip) or using a dog guide shall take all necessary precautions to avoid injury to such blind pedestrian and dog guide, and any driver who fails to take such precautions shall be liable in damages for any injury caused such pedestrian and dog guide; provided that a totally or partially blind pedestrian not carrying such a cane or using a dog guide in any of the places, accommodations or conveyances listed in Code of Virginia, § 51.5-44, shall have all of the rights and privileges conferred by law upon other persons, and the failure of a totally or partially blind pedestrian to carry such a cane or to use a dog guide in any such places, accommodations or conveyances shall not be held to constitute nor be evidence of contributory negligence; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the application of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-933 or 46.2-934. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-932.1. 
Sec. 32-800. - Duty of drivers when blind pedestrian crossing street. 
(a)  Whenever a pedestrian is crossing or attempting to cross a public street or highway within the city, guided by a dog or carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick clearly visible above the body, which is metallic or white in color or white tipped with red, the driver of every vehicle approaching the intersection or other place of crossing shall bring his vehicle to a full stop before arriving at such intersection or place of crossing, unless such intersection or place of crossing is controlled by a traffic officer. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Code 1967, § 16-168; Code 1981, § 13-534) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-933. 
Sec. 32-801. - Construction of section 32-800; failure to use cane or guide dog not contributory negligence. 
    Nothing contained din the preceding section shall be construed to deprive any totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person, not carrying a cane or walking stick or not being guided by a dog, of the rights and privileges conferred by law upon pedestrians crossing streets or highways, nor shall the failure of such totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person to carry a cane or walking stick, or to be guided by a guide dog, upon the streets, highways or sidewalks of this city be held to constitute or be evidence of contributory negligence. 
(Code 1967, § 16-170; Code 1981, § 13-535) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-934. 
Sec. 32-802. - Unlawful use of metallic or white cane. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, unless totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated, while on any public street or highway, to carry in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is metallic or white in color or white tipped with red. 
(b)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Code 1981, § 13-536) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212.1. 
Secs. 32-803-32-827. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - GARAGES AND REPAIR SHOPS 

Sec. 32-828. - Right of police to inspect vehicles. 
    Any police officer who is in uniform or who exhibits a badge or other sign of authority shall have the right to inspect any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer in any public garage or repair shop, for the purpose of locating stolen motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers and for investigating the title and registration of motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers. For such purpose, the owner of any such garage or repair shop shall permit any such police officer, without let or hindrance, to make investigation as herein authorized. 
(Code 1981, § 13-556) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-110. 
Sec. 32-829. - Vehicles struck by bullets. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle that shows evidence of having been struck by a bullet shall report in writing on forms furnished by the superintendent of state police, to the police station, within 24 hours after the motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration number, serial number or identification number, and the name and address of the owner or operator of the vehicle, if known. 
(Code 1981, § 13-557) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-109. 
Sec. 32-830. - Unclaimed vehicles. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop or automotive service, storage or parking place shall report to the police station any motor vehicle left unclaimed in his place of business for more than two weeks when he does not, of his own knowledge, know the name of the owner and the reason for such storage. 
(Code 1981, § 13-558) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1218. 
Sec. 32-831. - Vehicles with certain equipment. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop shall, within 24 hours, report in writing on forms furnished by the superintendent of state police, to the chief of police any motor vehicle, other than an authorized police or fire department vehicle, brought to his place of business upon which is discovered any bulletproof glass or any smoke screen device of any nature. 
(Code 1981, § 13-559) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-109. 
Sec. 32-832. - Forms for reports. 
    All reports required by sections 32-829, 32-830 and 32-831 shall be made in writing on appropriate forms furnished by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 13-560) 
Secs. 32-833-32-857. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - ACCIDENTS[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to establish police lines, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1714; accidents, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-890 et seq.; reporting of accidents, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-372; authority of city to require reports in addition to state reports, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-381. 

Sec. 32-858. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    If such accident results only in damage to property, the person so convicted shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor; however, if the vehicle or other property struck is unattended and such damage is less than $250.00, such person shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. A motor vehicle operator convicted of a Class 4 misdemeanor under this section shall be assigned three demerit points by the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1981, § 13-576) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-900. 
Sec. 32-859. - Removal of vehicles following accident. 
    Whenever a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer involved in an accident is found upon the streets in the city and is so located to impede the orderly flow of traffic, the police may, at no cost to the owner or operator, remove such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer from the streets to some point in the vicinity where such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer will not impede the flow of traffic. 
(Code 1967, § 16-174; Code 1981, § 13-577) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1212. 
Sec. 32-860. - Reports required by article to be in addition to reports required by state law. 
    The reports of accidents, as required by this article, are in addition to and not in lieu of any reports required by the Code of Virginia, § 46.2-371 et seq. 
(Code 1981, § 13-578) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to require accident reports, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-381. 
Sec. 32-861. - General duty of drivers and passengers when property damaged. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident in which an attended vehicle or other attended property is damaged shall immediately stop as close to the scene of the accident as possible, without obstructing traffic, and report forthwith, to the police department and to the driver or some other occupant of the vehicle collided with, or the custodian of other damaged property, his name, address, driver's license number and the registration number of his vehicle. The driver shall also render reasonable assistance to any person injured in such accident, including the carrying of such injured person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person. Where, as a result of injuries sustained in the accident, the driver is prevented from complying with the above provisions, the driver shall, as soon as reasonably possible, make the required report to the police authority and make a reasonable effort to locate the person struck, or the driver or some other occupant of the vehicle collided with, or the custodian of the damaged property and report to such person or persons his name, address, driver's license number and the registration number of his vehicle. 
(b)  If the driver fails to stop and make the report required by subsection (a) of this section, any person 16 years of age or older in the vehicle with the driver at the time of the accident who has knowledge of the accident shall report, within 24 hours from the time of the accident, to the chief of police, his name, address and such other information within his knowledge as the driver must report pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident in which no person is killed or injured, but in which an unattended vehicle or other unattended property is damaged shall make a reasonable effort to find the owner or custodian of such property and shall report to the owner or custodian the information which the driver must report pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, if such owner or custodian is found. If the owner or custodian of such damaged vehicle or property cannot be found, the driver shall leave a note in a conspicuous place at the scene of the accident and shall report the accident in writing, within 24 hours, to the chief of police. Such note and written report shall contain the information which the driver must report pursuant to subsection (a) of this section and such written report shall state, in addition, the date, time and place of the accident and the driver's estimate of the property damage. Where, as a result of injuries sustained in the accident, the driver is prevented from complying with the above provisions, the driver shall, as soon as reasonably possible, make the required report to the superintendent, or to the chief of police and make a reasonable effort to find the owner or custodian of the unattended vehicle or property and report to such person or persons such information as is required to be reported pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  If the driver fails to stop and make a reasonable search for the owner or custodian of an unattended vehicle or property or to leave a note for such owner or custodian as required by subsection (c) of this section, any person in the vehicle with the driver at the time of the accident, who has knowledge of the accident, shall report, within 24 hours from the time of the accident, to the chief of police his name, address and such other facts within his knowledge as are required by subsection (c) of this section to be reported by the driver. 
(e)  The reports required by this section are in addition to other accident reports required by this article or state law and shall be made irrespective of the amount of property damage involved. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall apply irrespective of whether such accident occurs on the public streets or highways or on private property. 
(g)  This subsection shall in no case be construed to limit the authority or duty of the commissioner with respect to revocation of licenses for violation of this section, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-894 et seq. Any license revoked under the provisions of this subsection shall be surrendered to the court to be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia § 46.2-398 
(Code 1967, §§ 16-171, 16-172; Code 1981, § 13-579) 
State Law reference- Provisions similar to subsections (a)-(f) and duties of drivers and passengers when accident results in personal injury or death, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-894-46.2-899; provisions similar to subsections (g) and (h), Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-900, 46.2-901. 
Sec. 32-862. - Driver to give immediate notice of certain accidents. 
    The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident resulting in injury to or death of any person, or some person acting for such driver, shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of the accident to the police department. A willful failure to make the report required in this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor and be punishable under section 32-2. 
(Code 1981, § 13-580) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-371. 
Sec. 32-863. - Reports by driver and witnesses. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $350.00 or more shall, within five days after the accident, make a written report of it to the police department. 
(b)  The chief of police may require any driver of a vehicle involved in any accident of which report must be made under this section to file a supplemental report whenever any report is insufficient, in his opinion, and he may require witnesses of accidents to render reports to the police department. 
(c)  A willful failure to file the report required in this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable under section 32-2. 
(Code 1981, § 13-581) 
State Law reference- Reporting of accidents, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-372; authority of city to require reports, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-381. 
Sec. 32-864. - Reports by occupants. 
    Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making an immediate or a written report of an accident of which a report is required, each other occupant of the vehicle at the time of the accident, if any, who is capable of so doing must make the report required by this article to be made primarily by the driver. A willful failure to file the report required by this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable under section 32-2. 
(Code 1981, § 13-582) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-372. 
Sec. 32-865. - Report by investigating officer. 
    Every law enforcement officer who, in the course of duty, investigates a motor vehicle accident of which report must be made, either at the time of and at the scene of the accident or thereafter and elsewhere, by interviewing participants or witnesses shall, within 24 hours after completing the investigation, forward a written report of the accident to the police department. Such report shall include the name or names of the insurance carrier or of the insurance agent of the automobile liability policy on each vehicle involved in such accident. 
(Code 1981, § 13-583) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-373. 
Sec. 32-866. - Report by garage or repair shop. 
    The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle that shows evidence of having been involved in a serious motor vehicle accident or with evidence of blood stains shall report to the police department, within 24 hours after the motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number, registration number and the name and address of the owner or operator of the vehicle, if known. Reports required by this section shall be made upon forms furnished by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 13-584) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-376. 
Sec. 32-867. - City to supply report forms. 
    The city shall supply to the police department or other officials, garages and other suitable agencies forms for accident reports and other reports required under this article to be made to the police department, appropriate with respect to the persons required to make such reports and the purpose to be served. 
(Code 1981, § 13-585) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-374. 
Sec. 32-868. - Reports to be without prejudice; confidentiality of reports. 
    All accident reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department or other municipal or state agencies having use for the records for accident prevention purposes, except that the police department may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident, when his identity is not otherwise known or when he denies his presence at the accident. 
(Code 1981, § 13-586) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-377. 
Sec. 32-869. - Use of reports as evidence. 
    No accident report shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the police department shall furnish, upon demand of any person who has or claims to have made such a report or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing a specified accident report has or has not been made to the police department, solely to prove compliance or noncompliance with the requirement that the report be made to the police department. 
(Code 1981, § 13-587) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-378. 
Sec. 32-870. - Use of reports made by investigating officers. 
    Subject to the provisions of section 32-868, all accident reports made by investigating officers shall be for the confidential use of the police department and other municipal or state agencies for accident prevention purposes and shall not be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of any accident. The police department shall disclose, from the reports, upon request of any person, the date, time and location of the accident and the names and addresses of the drivers, the owners of the vehicles involved, the injured persons, the witnesses and one investigating officer. 
(Code 1981, § 13-588) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-379. 
Sec. 32-871. - Requirement to furnish proof of insurance, etc. 
    Any law enforcement officer present at the scene of a motor vehicle accident as to which a law enforcement officer is required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-373 to file an accident report with the department may require the operator of any motor vehicle involved in such accident to furnish proof that the vehicle he was operating at the time of such accident was either: 
(1)  An insured motor vehicle as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-705; or 
(2)  A vehicle for which the fee required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-706 for registration of an uninsured vehicle had been paid as to that vehicle. Failure to furnish proof of insurance or payment of the uninsured vehicle registration fee when required by a law enforcement officer as provided in this section within 30 days shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-902.1. 
Sec. 32-872. - Leaving scene of accident when directed to do so by officer. 
    A person shall leave the scene of a traffic accident when directed to do so by a police officer. A violation of this section shall be punished as prescribed in section 32-2. 
(Code 1967, § 16-173; Code 1981, § 13-589) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-902. 
Secs. 32-873-32-892. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - RAILROADS[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
State Law reference- Railroad corporations, Code of Virginia, § 56-345 et seq. 

Sec. 32-893. - Railroad cars obstructing street or road; standing vehicle on railroad track. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or any receiver or trustee operating a railroad, to obstruct for a longer period than five minutes the free passage on any street or road by standing cars or trains across the same, except a passenger train while receiving or discharging passengers, but a passway shall be kept open to allow normal flow of traffic; provided that when a train has been uncoupled, so as to make a passway, the time necessarily required, not exceeding three minutes, to pump up the air after the train has been recoupled shall not be included in considering the time such cars or trains were standing across such street or road; nor shall it be lawful for any person to stand any wagon or other vehicle on the track of any railroad which will hinder or endanger a moving train. 
(b)  Any such railroad company, receiver or trustee, or driver of any such wagon or vehicle, violating any of the provisions of this section, shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00; provided that the fine may be $100.00 for each minute beyond the permitted time but the total fine shall not exceed $500.00. 
(c)  This section shall not apply when the train is stopped due to breakdown, mechanical failure or emergency. 
(Code 1967, § 23-1; Code 1981, § 22-2) 
State Law reference- Trains obstructing public ways, similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-412.1; conflicting ordinances prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 56-412.2. 
Secs. 32-894-32-899. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS 

Sec. 32-900. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases when used in this article shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them: 
    Golf cart means a self-propelled vehicle that is designed to transport persons playing golf and their equipment on a golf course. 
    Multi purpose path means that area of a public street designated by the city for pedestrian travel and use by golf carts. 
    Sidewalk means that area of a public street set aside or used for pedestrian travel which is parallel to and within the boundary lines of a street. 
    Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in the city, including the streets and alleys, and, for law enforcement purposes, the entire width between the boundary lines of all private roads or private streets that have been specifically designated "highways," as that term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, by ordinance, and also including sidewalks and multi-purpose paths. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 10-6-2016) 
Sec. 32-901. - Golf cart operation on streets not otherwise designated for such operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a golf cart on or over any street, sidewalk, or multipurpose path in the city except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 10-6-2016) 
Sec. 32-902. - Designation of public streets of the city for golf cart operation; posting of signs. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-916.2 et seq. and § 46.2-676, city council may authorize by ordinance, the operation of golf carts on designated public streets within the city after (i) considering the speed, volume, and character of motor vehicle traffic using such streets, and (ii) determining that golf cart operation on particular streets is compatible with state and local transportation plans and consistent with the Commonwealth's Statewide Pedestrian Policy. No public street of the city shall be designated for use by golf carts if such golf cart operations will impede the safe and efficient flow of motor vehicle traffic, or if the street's posted speed limit is greater than 25 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 10-6-2016) 
Sec. 32-903. - Limitations. 
    Golf cart operations on designated public streets of the city shall be in accordance with the following limitations: 
(1)  Golf carts may be operated on the streets of the City of Buena Vista that allow a maximum speed of 25 miles per hour. 
(2)  No golf cart shall be driven across any street at an intersection where the street being crossed has a posted speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour. 
(3)  No person shall operate any golf cart on any designated public street of the city unless he has in his possession a valid driver's license. 
(4)  No golf cart shall be operated on any designated public street of the city without displaying a slow-moving, vehicle emblem in conformity with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1081. 
(5)  No person shall operate any golf cart on any designated public street of the city between sunset and sunrise, unless equipped with lights as required in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1010. 
(6)  Golf carts operating on designated public streets of the city pursuant to this article shall be insured by a policy of liability insurance with coverage of not less than $300,000.00 per accident. In lieu of coverage provided by an insurance policy, the owner of such golf cart may self-insure the liability coverage if the Commissioner of the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles has issued a certificate of self-insurance pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-368. 
(7)  Golf carts must be operated in accordance with all applicable state and local laws and ordinances, including all laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining to the possession and use of alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  The operation of golf carts shall be in a manner so as not to impede the safety and efficient flow of motor vehicle traffic. 
(9)  No golf cart shall be operated within 150 feet of any intersection with a street having a posted speed limit exceeding 35 miles per hour. 
(10)  Only the number of people the golf cart is designed to seat may ride on a golf cart. Additionally, passengers shall not be carried on the part of a golf cart designed to carry golf bags. 
(11)  Golf carts must be operated in accordance with the motor vehicle laws of the Commonwealth. 
(12)  Golf carts shall not be operated during inclement weather, nor when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions. 
(13)  The chief of police, or his designee, may temporarily prohibit the operation of golf carts on any highway if the chief determines that the prohibition is necessary in the interest of safety. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 10-6-2016) 
Sec. 32-904. - Exception. 
    The limitations set forth in section 32-903(1) and (2) above shall not apply to golf carts being operated as follows: 
(1)  To the extent necessary for city employees and city contractors to fulfill a governmental purpose, or as otherwise authorized by the city manager or his designee, provided the golf cart is not operated on a public street of the city with a posted speed limit over 25 miles per hour except during special events when traffic on the roadway will be redirected. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 10-6-2016) 
Sec. 32-905. - City inspection and safety equipment. 
    Golf carts shall pass a safety inspection at least once yearly. Such safety inspection shall be conducted by an inspection station approved by the city. Such safety inspection shall only cover the following items: 
(1)  Headlights, tail lights and turn signals, if the golf cart is driving between sunset and sunrise; 
(2)  Horn, adequate steering gear, brakes, emergency or parking brake, one mirror, and an adequately fixed driver's seat; 
(3)  All other factory installed safety or mechanical systems, including checking for gasoline or propane leaks; 
(4)  Speed governor, if gasoline powered; 
(5)  Safety lap belts, if equipped; 
(6)  Rubber or equivalent tires; 
(7)  Slow moving vehicle emblem in conformity with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1081; and 
(8)  Proof of insurance is required. 
    The owner of the golf cart shall be responsible for obtaining a certification from the inspection station that the golf cart passed the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 10-6-2016) 
Sec. 32-906. - License and decal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any golf cart that is used within the city to fail to obtain and display the city vehicle license decal required by this article. 
(1)  License year. For the purpose of this article, the license year shall extend from April 1 of each year through April 15 of the next succeeding calendar year. 
(2)  License fee levied. There is hereby assessed and levied an annual license fee upon each golf cart required to be licensed under this article. 
(3)  When fee payable. The license fee imposed by this article shall be paid to the city treasurer not later than April 15 of the license year, but the same may be paid on or after March 1 preceding the license year. 
(4)  Proration of golf cart license/decal. One-half of the license fee prescribed by this article shall be collected when the license is issued during the period beginning on October 1 and ending on January 15 in the same license year, and one-third of such fee shall be collected when the license issued after January 15 in any license year. 
(5)  Disposition of revenue derived from fee. The revenue derived from the fee levied by this article shall be paid into the general revenue fund of the city and applied to general city purposes. 
(6)  Issuance and contents of decal. Upon receipt of the prescribed license fee, approved inspection and proof of insurance, the police department shall issue a license decal for the golf cart on which the fee was paid. The decal shall show thereon the words "City of Buena Vista," an indication of the year for which it was issued and the number of the license, together with such other matter as the council may from time to time designate. 
(7)  Display decal generally. 
a.  A decal issued pursuant to this article shall be attached to the lower righthand side of the windshield of the golf cart for which it was purchased or to such other location as the police department shall direct on a golf cart not equipped with a windshield. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a golf cart required to be licensed under this article on any street unless a current license decal is displayed on the golf cart in the manner prescribed in this section. 
(8)  Display of expired decal. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a golf cart to display thereon a city license decal after its expiration date. 
(9)  Transfer or reissuance of decal. A license decal acquired pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be transferable by the licensee from any golf cart sold, traded in or otherwise disposed of by the licensee to any golf cart thereafter acquired by the licensee during the license year subject to proof of insurance in accordance with the requirements of section 32-903 and a certification that the golf cart has passed a safety inspection required by section 32-905. The transfer shall be accomplished by the payment of $1.00 to the police department, together with the delivery to the police department of either the remains of the decal, including the number portion thereof, or an affidavit of the licensee certifying that the original decal was destroyed or is no longer in the city and is unavailable to the licensee for delivery to the police department. The police department shall then transfer or reissue the decal. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 10-6-2016) 
Sec. 32-907. - Local vehicle license. 
    No golf cart shall be used on the public street unless it has obtained a City of Buena Vista vehicle license under section 32-906. No vehicle license shall be issued until the owner of the golf cart presents evidence that the golf cart is insured in accordance with the requirements of section 32-902 and the golf cart has passed a safety inspection required by section 32-905. The fee for such license shall be $10.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 10-6-2016) 
Sec. 32-908. - Liability disclaimer. 
    This chapter is adopted to address the interest of public safety. Golf carts are not designed or manufactured to be used on the public streets, and the City of Buena Vista in no way advocates or endorses their operation on public streets or roads. The City of Buena Vista "assumes" no liability for permitting golf carts to be operated on public streets and roads under special legislation granted by the Virginia General Assembly. The City of Buena Vista, by regulating such operation, is merely trying to address obvious safety issues. All persons who operate or ride upon golf carts upon public streets or roads do so at their own risk and peril, and must be observant of bicyclists, pedestrians and other vehicular traffic. Any person who operates a golf cart is responsible for procuring liability insurance sufficient to cover the risk involved in using a golf cart on the public streets and roads. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 10-6-2016) 
Sec. 32-909. - Compliance with article, general penalty for violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this article or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto. A violation of this article shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, 10-6-2016) 
Secs. 32-910-32-950. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - OPERATION OF UTILITY VEHICLES[19] 

Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-05, adopted Mar. 1, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 32-910, 32-911. To preserve the style of the Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 32-951, 32-952. 

Sec. 32-951. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases when used in this article shall for the purpose of this article have the meaning respectfully ascribed to them: 
    Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place open to use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in the city, including the streets and alleys, and, for law enforcement purposes, the entire width between the boundary lines of all private roads or private streets that have been specifically designated "highways," as that term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, by ordinance, and also including sidewalks and multi-purpose paths. 
    Utility vehicle means a motor vehicle that is (i) designated for off-road use, (ii) powered by a motor, and (iii) used for general maintenance, security, agricultural or horticultural purposes. "Utility vehicle" does not include riding lawn mowers. 
(Ord. No. 18-05, 3-1-2018) 
Sec. 32-952. - Utility vehicle operation on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a utility vehicle on or over any street in the city except for local government employees, operating only upon streets within the city, to fulfill a governmental purpose, which for the purpose of this article shall include members of the Buena Vista Firefighters and members of the Buena Vista Rescue Squad, provided the utility vehicle is being operated on streets with speed limits of 35 mph or less and employees of public or private two-year or four-year institutions of higher education if operating on streets within the property limits of such institutions, provided the utility vehicle is being operated on streets with speed limits of 35 mph or less. Then, and in that case only, all streets outlined above shall be designated as public highways for utility vehicle operation in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    The provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-916.3(A), as amended, shall not apply to utility vehicles operated by city employees or employees of public or private two-year or four-year institution of higher education. 
(Ord. No. 18-05, 3-1-2018) 
Chapter 34 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to establish, maintain and operate sewage disposal systems, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122 et seq.; authority to regulate sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-928; onsite sewage systems, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2157; sewage disposal generally, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163 et seq.; municipal construction of sewers and drains, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109 et seq. 

Sec. 34-19. - Connection with sewer, etc., required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of property in the city used for human habitation to fail to provide or maintain sanitary facilities through connections with the city system of sanitary sewers. 
(Code 1967, § 25-1; Code 1981, § 23-1) 
State Law reference- Mandatory connection to sewer and water systems. Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2109, 15.2-2111. 
Sec. 34-20. - Rates established. 
    The rates for sewer usage established are not included in this Code, but are on file in the city offices. 
(Code 1967, § 25-3.1; Code 1981, § 23-2; Ord. of 4-13-1995; Ord. of 5-17-2001; Ord. of 5-27-2008; Ord. No. 10-1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 34-21. - Rates relief for certain businesses and industries. 
    Upon the application of a business or industrial customer requesting relief from the 40 percent sewage fee or charge, the city manager shall then determine whether the applicant does not return all of the water purchased by the applicant to the sanitary sewage system. If such is the case, then the 40 percent fee or charge heretofore levied shall only be applicable to water purchased for domestic purposes, with the amount of gallonage used for such purposes to be determined as follows: 
(1)  An average annual employment rate shall be determined for each business and industry. 
(2)  Each employee shall be presumed to consume by way of domestic usage 1,000 gallons per month. 
(3)  The number of average annual employees shall be multiplied by 1,000 and the result shall be the number of gallons presumed to be purchased each month for domestic purposes, and it is to this gallonage only that the 40 percent charge or fee will be levied. 
(4)  Only upon a demonstrated significant change in the number of personnel employed shall there be an adjustment in the average annual employee rate. 
(Code 1967, § 25-3.2; Code 1981, § 23-3) 
Sec. 34-22. - Infiltration of groundwater into sewer system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner who is connected to the sewage collection system of the city to utilize service lines connecting to the trunk lines of the system which permit groundwater to infiltrate the sewage treatment system. 
(b)  This shall be considered a penal ordinance. However, no charges may be made hereunder until the city manager has given 60 days' notice of an alleged violation by service of process upon the property owner. 
(Code 1981, § 23-8; Ord. of 6-25-1987) 
Secs. 34-23-34-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONNECTIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory connection to sewer and water systems, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2109, 15.2-2111. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-48. - Exemptions. 
    For good and sufficient reasons, the department of health, in special cases, may exempt a property owner from complying with the requirements of this article or may extend the time of his so doing, but in case any exemptions or extensions are granted by the department of health, it shall promptly make a full report of them to the city council, stating the reason for same. 
(Code 1967, § 25-11; Code 1981, § 23-17) 
Sec. 34-49. - Violations. 
    Any property owner required to comply with this article shall be subject to punishment, as provided in section 1-14, for failure so to comply, or the city may, at its option, cause the necessary work to be done to make the connections and supply water closets, and the amount so expended, including the charge for the permit to connect, shall be recoverable against the owner of the property. 
(Code 1967, § 25-10; Code 1981, § 23-18) 
Sec. 34-50. - When required; connection procedure. 
    Whenever a sewer is available to any property in the city, the owner of the property shall be required to cause the buildings on his premises to be connected with such sewer either directly or through some private sewer, the connections to be made as determined by the city manager or his property representative and within one month after notice to connect has been given to the property owner by the plumbing inspector. 
(Code 1967, § 25-4; Code 1981, § 23-19) 
Sec. 34-51. - Permit required. 
    Whenever a sewer is to be connected either directly to a main sewer or through some private sewer, the property owner shall first secure a permit from the city manager for each building, which, however, shall include accessory buildings on the premises, giving the property owner the right and privileges to connect with and use the sewer as mentioned in this chapter. The city manager shall, for such purpose, use a suitable bond book containing blank permits with duplicate stubs in which all permits shall be recorded by him. 
(Code 1967, § 25-6; Code 1981, § 23-20) 
Sec. 34-52. - Fees. 
    In consideration of issuing a permit as provided for in this division, the privileges and rights of connecting with the sewer and for the services and removal of sewerage and for the cost of the sewer pipes, making the proper connections and refilling excavations in the streets, the property owner in question shall be charged a sum in accordance with the fee schedule which is on file in the city offices. 
(Code 1967, § 25-7; Code 1981, § 23-21; Ord. of 6-28-1979; Ord. of 5-28-1981) 
Sec. 34-53. - Sewer main extends to property line. 
    The property owner shall place sewers in his property in accordance with the requirements of this Code and other ordinances of the city, and shall run his sewer line to his property line and public right-of-way interface if he desires connection with a main city sewer. The city will then run the sewer line from the property line of the owner and connect the same with a main sewer. 
(Code 1967, § 25-13; Code 1981, § 23-22) 
Sec. 34-54. - Use of city water. 
    In all cases where any water closet is connected with any sewer, it shall be unlawful for the owner or occupier of the premises upon which such water closet is situated to use such water closets without having the city water turned thereon or to avoid by any shift or device using the city water therein. 
(Code 1967, § 25-15; Code 1981, § 23-23) 
Sec. 34-55. - Sewer on different street. 
    The owners of lots on a street or public alley along which there is no public sewer may, with the permission of the city manager or his employees, connect their sewer with some other accessible public sewer, either along the streets and alleys of the city or through private property. 
(Code 1967, §§ 25-5, 25-18; Code 1981, § 23-24) 
Sec. 34-56. - Duty of inspector. 
    Before a sewer connection is made by the city, pursuant to a permit as provided in this division, it shall be the duty of the building inspector to inspect all outside sewer lines to the street to ascertain if all requirements have been met. If the building inspector has ascertained that all requirements have been met, he shall then approve the permit for connection. 
(Code 1967, § 25-8; Code 1981, § 23-25) 
Sec. 34-57. - Compliance with technical requirements, etc. 
    If a connection is made to the city sewer system by any person either inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, such person shall comply strictly with the technical requirements of this Code and other ordinances of the city and have all sewer and water piping inspected and approved by the building inspector and secure permits as required. 
(Code 1967, § 25-9; Code 1981, § 23-26) 
Sec. 34-58. - Laying in street or alley. 
    No connections with a public sewer shall be laid along any public street or alley of the city by any person, except the city's employees or approved city contractor, under the direction of the city manager, who shall require in all cases that the sewer be sized and laid to a depth that meets current industry standards. These sewers, when laid, shall become the property of the city. 
(Code 1967, § 25-12; Code 1981, § 23-27) 
Sec. 34-59. - Septic tanks. 
    In cases where it is determined by the city manager to not be practicable or possible to make connection with the city system of sewers, the use of septic tanks will be allowed at the discretion of the director of public health, and in all such cases the septic tank shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the directions of the director of public health and state regulations. 
(Code 1967, § 25-24; Code 1981, § 23-29) 
Sec. 34-60. - Discontinuance of service by consumer. 
    In the event sewer service to a lot or lots is discontinued for a period of more than three years, the city manager may declare that the connection with the sewer main has been abandoned and may order the connection with the sewer main severed. The city manager shall consider all relevant facts in each situation, such as any structures on the property, the likelihood of new construction planned, etc. In the event of declared abandonment, any future connection to the main for the lot or lots involved shall be treated as a new connection and the fees and procedures for connection shall be enforced. 
(Code 1981, § 23-30; Ord. of 7-23-1981) 
Secs. 34-61-34-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXTENSION OF SEWER MAINS 

Sec. 34-79. - Generally. 
    On any request for a sanitary sewer connection with the sewer system of the city where a line is not available without an extension of the existing city line, the city shall extend the line a distance of 50 feet to make the connection. Where it is necessary to extend the line for the connection more than 50 feet, the applicant shall pay for all labor, materials and rights-of-way (all being actual costs incurred by the city) after the first 50 feet. 
(Code 1967, § 25-16; Code 1981, § 23-36; Ord. of 12-13-2001(02); Ord. of 12-13-2001(03)) 
Sec. 34-80. - Charges for connection to existing extension. 
(a)  Should an application for a sewer connection with the city's sewer system be made in an instance where the connection will be made to a line which has been previously extended pursuant to section 34-566 within ten years of the application, pursuant to which there was an amount in addition to the usual connection charge paid by the former applicant for the extension to be connected to, then, in addition to the usual connection charge, the present applicant shall pay to the city the current cost of specified pipe for each existing foot of pipe immediately to the front or rear of the present applicant's property to which the connection is to be made, which amount shall be refunded by the city to the original applicant who paid for the extension connected to. 
(b)  Should the existing pipe be located so as to be at the front or rear of two applicants for connection, then the additional charge for connection provided for herein shall be reduced by one-half. 
(Code 1967, § 25-17.1; Code 1981, § 23-37) 
Sec. 34-81. - When bond required. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 34-79, the city shall not be required to extend any sewer line along a street which is not a part of the street system maintained by the city until satisfactory bond has been furnished, conditioned upon the satisfactory improvement of the street in accordance with specifications satisfactory to the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 25-17; Code 1981, § 23-38) 
Secs. 34-82-34-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER USE AND STORMWATER STANDARDS 

Sec. 34-136. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise: 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit used to collect and carry away sewerage or stormwater run-off from the generating source to sewage treatment plant (sanitary sewer or receiving streams (stormwater)). 
    Sewerage means water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwater, surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
(Code 1981, § 23-66; Ord. of 12-10-1981) 
Sec. 34-137. - Discharge of stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet in accordance with the most current version of the state stormwater regulations. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged after permits have been secured from the appropriate regulatory agencies, with prior approval of the city council and as allowed and/or permitted by the state department of environmental quality, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1967, § 25-3; Code 1981, §§ 23-4, 23-67; Ord. of 7-23-1981; Ord. of 12-10-1981) 
Sec. 34-138. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors/traps shall be provided when they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be a type and capacity approved by the city council or designee, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1981, § 23-71; Ord. of 12-10-1981) 
Sec. 34-139. - Method and place of measuring, testing, etc., wastes. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. 
(Code 1981, § 23-73; Ord. of 12-10-1981) 
Secs. 34-140-34-161. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWER USE AND PRETREATMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-162. - Introduction. 
(a)  Purpose. This article sets forth uniform requirements for industrial contributors into the wastewater collection and POTW for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977, the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403) and the Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit regulation (9 VAC 25-31-10 et seq.). 
(b)  Objectives. 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater treatment facility and/or system which will interfere with the operation of the system, contaminate resulting sludge or lead to a violation of the VPDES permit requirement. 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater treatment facility and/or system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or be incompatible with the system. 
(3)  To allow the city to produce a high quality effluent and sludge to meet all requirements of state and federal regulations. 
(c)  Incorporation of federal regulations. 
(1)  The following federal regulations are hereby incorporated by reference: 
a.  40 CFR 403.6(a)-(f) (2004), national pretreatment standards: categorical standards. 
b.  40 CFR 403.7 (2004), removal credits. 
c.  40 CFR 403.8(b)-(e) (2004), POTW pretreatment program development and implementation by POTW. 
d.  40 CFR 136 (2004), guidelines for establishing test procedures for the analysis of pollutants. 
e.  40 CFR 403.13 (2004), variance from categorical pretreatment standards for fundamentally different factors (FDF). 
f.  40 CFR 403.15 (2004), net/gross calculations. 
g.  40 CFR 403.17 (2004), bypass. 
h.  40 CFR 403.18 (2004), modifications to the POTW's pretreatment program. 
i.  The following national categorical pretreatment standards: 
1.  Aluminum forming, 40 CFR 467 (2004). 
2.  Asbestos manufacturing, 40 CFR 427 (2004). 
3.  Battery manufacturing, 40 CFR 461 (2004). 
4.  Canned and preserved fruits and vegetables, 40 CFR 407 (2004). 
5.  Canned and preserved seafood, 40 CFR 408 (2004). 
6.  Carbon black manufacturing, 40 CFR 458 (2004). 
7.  Cement manufacturing, 40 CFR 411 (2004). 
8.  Centralized waste treatment, 40 CFR 437 (2004). 
9.  Coal mining, 40 CFR 434 (2004). 
10.  Coil coating, 40 CFR 465 (2004). 
11.  Copper forming, 40 CFR 468 (2004). 
12.  Dairy products, 40 CFR 405 (2004). 
13.  Electrical and electronic components, 40 CFR 469 (2004). 
14.  Electroplating, 40 CFR 413 (2004). 
15.  Explosives manufacturing, 40 CFR 457 (2004). 
16.  Feedlots, 40 CFR 412 (2004). 
17.  Ferroalloy manufacturing, 40 CFR 424 (2004). 
18.  Fertilizer manufacturing, 40 CFR 418 (2004). 
19.  Glass manufacturing, 40 CFR 426 (2004). 
20.  Grain mills, 40 CFR 406 (2004). 
21.  Gum and wood chemicals manufacturing, 40 CFR 454 (2004). 
22.  Hospitals, 40 CFR 460 (2004). 
23.  Ink formulating, 40 CFR 447 (2004). 
24.  Inorganic chemicals manufacturing, 40 CFR 415 (2004). 
25.  Iron and steel manufacturing, 40 CFR 420 (2004). 
26.  Landfills, 40 CFR 445 (2004). 
27.  Leather tanning and finishing, 40 CFR 425 (2004). 
28.  Meat products, 40 CFR 432 (2004). 
29.  Metal finishing, 40 CFR 433 (2004). 
30.  Mineral mining and processing, 40 CFR 436 (2004). 
31.  Nonferrous metals, 40 CFR 421 (2004). 
32.  Nonferrous metal forming, 40 CFR 471 (2004). 
33.  Oil and gas extraction, 40 CFR 435 (2004). 
34.  Ore mining and dressing, 40 CFR 440 (2004). 
35.  Organic chemicals, plastics and synthetic fibers, 40 CFR 414 (2004). 
36.  Paint formulating, 40 CFR 446 (2004). 
37.  Paving and roofing materials, 40 CFR 443 (2004). 
38.  Pesticide chemicals, 40 CFR 455 (2004). 
39.  Petroleum refining, 40 CFR 419 (2004). 
40.  Pharmaceutical manufacturing, 40 CFR 439 (2004). 
41.  Phosphate manufacturing, 40 CFR 422 (2004). 
42.  Photographic processing, 40 CFR 459 (2004). 
43.  Plastics molding and forming, 40 CFR 463 (2004). 
44.  Porcelain enameling, 40 CFR 466 (2004). 
45.  Pulp, paper and paperboard, 40 CFR 430 (2004). 
46.  Rubber processing, 40 CFR 428 (2004). 
47.  Secondary treatment, 40 CFR 133 (2004). 
48.  Soaps and detergents, 40 CFR 417 (2004). 
49.  Steam electric power generation, 40 CFR 423 (2004). 
50.  Sugar processing, 40 CFR 409 (2004). 
51.  Textile mills, 40 CFR 410 (2004). 
52.  Timber products, 40 CFR 429 (2004). 
53.  Toxic pollutant effluent standards, 40 CFR 129 (2004). 
54.  Transportation equipment cleaning, 40 CFR 442 (2004). 
55.  Waste combustors, 40 CFR 444 (2004). 
(2)  The city shall adopt any future changes, deletions and amendments to those federal regulations cited in this subsection (c). 
(d)  Incorporation of state regulations. 
(1)  The following state regulations are hereby incorporated by reference: 
a.  9 VAC 25-31-10 et seq., Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit regulation (2004); 
b.  9 VAC 25-260 Virginia Water Quality Standards (2004). 
(2)  The city shall adopt any future changes, deletions and amendments to those state regulations cited in this subsection (d). 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 34-163. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
    Act or the act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the director of the department of environmental quality. 
    Baseline monitoring report (BMR) means a permit application prepared by industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Best management practice (BMP) means a practice, or combination of practices, which are low in cost, are applicable to broad categories of industry, and are determined to be an effective, practicable means of preventing or reducing the release of toxic and hazardous pollutants from spills, leaks, treatment and manufacturing processes. BMPs may be used as a control mechanism and shall be enforceable in accordance with this article. 
    Bimonthly means once every other month. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
    Biweekly means once every other week. 
    Blowdown means the removal of accumulated solids in boilers to prevent plugging of boiler tubes and steam lines. In cooling towers, blowdown is used to reduce the amount of dissolved salts in the recirculated cooling water. 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastes from any portion of a treatment facility. 
    Categorical pretreatment standards means pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 33 USC 1317 section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act. 
    City means the city or the city council of Buena Vista. 
    Compatible pollutant means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, unoxidized nitrogen, chemical oxygen demand, phosphorus, turbidity, pH, and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the city's Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit, if the wastewater treatment facility to which the pollutant is discharged was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact, does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. 
    Composite wastewater sample means a combination of individual samples of wastewater taken at selected intervals for some specified period, to minimize the effect of the variability of individual samples. Individual samples may have equal volume or may be roughly proportioned to the flow at time of sampling. 
    Control authority means the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) if the POTW's submission for its pretreatment program has been approved by the approval authority, or the approval authority if the submission has not been approved. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Daily maximum means the maximum allowable discharge of pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant derived from all measurements taken that day. 
    DEQ means Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Dilution wastestream means domestic wastewater, boiler/tower blowdown, noncontact cooling water (unless regulated by the categorical pretreatment standards). 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Director means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
    Domestic sewage or domestic waste means waterborne wastes normally discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free from storm surface water and industrial wastes. 
    Duly authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(1)  For permit applications, a duly authorized representative means: 
a.  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president for a corporation. 
b.  A general partner of the proprietor for a partnership or sole proprietorship. 
(2)  All other correspondence, reports and self-monitoring reports shall be signed by either a person described in subsection (1) of this definition or by a duly authorized representative of that person if: 
a.  The authorization is made in writing by a person described in subsection (1) of this definition; or 
b.  The authorization specified either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the regulated facility or activity, such as the position of plant manager, superintendent, or position of equivalent responsibility. 
    Effluent means wastewater flowing out of any facility designed to treat, convey or retain wastewater. 
    Environmental protection agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Grab wastewater sample means an individual sample collected in less than 15 minutes, without regard for flow or time. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as, but not limited to, industrial waste, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks. These wastes are to be discharged at a wastewater treatment facility equipped to handle such waste and not into a public sewer. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant as defined in this section. 
    Industrial user (IU) or user means any source of nondomestic discharge to a POTW. 
    Inspector means a person authorized by the city to inspect wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, pretreatment and disposal facilities. 
    Instantaneous maximum concentration means the maximum concentration allowed in any single grab sample. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's VPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): 
a.  Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solids Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA); 
b.  The Clean Air Act; and 
c.  The Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) refers to a mass to volume ratio. 
    Monthly average means the arithmetic mean of the values for effluent samples collected over a period of 30 consecutive days. 
    National pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, which applies to industrial users. The term "national pretreatment standard" includes general and prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 9 VAC 25-31-770. 
    New source. 
(1)  The term "new source" means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production of wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1) or (3) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contract which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
    Nondomestic discharge or nondomestic waste means any waste other than domestic waste. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's VPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means a substance which, when present in a sufficient concentration and under certain conditions, can cause pollution either singularly or in combination with other substances. 
    POTW means publicly owned treatment works. 
    Pretreatment means the application of physical, chemical, and/or biological processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in or alter the nature of the pollutant properties in a wastewater prior to discharging such wastewater in the wastewater treatment system. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any requirements arising under part VII of the VPDES permit regulation including the duty to allow or carry out inspections, entry or monitoring activities; any rules, regulations, or orders issued by the owner of a publicly owned treatment works; or any reporting requirements imposed by the owner of a publicly owned treatment works or by the regulations of the board. Pretreatment requirements do not include the requirements of a national pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards means all applicable rules and regulations implementing section 307 of the Federal Act, as well as any nonconflicting state or local standards. In cases of conflicting standards or regulations, the more stringent thereof shall be applied. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Septic tank wastes means wastewater from residential septic tanks and port-a-john wastes. 
    Sewage means a combination of water-carried waste from residential, commercial, institutional and industrial establishments together with such unintentional groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit used to collect and carry away sewage or stormwater run off from the generating source to sewage treatment plants or receiving streams. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU) means: 
(1)  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 9 VAC 25-31-780; and 
(2)  Any other industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; 
c.  Is designated as such by the control authority, as defined in 9 VAC 25-31-840 A, on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with part VII (9 VAC 25-31-730 et seq.) of this regulation, determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
Significant noncompliance (SNC) means: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66-percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug load means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during the normal operations. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management. 
    Standard method means the most current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    State means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other Acts. 
    Unpolluted water means not containing any pollutants limited or prohibited by the effluent standard established in the city's VPDES permit or waste whose discharge will not cause any violation of receiving water quality standards. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with technology based permit limitations because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the permittee, excluding such factors as operational error, improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities, or improper operation and maintenance or lack thereof. 
    User means see industrial user. 
    Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) means the program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits known as VPDES permit for the discharge of pollutants from point sources, pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
    Wastewater. See Sewage. 
    Wastewater contribution permit means an industrial wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this article. 
    Wastewater treatment facility means a plant operated by the city under conditions prescribed in a VPDES permit. It has devices, facilities, structures, equipment or works owned or used by the city for the purpose of storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of wastewater. This includes elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well facilities and any works, including site acquisition of land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 2) 
Secs. 34-164-34-194. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRETREATMENT STANDARDS THAT APPLY TO ALL USERS 

Sec. 34-195. - Purpose. 
    This division establishes limitations and prohibitions on the quantity and quality of sewage or wastewater which may be lawfully discharged into the city's wastewater treatment system by any user. Pretreatment of some sewage discharge will be required to achieve the goals established by the ordinance and the national pretreatment standards. The specific limitations set forth herein, and other prohibitions and limitations of the ordinance are subject to change as necessary to enable the city to: 
(1)  Provide efficient wastewater treatment; 
(2)  Protect the public health, the environment and the beneficial uses of the receiving waters; and 
(3)  Enable the city to meet requirements contained in its VPDES permit. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 3.1) 
Sec. 34-196. - General and specific discharge prohibitions. 
    No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed any pollutants which cause pass through, interference or violation of the water quality standards. These general and specific prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to any POTW: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 (2000). 
(2)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference. 
(3)  Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0, unless the works is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges. 
(4)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(5)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity into the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW treatment plant which exceeds 40 degrees centigrade (140 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(6)  Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(7)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
(9)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(10)  Any substance which may cause the city's effluent or any other product of a wastewater treatment facility, such as residues, sludge, or scum, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse, or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the wastewater treatment system cause the city to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Federal Clean Water Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(11)  Any substance which will cause the city to violate its VPDES permit of receiving water quality standards. 
(12)  Any waste containing concentrations of phenols, arsenic, barium, cadmium, chromium, copper, cyanide, iron, lead, mercury, nickel, silver, zinc or other substances in excess of concentrations which may be adopted by the city. 
(13)  Any slug discharges. 
(14)  Any substance directly into a manhole or other opening in a public sewer other than through an approved discharge point. Written application for a discharge permit shall be made by the user. 
(15)  Any waters or wastes containing substances, including nonbiodegradable detergents, which will not respond to treatment. The discharge of these substances is limited only to the degree that the wastewater treatment facility effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(16)  Any discharge containing either fat, oil, or grease in concentrations greater than 100 milligrams per liter as determined by procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136. 
(17)  Any garbage or waste that has not been adequately shredded to pass through a one-half-inch screen. 
(18)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, lint, glass, rags, metals, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, insulation materials, fibers of any kind, stock or poultry feeds, processed grains, viscera or other fleshy particles from processing or packing plants, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or interference with proper operation of sewage treatment facilities. 
(19)  Any waters or wastes containing BOD or COD of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required in the handling of such materials in the sewerage system, or exceeding limits established in this article. 
(20)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required in the handling of such waste materials in the sewerage system. 
(21)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance, or any substance or compound, which when introduced into a reducing environment such as might exist in the sewer system, might cause the evolution of a malodorous gas and thereby create a public nuisance. 
(22)  Any wastes containing any radioactive materials or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed any limits established by applicable state or federal regulations. 
(23)  Any toxic substances in amounts exceeding standards promulgated by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to section 307(a) of the Federal Act, or as established by the city. These substances shall include any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to: 
a.  Injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process; 
b.  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; 
c.  Create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment facility; or 
d.  Exceed the limitations set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. 
(24)  The term "pickling wastes" means any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(25)  Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limits set for any pollutant at the point of discharge but which would accumulate to undesirable quantities in the collection and/or treatment system. 
(26)  Any wastes requiring the introduction of a quantity of chlorine or any other compound beyond the range normally required for sewage treatment purposes. 
(27)  Any lime sludge resulting from the pretreatment and/or removal of metals. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 3.2) 
Sec. 34-197. - Local limits. 
    The following local limits apply based on 24-hour composite samples: 
Metal Maximum mg/l Cadmium 1.82 Copper 3.4 Nickel 4.89  
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 3.3) 
Sec. 34-198. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations of those in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 3.4) 
Sec. 34-199. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 34-195. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 3.5) 
Sec. 34-200. - Deny or condition new or increased pollutants. 
    The city may deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants to the system by any user where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or where such contributions would cause a pass through or interference to the system. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 3.6) 
Secs. 34-201-34-223. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT 

Sec. 34-224. - Applications required. 
    Any user desiring to discharge into the wastewater treatment system shall first make application to the city prior to any discharge to the sewer system. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 4.1) 
Sec. 34-225. - Permit application requirements. 
    All industrial users seeking a permit shall complete and file with the city, a completed application form prescribed by the city containing the following information where appropriate: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone and location (if different from the address) and type of permit application (either existing or proposed). 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987. 
(3)  Estimated volume of wastewater to be discharged. 
(4)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in this article as determined by a laboratory approved by the city. 
(5)  Time and duration of discharge. 
(6)  Average daily flow and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any. 
(7)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
(8)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials, processes and types of materials which are or could be discharged. 
(9)  Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production. 
(10)  Number and type of employees, and hours of work. 
(11)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to properly evaluate the permit. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 4.2) 
Secs. 34-226-34-243. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS 

Sec. 34-244. - Permit required. 
    The city will ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements through the issuance of permits. All industrial users identified as significant industrial users (SIUs) must obtain a discharge permit with the city. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 5.1) 
Sec. 34-245. - Processing and issuance of permits. 
    The city shall evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. A draft permit shall be delivered to the users requiring permits within 60 days after all data has been furnished and accepted by the city, unless there are special circumstances. The industrial user shall be allowed a 30-day comment period to respond. On or before the end of the comment period, the city shall issue or deny a permit. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 5.2) 
Sec. 34-246. - Duration of permits. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 5.3) 
Sec. 34-247. - Administrative continuance. 
    If a permittee has reapplied for a permit within the specified time period and a new permit has not been issued before the expiration date of the current permit, then the current permit is in effect for up to 180 days after the expiration date. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 5.4) 
Sec. 34-248. - Transfer of ownership or control. 
    Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation and are not assignable to another user or transferable to any other location without the prior written approval of the city. In the event of a sale, the permittee must inform the purchaser of all responsibilities and obligations under the permit. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 5.5) 
Sec. 34-249. - Modification of permits. 
(a)  The director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator; 
(10)  Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's operation not covered in the effective permit; 
(11)  A change in any condition that required either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(12)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's collection and treatment systems, POTW personnel or the receiving waters; 
(13)  Discharges wastewater that is in significant noncompliance of the permit issued; or 
(14)  Discharges prohibited wastewater to public sewers. 
(b)  The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification or notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance does not stay any permit conditions. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 5.6) 
Sec. 34-250. - Duty to reapply. 
    If the permittee wishes to continue an activity regulated by the permit after the expiration date of the permit, the permittee must apply for and obtain a new permit. The application must be submitted at least 90 days before the expiration date of the current permit. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 5.7) 
Sec. 34-251. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on a discharger obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public without restriction unless the discharger specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the discharger. The physical and/or chemical characteristics of a discharger's wastewater will, however, not be recognized as confidential information or as trade secret. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 5.8) 
Sec. 34-252. - Denial of a permit. 
    Should the waste from an industrial user's operations be deemed to be inadmissible into the sanitary sewer system because of objectionable character as defined by this article, because of concentrations of elements or substances in excess of the limits established by the city, or because of flow characteristics incompatible with the best use of the receiving sewer, the city shall not approve the discharge of such waste into the sanitary sewer system until such user has employed, at his own expense, methods and processes of pretreatment as will render the waste admissible to the sanitary sewer system in accordance with this article. The city shall not specify, suggest, or recommend equipment, structures, or arrangements compromising the pretreatment processes. The methods and procedures of the pretreatment to be employed shall be reviewed and approved with the same procedure as stipulated for permit applications. Approval of discharge of industrial wastes by any user shall be given only on the basis of performance of pretreatment processes, if pretreatment should be required. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 5.9) 
Sec. 34-253. - Permit revocation. 
    The director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 5.10) 
Secs. 34-254-34-284. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 34-285. - Contents. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the city to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. Wastewater discharge permits must contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Effluent limits based on the applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law; 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law; and 
(6)  Any applicable compliance schedules, which may not extend beyond applicable federal deadlines. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.1) 
Sec. 34-286. - Duty to comply. 
    The permittee shall comply with all conditions of the permit. Failure to comply with the requirements of this article may be grounds for administrative action, or enforcement proceedings including civil and/or criminal penalties, injunctive relief and termination of service. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.2) 
Sec. 34-287. - Duty to mitigate. 
    The permittee shall take all reasonable steps to minimize or correct any adverse impact on the environment resulting from noncompliance with the permit, including such accelerated or additional monitoring as necessary to determine the nature and impact of the noncomplying discharge. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.3) 
Sec. 34-288. - Right of entry to inspect. 
(a)  The city shall inspect all significant industrial users at least once a year per the VPDES Permit Regulation at 9 VAC 25-31-800.F.2.e. The purpose of the inspection is to ascertain whether the provisions of this ordinance are being met and all requirements are being complied with. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. The permittee shall allow authorized city representatives, upon the presentation of credentials: 
(1)  To have ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the permittee's premises for purposes of inspection and/or sampling in the performance of any of their duties; 
(2)  To have access to and copy at reasonable times any records required to be kept under the terms and conditions of the permit; 
(3)  To inspect at reasonable times any facilities, equipment (including monitoring equipment and control equipment), practices, operations or monitoring method regulated or required in the permit; 
(4)  To sample or monitor at reasonable times, for the purposes of ensuring permit compliance, any substances or parameters at any location; 
(5)  Inspect any production, manufacturing, fabricating or storage area where pollutants, regulated under the permit, could originate; 
(6)  Where the permittee has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities; 
(7)  The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations; 
(8)  The city may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy; 
(9)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user; 
(10)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.4) 
Sec. 34-289. - Property rights. 
    The issuance of the permit does not convey any property rights in either real or personal property, or any exclusive privileges, nor does it authorize any injury to private property or any invasion of personal right, nor any infringement of federal, state or local laws or regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.5) 
Sec. 34-290. - Dilution. 
    The permittee shall not increase the use of potable or process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the permit. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.6) 
Sec. 34-291. - Adverse impact. 
    The permittee shall take all reasonable steps to minimize any adverse impact on the receiving works resulting from noncompliance with any effluent limitations specified in the permit, including such accelerated or additional monitoring as necessary to determine the nature and impact of the noncomplying discharge. The permittee shall immediately notify the city of slug discharges, spills that may enter the public sewer, or any other significant changes in operations, wastewater characteristics and constituents. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.7) 
Sec. 34-292. - Special agreements. 
    Special agreements and arrangements between the city and any user, unless disapproved by the state, may be established with respect to the issuance of a permit when in the opinion of the city unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms and conditions. In no case shall allowable discharge be in excess of national categorical standards or the general and specific prohibitions of 40 CFR 403.5. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.8) 
Sec. 34-293. - Pretreatment facilities. 
    Permitted industrial users shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations established herein before discharging to the wastewater treatment system. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to meet the requirements of the ordinance shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating and maintenance procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and must be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operation and maintenance procedures shall in no way relieve the permitted industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility, as necessary, to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the city before their implementation. These changes shall be acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.9) 
Sec. 34-294. - Slug discharge control plan. 
(a)  Upon submission of an application for discharge permit and every two years thereafter, the city shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges. The need for a slug discharge control plan shall be evaluated based upon criteria such as the users potential for slug discharges, history of slug discharges, presence of stored chemicals, whether stored chemicals are in diked storage areas, and the proximity of floor drains to those stored chemicals. 
(b)  If a slug discharge control plan is required, it shall contain at least the following elements: 
(1)  A description to discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharge. 
(2)  A description of stored chemicals. 
(3)  Procedures for promptly notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a specific prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures for followup written notification within five days. 
(4)  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(5)  If necessary, followup practices to limit the damage suffered by the treatment plant or the environment. 
(c)  The slug discharge control plan shall be signed by one of the following: 
(1)  For a corporation, by a principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president. 
(2)  For a partnership or sole proprietorship, by a general partner or the proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  By a duly authorized representative of one of the persons in subsection (c)(1) or (2) of this section. A person is a duly authorized representative only if: 
a.  The authorization is made in writing by a person described in subsection (c)(3)b of this section. 
b.  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the regulated facility or activity, such as the position of plant manager, superintendent or position of equivalent responsibility. 
(d)  The slug control plan shall be certified by the following statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gathered and evaluated the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who managed the system, or those persons, directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fines and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.10) 
Sec. 34-295. - Proper operation and maintenance. 
    The permittee shall at all times properly operate and maintain all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances) which are installed or used by the permittee to achieve compliance with the conditions of the permit. Proper operation and maintenance includes but is not limited to: effective performance, adequate funding, adequate operator staffing and training, and adequate laboratory and process controls, including assurance procedures. This provision requires the operation of back-up or auxiliary facilities or similar systems only when necessary to achieve compliance with the conditions for the permit. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.11) 
Sec. 34-296. - Duty to halt or reduce activity. 
    Upon reduction, loss, or failure of the industrial user's pretreatment facility, the permittee shall, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with its permit, control production of all discharges or both until operation of the pretreatment facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies, for example, when the primary source of power of the pretreatment facility fails or is reduced. It shall not be a defense of a permittee in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the permitted activity in order to maintain compliance with the conditions of this permit. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.12) 
Sec. 34-297. - Bypass of pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  Bypass is prohibited unless it is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage or no feasible alternatives exist. 
(b)  The permittee may allow bypass to occur which does not cause effluent limitations, to be exceeded, but only if it also is for essential maintenance or to ensure efficient operation. 
(c)  Notification of bypass. 
(1)  Anticipated bypass. If the permittee knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice, at least ten days before the date of the bypass to the city. 
(2)  Unanticipated bypass. The permittee shall immediately notify the city and submit a written notice to the POTW within 24 hours of becoming aware of the bypass. 
(3)  Notification of the bypass shall contain the following information: 
a.  Description of the discharge or slug load, the cause thereof and the discharge's or slug load's impact on the permittee's noncompliance status; 
b.  Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur; 
c.  All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such discharge, slug load or other conditions of noncompliance. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.13) 
Sec. 34-298. - Removed substances. 
    Solids, sludge, filter backwash, or other pollutants removed in the course of treatment or control of wastewaters or intake waters shall be disposed of in accordance with section 405 of the Clean Water Act and subtitles C and D of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and shall not enter the public transport/treatment works. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.14) 
Sec. 34-299. - State and federal laws. 
    Nothing in the permit shall be construed to preclude the institution of any legal action or relieve the permittee from any responsibilities, liabilities, or penalties to which the permittee is or may be subject to under any applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.15) 
Sec. 34-300. - Special conditions. 
    Special conditions may be added to the permit at any time by the city. Special conditions may consist of compliance schedules in regard to pretreatment of the permittee's wastestream. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.16) 
Sec. 34-301. - Appeals. 
    The permittee has the right to appeal enforcement actions. Notice of appeal should be given in writing to the director of the city WWTP within 30 days of the director's order. Failure to file within the time limit shall be considered a waiver in right to appeal. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.17) 
Sec. 34-302. - Protection from accidental discharge. 
    Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this article. Such facilities shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to provide the protection necessary against accidental discharge. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 6.18) 
Secs. 34-303-34-322. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INDUSTRIAL USER MONITORING AND RECORDKEEPING 

Sec. 34-323. - Frequency. 
    All significant industrial users must monitor at least semiannually. The discharge shall be monitored for those constituents as specified in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 7.1) 
Sec. 34-324. - Representative samples. 
    Samples and measurements taken as required shall be representative of the volume and nature of the monitored discharge. All samples shall be taken at the monitoring points specified in the permit and unless otherwise specified, before the effluent joins or is diluted by other waste streams, bodies of water or substances. Monitoring points shall not be changed without notification to and the approval of the director. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 7.2) 
Sec. 34-325. - Flow measurements. 
    If flow measurement is required by the permit, the appropriate flow measurement devices and methods consistent with approved scientific practices shall be selected and used to ensure the accuracy and reliability of measurements of the volume of monitored discharges. The devices shall be installed, calibrated and maintained to ensure that the accuracy of the measurements are consistent with the accepted capability of that type of device. Devices selected shall be capable of measuring flows with a maximum deviation of less than ten percent from true discharge rates through the range of expected discharge volumes. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 7.3) 
Sec. 34-326. - Additional monitoring by permittee. 
    If the permittee monitors any pollutant at the locations designated in the permit more frequently than required by this permit, using approved analytical methods as specified in section 34-325, the results of such monitoring shall be reported in the periodic discharge report. Such increased frequency shall also be indicated. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 7.4) 
Sec. 34-327. - Monitoring facilities. 
    The city may require a permitted industrial user to construct at said industrial user's expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the industrial user's waste streams, and may also require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed, and operated at the industrial user's expense. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 7.5) 
Sec. 34-328. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 7.6) 
Sec. 34-329. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 7.7) 
Sec. 34-330. - Falsifying information. 
    Knowingly making any false statement on any report or other document required by the permit or knowingly rendering any monitoring device or method inaccurate, may result in punishment under civil and/or criminal law proceedings as well as being subjected to injunctive relief. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 7.8) 
Sec. 34-331. - Recordkeeping. 
    Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. The permittee shall record for all samples: 
(1)  The date, exact place, time and methods of sampling preservation techniques or procedures; 
(2)  Who performed the sampling or measurements; 
(3)  The dates the analyses were performed; 
(4)  Who performed the analyses; 
(5)  The analytical techniques or methods used; 
(6)  The results of such analyses. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 7.9) 
Sec. 34-332. - Retention of records. 
(a)  The permittee shall retain records of all monitoring information, including all calibration and maintenance records and all original strip chart recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation, copies of all reports required by this permit, and records of all data used to complete the application for this permit, for a period of at least three years from the date of the sample, measurement, report or application. This period may be extended by request of the city at any time. 
(b)  All other records that pertain to matters that are the subject of special orders or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city, approval authority, or EPA shall be retained and preserved by the permittee until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(c)  These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or city or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 7.10) 
Sec. 34-333. - POTW monitoring of significant industrial users. 
    The city shall randomly sample and analyze the effluent from each significant industrial user at least once a year per the VPDES permit regulation at 9 VAC 25-31-800.F.2.e. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 7.11) 
Secs. 34-334-34-354. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - INDUSTRIAL USER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 34-355. - Periodic compliance reports. 
    All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the city, but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December) submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 8.1) 
Sec. 34-356. - Reports of changed conditions. 
(a)  For purposes of this requirement, the term "significant changes" includes, but is not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent for greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. (Note: EPA regulations do not define the term "significant change"; however, it is recommended that changes of 20 percent or greater be considered significant changes.) 
(b)  Each user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least seven days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submissions of a wastewater discharge permit application. 
(2)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 8.2) 
Sec. 34-357. - Anticipated noncompliance. 
    The permittee shall give advance notice to the director of any planned changes in the permitted facility or activity, which may result in noncompliance with permit requirements. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 8.3) 
Sec. 34-358. - Duty to provide information. 
    The permittee shall furnish the city, within a reasonable time, any information which the city may request to determine whether cause exists for modifying, revoking and reissuing, or terminating the permit, or to determine compliance with the permit. The permittee shall also furnish the city, upon request, copies of records required to be kept by the permit. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 8.4) 
Sec. 34-359. - Signatory requirements. 
    All applications, reports, or information submitted to the city shall be signed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  All permit applications shall be signed: 
a.  For a corporation: by a principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president. 
b.  For a partnership or sole proprietorship: by a general partner of the proprietor, respectively. 
(2)  All other correspondence, reports and self-monitoring reports shall be signed by a person described above or by a duly authorized representative of that person. A person is a duly authorized representative only if: 
a.  The authorization is made in writing by a person described in subsection (2)b of this section. 
b.  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the regulated facility or activity, such as the position of plant manager, superintendent, or position of equivalent responsibility. 
(3)  Any change in signatures shall be submitted to the city in writing within 30 days after the change. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 8.5) 
Sec. 34-360. - Certification requirements. 
    All applications, reports or information submitted to the city shall contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 8.6) 
Sec. 34-361. - Reports of potential problems, including slug loadings. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the causes of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 8.7) 
Sec. 34-362. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
    All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the director as the director may require. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 8.8) 
Sec. 34-363. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
    If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 8.9) 
Sec. 34-364. - Hazardous waste notification. 
(a)  The industrial user shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under the Code of Virginia and 40 CFR 261 (2000). Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in the Code of Virginia and 40 CFR 261 (2000), the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: 
(1)  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 
(2)  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and 
(3)  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
All notifications must take place within 180 days of the effective date of this section. Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of this section shall provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this section need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under 9 VAC 25-31-840J. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under self-monitoring requirements of 9 VAC-25-31-840B, D and E. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) (2000). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) (2000), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 8.10) 
Secs. 34-365-34-386. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR INDUSTRIES SUBJECT TO NATIONAL CATEGORICAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 34-387. - Categorical industries baseline monitoring report (BMR). 
    Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 9 VAC 25-31-780A.4, whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. Users described in this section shall submit the set forth the following information: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operation. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classification (SIC) code of the operations carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates the points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 9 VAC 25-31-780.E. The city may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows when justified by cost or feasibility consideration. 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. The following provisions shall apply to the measurement of pollutants: 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The samples shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. 
c.  Sampling must be performed using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH cyanide, phenol, sulfides and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
d.  The industrial user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this section. 
e.  Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the industrial user should measure the flows and concentration necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula found in 9 VAC 25-31-780.E in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. When an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with the combined waste stream formula in 9 VAC 25-31-780.E, this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the city. 
f.  Sampling and analysis procedures shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in the current 40 CFR 136. When 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or when the director determines that the 40 CFR 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the EPA. 
g.  The city may allow the submission of a baseline monitoring report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. 
h.  The baseline monitoring report shall indicate the time, date and place, of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements; and 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance are required to meet the pretreatment standards, the industrial user shall submit the shortest schedule by with the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
a.  When the industrial user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by the combined waste stream formula regulated under 40 CFR 403.13 and/or a fundamentally different factors variance, the information required by this subsection (7) and subsection (6) of this section pertain to the modified limits. 
b.  If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by the combined waste stream formula and/or a fundamentally different factors variance after the industrial user submits the report required by subsection (6) of this section, any necessary amendments to the information requested by this subsection and subsection (6) of this section shall be submitted by the industrial user to the city within 60 days after the modified limit is approved. 
c.  The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by this subsection (7): 
1.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment facilities required for the industrial user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. No increment of this schedule shall exceed nine months. 
2.  No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the city including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on that date, and if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 9.1) 
Sec. 34-388. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director, a report containing the information described in section 34-387(4) through (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 9.2) 
Secs. 34-389-34-419. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 

Sec. 34-420. - Notification of violation. 
(a)  Purpose. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the city may serve upon such person a written notice. 
(b)  Procedure. The notice of violation shall be served to the user by certified mail or in person. The text of the notice of violation shall state the nature of the violation, date and evidence. 
(c)  Consequences. Within 30 days from the receipt date of the notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the city. Submission of the plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 10.1) 
Sec. 34-421. - Show cause hearing. 
(a)  Purpose. The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the wastewater treatment system to show cause before the city council why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  A notice shall be served on the user specifies: 
a.  The time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council regarding the violation; 
b.  The reasons a proposed enforcement action is to be taken; and 
c.  The proposed enforcement action. 
(2)  The notice shall also direct the user to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. The city may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its agents to: 
a.  Issue, in the name of the city, notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
b.  Take the evidence; and 
c.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city for action thereon. 
(3)  At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded and typed verbatim. The transcript, so recorded, may be made available to any member of the public, or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(c)  Consequences. After the city has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the public sewer service will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been installed on existing treatment facilities, and those devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 10.2) 
Sec. 34-422. - Administrative compliance order. 
(a)  Purpose. When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate the ordinance or a wastewater discharge permit or order issued thereunder, an administrative compliance order may be issued to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer services shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated to eliminate the cause of the violation. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices. Any deadlines established in the administrative compliance order shall not extend any compliance date beyond any applicable federal deadlines. 
(b)  Procedure. The administrative order shall be served to the user by certified mail or in person. The user shall comply with the order or be subjected to the penalties described therein. 
(c)  Consequences. The user shall submit a written report to the city within five days of each compliance date contained in the administrative order. The report shall state whether the user has taken the action required by the date specified. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 10.3) 
Sec. 34-423. - Permit suspension. 
(a)  Purpose. The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or an industrial wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment; causes interference to the wastewater treatment system; or causes the city to violate any condition of the applicable VPDES permit. 
(b)  Procedure. The city shall submit a notice of suspension to the user in person or by certified mail. The notice of suspension shall include the reason for suspension, the effective date of suspension, and the conditions under which the permit shall be restored. 
(c)  Consequences. Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or of the industrial wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the said user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the public sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sanitary sewer or wastewater treatment facility or endangerment to any individuals. The industrial wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service shall be reinstated upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence. Upon acceptance by the city, the suspension will be lifted and the user will be notified of the permit restoration. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 10.4) 
Sec. 34-424. - Publication of significant industrial users in significant noncompliance. 
    The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance (SNC) with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 10.5) 
Secs. 34-425-34-446. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 

Sec. 34-447. - Injunctive relief. 
    When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition the circuit court through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 11.1) 
Sec. 34-448. - Civil penalties. 
    Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city council or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this article, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate state law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 11.2) 
Sec. 34-449. - Falsification. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 11.3) 
Secs. 34-450-34-466. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - CHARGES AND FEES 

Sec. 34-467. - Charges and fees. 
(a)  The city may adopt charges and fees which may include: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for permit applications; 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(6)  Fees for consistent removal (by the city) of pollutants otherwise subject to federal, state or local pretreatment standards; 
(7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
(b)  These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 12.1) 
Sec. 34-468. - Cost recovery. 
    In addition to civil liability, the permittee violating any of the provisions of the wastewater contribution permit or any conditions in this article or causing damage to or otherwise inhibiting the city's treatment works shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The city shall bill the permittee for the costs incurred by the city for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. 
(Ord. of 5-11-2006, § 12.2) 
Secs. 34-469-34-489. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WATER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Public water supplies, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-167 et seq.; authority of city to acquire, establish, maintain and operate waterworks, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2143, 15.2-2146; municipal water supply systems generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2143; authority to acquire land, construct dams, etc., for water supply, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2134 et seq.; local water saving ordinances authorized, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-923; water supply emergency ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-924. 

Sec. 34-490. - Record of materials; map of system. 
    The public works director shall keep a record of the description and location of all water system improvements. This data shall, from time to time, be entered upon a map of the city or graphic information system to be furnished by the city council, copies of which shall be preserved in the offices of the public works director. 
(Code 1967, § 31-21; Code 1981, § 29-1) 
Sec. 34-491. - Right of entry. 
    Every person occupying any lot or tenement into which water is conveyed under this article shall permit any authorized agent of the city to enter such lot or tenement, at reasonable hours, to inspect the city-owned water system components therein or to see if the provisions of the law have been violated. 
(Code 1967, § 31-17; Code 1981, § 29-2) 
Sec. 34-492. - Tenant's application for service. 
    The tenant occupying any premises or lot in the city, previously connected to the city water system, but who has had the meter removed, may apply for water on a form prescribed by the city manager. Such application shall set forth the name of the applicant, the location and description of the property into which the water is to be introduced, the purpose for which the water is to be used, and the agreement of the applicant to pay promptly upon presentation of bill for water consumed, at the rates prescribed in accordance with this article, all costs which may accrue on account of water service, and shall pay in advance an amount fixed by the city council from time to time for cut-on service or for transfer of service. 
(Code 1967, § 31-3; Code 1981, § 29-3) 
Sec. 34-493. - Property owner's application for service. 
    Whenever any person owning property in the city along the line of any water main shall desire the introduction of water into his premises, he shall make written application therefor to the director of public works on forms prescribed by him. Such application shall set forth the name of the applicant, the location, the description of the property into which the water is to be introduced, the purpose for which the water is to be used and the agreement of the property owner to pay promptly upon presentation of bill for water consumed, at rates prescribed in accordance with this article, all costs which may accrue on account of water service. He shall pay in advance an amount fixed by the city council from time to time. In addition, the applicant shall pay any additional costs for labor, equipment and material in excess of such amount. 
(Code 1967, § 31-2; Code 1981, § 29-4; Ord. of 6-28-1979) 
Sec. 34-494. - Application for water connection outside city. 
    When any person along the line of any water main owning or renting property outside of the city shall desire to have city water introduced into his premises, he shall make written application to the city council on forms prescribed for that purpose. Before the permit is granted, the applicant shall in writing agree to the following conditions, which may be incorporated in the application: 
(1)  He will pay all water bills against such property. 
(2)  The rates for water used outside the city shall be 100 percent over the rates charged for the use of water for the same purpose within the city. 
(3)  The petitioner will observe and perform all the rules, regulations and ordinances now in force or that may be hereafter passed or enacted by the city council in reference to the use of city water. 
(4)  The city reserves the right to discontinue the service of water at any time from any and all persons using same outside the corporate limits and without notice to such users. 
(5)  Upon the approval of the application, the procedure for the introduction of water shall be the same as provided for inside the city. 
(Code 1967, § 31-5; Code 1981, § 29-5) 
Sec. 34-495. - Classification of premises. 
(a)  For the purpose of supplying city water, all premises shall be placed in one or more of the following classes: 
(1)  A building under one roof and occupied as one residence, business or industry. 
(2)  A combination of buildings in one common enclosure and occupied by a family, business or industry. 
(3)  Every division of a double or tenement house having a partition wall and using a separate hall or entrance. 
(4)  A building of one or more apartments using in common one hall or entrance. Every apartment may be metered separately if desired and if approved by the city manager. 
(5)  A building of one or more apartments or offices or both, using a common hall or entrance. Each apartment or suite of offices may be metered separately if desired and if approved by the city manager. 
(6)  A vacant lot or tract of land. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of premises within each such class shall constitute a water consumer for which a minimum charge will be made. One connection and one meter will be allowed for one consumer as described above and only one water consumer shall be supplied through one connection or meter. 
(Code 1967, § 31-1; Code 1981, § 29-6) 
Sec. 34-496. - Privately laid pipelines. 
    Before the city furnishes water through pipelines laid by property owners, such private lines, including the size, location and construction, must have been inspected and approved by the city manager or his authorized representative. Whenever the city furnishes water through any privately laid pipelines, the city shall maintain such lines so long as it furnishes water through them. In consideration of such maintenance the city shall have the right to connect with and furnish water to such additional consumers through such lines as the city may determine, without any charge being made by the owners of such lines to the city or to the owners of any property connected therewith. 
(Code 1967, § 31-24; Code 1981, § 29-7) 
Sec. 34-497. - Service installation. 
(a)  Upon the receipt of an application for introduction of water into premises pursuant to section 34-493, the city manager shall cause to be constructed, by the water department at the expense of the city, a water service pipe, including valve, leading from the water main to the curb nearest such main where the tap is to be introduced, and install a water meter thereon. 
(b)  Upon the receipt of an application for introduction of water into premises pursuant to section 34-492, the city manager shall cause the water meter to be reinstalled and the water cut on. 
(Code 1967, § 31-4; Code 1981, § 29-8) 
Sec. 34-498. - Size of connections. 
    In tapping water mains for service pipes to private residences, no pipe of greater diameter than three-fourths inch shall be used unless the owner of the property to be served has agreed in writing to pay the difference between the entire cost of the connection including the meter and the cost of a three-fourths-inch service pipe and a standard five-eighths-inch meter. 
(Code 1967, § 31-16; Code 1981, § 29-9) 
Sec. 34-499. - Steam boilers. 
    Steam boilers taking a supply of water directly from the service pipe, depending upon the hydraulic and hydrostatic pressure in the pipe system of the waterworks, for supplying such boilers under working pressure of boiler feed pumps which are connected directly with the service pipe, without any intervening vessel into which to receive the water and from which to pump it into the boilers, will do so at the risk of parties making such attachment, as the city will not be responsible for damages for any accident to which such devices are frequently subject. 
(Code 1967, § 31-19; Code 1981, § 29-10) 
Sec. 34-500. - Unlawful service connections or use of water. 
    If any person shall introduce, from the city waterworks, water upon any premises, except as provided in this Code or other ordinance of the city, or if any person, other than the public works director or his agents, shall introduce into any lot or tenement water from the city pipes, or introduce any ferrule or other fixture into such pipes, or construct or lay down, or have constructed or laid down, any pipes or other works for the purpose of introducing water into a lot or tenement, or break up any street, alley, lane or road for the purpose of constructing or laying down any such pipes or works, every person so offending shall be punished as provided in section 1-14 and every 24 hours during which such work or fixture shall continue shall be a distinct offense. If any person not acting under the authority of the public works director shall turn the water on at any premises whatsoever, or if any person shall take, receive or use the city water other than as provided in this article, he shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1967, § 31-18; Code 1981, § 29-11) 
Sec. 34-501. - Shortages. 
    The city reserves the right first to discontinue the service of water at any time to manufactories or other commercial users and then to curtail or discontinue service to nonresident individual consumers before curtailing or discontinuing service to resident consumers in the event of a shortage of water or any emergency necessitating the curtailment of the local supply. 
(Code 1967, § 31-8; Code 1981, § 29-12) 
Sec. 34-502. - Discontinuance of service by consumer. 
(a)  An owner or tenant of property supplied with water may discontinue the use thereof by giving the city auditor notice, in writing, for one week prior to such discontinuance, of his desire to have water service discontinued, and the meter removed. In such case the meter will be removed and a final bill rendered. A minimum charge fixed by the city council from time to time will be made, however, as long as the meter remains connected, whether any water is consumed at the premises or not. 
(b)  In the event of discontinuance for a period of more than three years, the city manager may declare that the connection with the water main has been abandoned and may order the connection with the water main severed. The city manager shall consider all relevant facts in each situation, such as any structures on the property, the likelihood of new construction planned, etc. In the event of declared abandonment, any future connection to the main for the lot or lots involved shall be treated as a new connection and the fees and procedures for connection shall be enforced. 
(Code 1967, § 31-7; Code 1981, § 29-13; Ord. of 7-23-1981) 
Sec. 34-503. - Obstructing meters. 
    No person shall in any manner obstruct the free access to any water meter. 
(Code 1967, § 31-23; Code 1981, § 29-14) 
Sec. 34-504. - Tampering with fixtures, etc. 
    If any person shall deface or injure any house, wall, cock, wheel, fire hydrant or other fixture connected with or pertaining to the waterworks, or remove or injure any pipe, fire hydrant or cock, or open any of them so as to waste water, or place any building material, rubbish or other matter upon the stopcock of a street main or service pipe, or except as provided in the following section, obstruct access to any fixture connected with the waterworks, he shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1967, § 31-22; Code 1981, § 29-15) 
Sec. 34-505. - Responsibility as to certain accidents. 
    For damages caused by accidents resulting from the imperfect action of any check or vacuum valves on any hot water storage tank or house boiler, or from insecure boilers, or from variations in the water pressure which may cause firebacks of cooking ranges and stoves to be alternately filled with water and steam partly superheated, the city will in no case be responsible. 
(Code 1967, § 31-20; Code 1981, § 29-16) 
Secs. 34-506-34-533. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CHARGES FOR WATER, ETC. 

Sec. 34-534. - Deposit; connection fee. 
(a)  Any new subscriber to water and sewer service within the corporate limits of the city shall be required to deposit with the city an amount fixed by the city council from time to time as security for payment for water and sewage services. Upon termination of the service, and payment of water and sewage fees in full, the deposit shall be refunded. 
(b)  Further, the city council shall establish from time to time water connection fees for resident and nonresident applicants. 
(Code 1967, § 31-6; Code 1981, § 29-31; Ord. No. 76-20, 1-8-1976; Ord. of 6-28-1979) 
Sec. 34-535. - Rates. 
    The rate to be charged for metered water is on file in the city manager's office. 
(Code 1967, § 31-9; Code 1981, § 29-32; Ord. of 4-13-1995; Ord. of 6-13-1996; Ord. of 5-13-1999; Ord. of 5-27-2008; Ord. No. 10-1, § 5-20-2010) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to charge and collect compensation for water furnished, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2143, 15.2-2604. 
Sec. 34-536. - Service fee. 
    Upon application of a business or industrial customer requesting relief from the 40 percent water fee or charge, the city manager shall then determine whether the applicant does not return all of the water purchased by the applicant to the sanitary sewage system. If such is the case, then the 40 percent fee or charge heretofore levied shall only be applicable to water purchased for domestic purposes with the amount of gallonage used for such purposes to be determined as follows: 
(1)  An average annual employment rate shall be determined for each business and industry. 
(2)  Each employee shall be presumed to consume, by way of domestic usage, 1,000 gallons per month. 
(3)  The number of average annual employees shall be multiplied by 1,000 and the result shall be the number of gallons presumed to be purchased each month for domestic purposes and it is to this gallonage that the 40 percent charge and fee will be levied, and to this gallonage only. 
(4)  Only upon a demonstrated significant change in the number of personnel employed shall there be an adjustment in the average annual employee rate. 
(Code 1967, § 31-9.2; Code 1981, § 29-33) 
Sec. 34-537. - Meter out of order. 
    If any water meter fails to register or is temporarily out of order or inoperable for any reason, the charge for water for each period of one month shall be the average reading for the preceding three months. 
(Code 1967, § 31-10; Code 1981, § 29-34) 
Sec. 34-538. - Bills computation, etc. 
    The city shall be charged with the duty of computing the bills of all users of city water in accordance with the rates prescribed by this article and with the keeping of the necessary records which shall be made out in such manner as shall be prescribed by the city council. The water bills shall be payable in the offices of the city within 30 days from the date of the delivery of the bill. The city shall be charged with such other duties in connection with the use and billing of water as may be directed by the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 31-11; Code 1981, § 29-35) 
Sec. 34-539. - Bill adjustment. 
    In the event of a water line break or leak that results in an increase in consumption of at least 150 percent of the average monthly bill, the city manager may consider an application from a customer for an adjustment, provided the application includes receipts, paid bills or other evidence that the repairs have been completed. Upon adjustment, the resulting charge to the customer shall be the average consumption monthly bill. Average consumption shall be based on: 
(1)  A monthly billing over the previous 12 months immediately prior to the billing period in question; 
(2)  Six consecutive monthly billing periods, excluding the subject bill in the absence of a one-year prior experience; or 
(3)  The monthly average for the period of occupancy if less than six months. 
(Code 1967, § 31-5; Code 1981, § 29-36; Ord. of 2-10-2005) 
Sec. 34-540. - Delinquencies. 
    If a bill for water shall remain unpaid for 30 days after the date of delivery of the bill, or the final date on which it becomes payable, the city shall notify the customer of his delinquent bill, after which the city shall proceed immediately to collect such water bill in the same manner that other claims and obligations are or may be collected. If any such water bill remains unpaid for 40 days after the same is delivered, then it shall be the duty of the city, immediately after expiration of such period of 40 days, to notify the director of public works of such nonpayment, and thereupon the director of public works shall at once cause the water to be cut off from the customer or applicant in respect to when the default exists, and the director of public works shall not allow the water to be turned on again at any place for such defaulting customer or applicant until the water bill is paid. 
(Code 1967, § 31-12; Code 1981, § 29-37) 
Sec. 34-541. - Charge for reconnection of service discontinued for unpaid bill. 
    When water is cut off for the nonpayment of a water bill, as provided in section 34-540, there shall be a charge fixed by the city council from time to time payable in advance before a supply is turned on again. 
(Code 1967, § 31-13; Code 1981, § 29-38) 
Sec. 34-542. - Unauthorized reconnection of service. 
    No person other than the public works director or his agents shall turn the water into or upon the premises from which it has been cut off for nonpayment of the water bill. Each day the water so unlawfully turned on the premises remains on the same, the fact of its so remaining shall be regarded as a distinct offense under this section, the same as if there were a fresh turning on each day. 
(Code 1967, § 31-14; Code 1981, § 29-39) 
Sec. 34-543. - Water rate ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance relating to water charges and fees, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 29-40) 
Sec. 34-544. - Conditions for providing water only accounts. 
    Utility customers may make application for water only accounts without sewer service, if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The water from such service will not be returned to the city's wastewater collection system, and that any other discharge not be unlawful; 
(2)  The customer pays all normal service connection fees; 
(3)  The customer provides the water service line from the city water meter; 
(4)  No cross connections shall be made between the water only service and other utility service lines; 
(5)  Water only accounts shall be subject to the same regulations and billing rates as normal utility service customers. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2002) 
Secs. 34-545-34-566. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXTENSIONS 

Sec. 34-567. - General provisions. 
    On any request for a water connection with the water system of the city where a line is not available without an extension of the existing city line, the city shall extend the line a distance of 50 feet to make the connection. Where it is necessary to extend the line for the connection more than 50 feet, the applicant shall pay for all labor, materials and rights-of-way (all being actual costs incurred by the city) after the first 50 feet. 
(Code 1967, § 31-25; Code 1981, § 29-56; Ord. of 12-13-2001(04); Ord. of 12-13-2001(05)) 
Sec. 34-568. - Charges for connection to existing extension. 
(a)  Should an application for a water connection with the city's water system be made in an instance where the connection will be made to a line which has been previously extended pursuant to section 34-567 within ten years of the application, pursuant to which there was an amount in addition to the usual connection charge paid by the former applicant for the extension to be connected to, then, in addition to the usual connection charge, the present applicant shall pay to the city the current cost of specified pipe for each existing foot of pipe immediately to the front or rear of the present applicant's property to which the connection is to be made, which amount shall be refunded by the city to the original applicant who paid for the extension connected to. 
(b)  Should the existing pipe be located so as to be at the front or rear of two applicants for connection, then the additional charge for connection shall be reduced by one-half. 
(Code 1967, § 31-27; Code 1981, § 29-57) 
Sec. 34-569. - Bond. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 34-567, the city shall not be required to extend any water line along a street which is not a part of the street system maintained by the city until satisfactory bond has been furnished, conditioned upon the satisfactory improvement of the street in accordance with specifications satisfactory to the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 31-26; Code 1981, § 29-58) 
Chapter 36 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-1-36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate use of streets for transportation, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2015; municipal control of the operation of taxicabs through permits, etc., Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310; state tags for taxicabs, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-712. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 36-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certificate means the certificate of public convenience and necessity granted by the city council to persons in the business of operating taxicabs, as provided in this chapter. 
    Driver means any person driving a taxicab. 
    Owner means any person having control of the operation or maintenance of a taxicab or of the collection of revenue derived from its operation. 
    Taxicab means any motor vehicle used for the transportation for hire or reward of passengers and baggage upon the streets of the city, other than buses being operated under franchise and over fixed routes between fixed termini. 
    Taxicab driver's permit means a taxicab driver's permit granted to a driver, as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 29-1; Code 1981, § 27-1) 
Sec. 36-20. - Compliance with chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit or cause to be operated any taxicab within the city except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1967, § 29-13; Code 1981, § 27-2) 
Sec. 36-21. - Penalty. 
    Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle used as a vehicle for the transportation of persons for a consideration on any highway, street, road, lane or alley in the city who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100.00 for the first offense and not more than $500.00 for each subsequent offense. 
(Code 1981, § 27-3) 
Sec. 36-22. - Insurance; bond. 
    No taxicab shall operate on the streets of the city under this chapter and no certificate shall be delivered therefore under this chapter unless the owner thereof shall deposit with the city manager for each vehicle a public liability and property damage insurance policy issued by a company authorized to do business in the commonwealth. Such policy shall provide for minimum limits of: 
(1)  $125,000.00 for injury to one person; 
(2)  $300,000.00 for one accident; and 
(3)  $250,000.00 for property damage. 
(Code 1967, § 29-4; Code 1981, § 27-4; Ord. of 12-17-2009) 
Sec. 36-23. - Owners to have listed telephones. 
    The owner of any taxicab operated pursuant to this chapter shall provide and maintain at all times a listed telephone by which calls for service can be made. 
(Code 1967, § 29-6; Code 1981, § 27-5) 
Sec. 36-24. - Name of owner displayed. 
    Every taxicab for which a certificate is issued pursuant to this chapter shall have the name of the owner thereof or firm name painted on the outside of the vehicle on both sides thereof in letters not less than two inches high. Signs attached to the vehicle and bearing the requisite information, whether removable or not, shall not be deemed to be in compliance with this section. 
(Code 1967, § 29-3; Code 1981, § 27-6) 
Sec. 36-25. - Condition of vehicles. 
    Taxicabs operated pursuant to this chapter shall at all times be kept clean and sanitary and in a safe physical condition to the satisfaction of state law. 
(Code 1967, § 29-2; Code 1981, § 27-7) 
State Law reference- Inspection of vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1158. 
Sec. 36-26. - Rate amounts. 
(a)  The rates charged for the use of taxicabs or for the transportation of passengers and baggage in taxicabs shall be as provided by the city council. The rate for the transportation of passengers and baggage is on file in the city offices. 
(b)  The rates for the transportation of retail goods including clothing and food, and excluding alcoholic beverages is established and per delivery are on file in the city offices. 
(c)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance relating to taxicab rates, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Code 1967, § 29-10; Code 1981, § 27-8; Ord. of 4-8-1999; Ord. of 11-4-1999) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate taxicab rates, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2062. 
Sec. 36-27. - Posting of rates; compliance. 
    The rates for the use of taxicabs or for the transportation of passengers and baggage in taxicabs shall be posted in each taxicab in full view of passengers. It shall be unlawful for any person to charge any rates other than those posted. 
(Code 1967, § 29-11; Code 1981, § 27-9) 
Sec. 36-28. - Number of passengers. 
    No driver of any taxicab operated pursuant to this chapter shall carry in such taxicab at any one time more passengers than the number which the vehicle was built to carry normally. 
(Code 1967, § 29-9; Code 1981, § 27-10) 
Sec. 36-29. - Nonpaying passengers. 
    No nonpaying passenger shall be transported in a taxicab operated pursuant to this chapter with a paying passenger, except bona fide officers or employees of the owner or a police officer engaged in the performance of his duty unable to obtain other adequate means of transportation. 
(Code 1967, § 29-8; Code 1981, § 27-11) 
Sec. 36-30. - Completion of calls. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of a taxicab operated pursuant to this chapter to fail or refuse to complete an accepted call in the absence of a satisfactory reason. 
(Code 1967, § 29-12; Code 1981, § 27-12) 
Sec. 36-31. - Report of accidents. 
    Every accident in which any taxicab operated pursuant to this chapter is involved shall be immediately reported to the chief of police. 
(Code 1967, § 29-5; Code 1981, § 27-13) 
Secs. 36-32-36-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATES OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate the number of taxicabs, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2067. 

Sec. 36-51. - Required. 
    No person shall use any vehicle under his control as a taxicab, or allow any vehicle under his control to be used as a taxicab, upon the streets of the city, unless he shall have obtained a certificate in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1967, § 29-14; Code 1981, § 27-26) 
Sec. 36-52. - Application contents. 
    An application for a certificate shall be made by the owner or proposed owner, in duplicate, and shall set out the following information: 
(1)  Full name and home and business address of applicant. 
(2)  Financial status and responsibility of applicant. 
(3)  Name and address of person lending money or furnishing capital to applicant. 
(4)  Motor number, kind, seating capacity, design and color scheme of each taxicab. 
(5)  Convictions or pleas of guilty, if any, for violation of any law on the part of the applicant. 
(6)  Experience of applicant in transportation of passengers for hire. 
(7)  Reasons why applicant believes public convenience and necessity requires the granting of the certificate applied for. 
(Code 1967, § 29-15; Code 1981, § 27-27) 
Sec. 36-53. - Filing of application; investigation. 
    An application for a certificate shall be filed by the owner or proposed owner with the city manager prior to applying for a business license for operation of a taxicab business. The city manager shall promptly investigate the matters stated in the application and report in writing to the city council prior to the next meeting of the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 29-16; Code 1981, § 27-28) 
Sec. 36-54. - Action by council. 
    The city council shall consider and act on the application for a certificate within 30 days after receipt of such application. 
(Code 1967, § 29-18; Code 1981, § 27-29) 
Sec. 36-55. - Grant or refusal. 
    The city council, upon report to it relative to an application for a certificate, shall determine whether the public convenience and necessity require the operation of the taxicab for which the application is filed. The city council may grant or refuse the certificate applied for or grant a certificate for a lesser number of vehicles than that specified in the application. Upon determination by the city council to grant a certificate, the approved application shall be filed with the city manager. 
(Code 1967, § 29-17; Code 1981, § 27-30) 
Sec. 36-56. - Notice to applicant. 
    The city manager shall immediately notify in writing the applicant for a certificate of the action of the city council upon the application filed by such applicant. 
(Code 1967, § 29-19; Code 1981, § 27-31) 
Sec. 36-57. - Report to commissioner of revenue. 
    The city manager shall report in to the commissioner of the revenue all certificates granted by the city council, together with the number of vehicles allotted. 
(Code 1967, § 29-20; Code 1981, § 27-32) 
Sec. 36-58. - Issuance. 
    When an approved application for a certificate is filed with the city manager by the city council pursuant to section 36-55, the city manager, upon the filing with him by the applicant of a receipt indicating the payment of the requisite business license tax and the filing of the insurance policy or bond required by section 36-22, shall issue to the applicant a certificate in accordance with the terms of the application as approved. 
(Code 1967, § 29-21; Code 1981, § 27-33) 
Sec. 36-59. - Contents. 
    The certificates referred to in this division shall give the name of the owner, the motor number of the vehicle and the kind and description of every vehicle covered thereby, together with the date of issuance and the date of expiration. 
(Code 1967, § 29-22; Code 1981, § 27-34) 
Sec. 36-60. - Transfer between persons. 
    The certificates shall not be transferable from one person to another. 
(Code 1967, § 29-24; Code 1981, § 27-35) 
Sec. 36-61. - Substitution of vehicles. 
    No vehicle shall be substituted for any vehicle described in a certificate until the vehicle to be substituted has been investigated and approved by the chief of police and the fact of such substitution is endorsed on the certificate by him. 
(Code 1967, § 29-26; Code 1981, § 27-36) 
Sec. 36-62. - Revocation; suspension. 
    The city council may, for cause, cancel, revoke or suspend any certificate after notice to the holder of the certificate. 
(Code 1967, § 29-25; Code 1981, § 27-37) 
Sec. 36-63. - Term. 
    The certificates referred to in this division shall expire on December 31, annually, unless revoked or suspended as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 29-23; Code 1981, § 27-38) 
Secs. 36-64-36-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S PERMIT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal licensing of operators of taxicabs, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310. 

Sec. 36-85. - Required. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab within the city unless he shall have obtained a taxicab driver's permit for that purpose, as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 29-27; Code 1981, § 27-51) 
Sec. 36-86. - Employment of driver without permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any taxicab to permit such taxicab to be driven by any person who does not have a valid and effective taxicab driver's permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1967, § 29-39; Code 1981, § 27-52) 
Sec. 36-87. - Application contents. 
    Any person desiring a taxicab driver's permit, as required in section 27-51, shall file an application therefor with the chief of police. Such application shall be made in writing under oath and shall show the following: 
(1)  Full name of applicant. 
(2)  Present address. 
(3)  Age. 
(4)  Place of birth. 
(5)  Places of previous address and employment for the past five years. 
(6)  Height. 
(7)  Weight. 
(8)  Color of eyes. 
(9)  Color of hair. 
(10)  Sex. 
(11)  Whether married, single or divorced and, if married, whether living with spouse or contributing to his support or the support of his children, if any, or both. 
(12)  Whether or not applicant is in good physical condition. 
(13)  Whether or not applicant has good hearing and good eyesight. 
(14)  Whether or not applicant uses, or has used within the past five years, intoxicating liquors, drugs or any other form of narcotic and, if so, to what extent. 
(15)  Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of, pleaded guilty to or entered the plea of nolo contendere to the violation of any city, state, federal or other criminal law and, if so, the number of times and the kind of offenses and such other information as may be required by the chief of police. 
(16)  What experience, if any, applicant has had in the operation of cars. 
(17)  Whether or not applicant has previously been employed or licensed as a driver or chauffeur and, if so, whether or not his license has ever been revoked or suspended for any reason. 
(Code 1967, § 29-28; Code 1981, § 27-53) 
Sec. 36-88. - Medical examination. 
    The chief of police may require of an applicant for a taxicab driver's permit that he take a medical examination and submit the finding to the chief of police. 
(Code 1967, § 29-30; Code 1981, § 27-54) 
Sec. 36-89. - Fingerprinting; photographs. 
    Each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit shall be fingerprinted and shall submit two photographs, two inches in size, of himself to the chief of police. One of the photographs of the applicant shall be retained in the files of the police department and the other photograph of the applicant shall be attached to the taxicab driver's permit which may be issued to such applicant. 
(Code 1967, § 29-29; Code 1981, § 27-55) 
Sec. 36-90. - Issuance; fee. 
    A taxicab driver's permit shall be issued to the applicant therefor unless such applicant shall be disqualified because of physical condition, including defective hearing or defective eyesight, addiction to intoxicating liquors, narcotics or drugs or has been convicted of violating any law or ordinance involving moral turpitude, or shall not be of good moral character. A taxicab driver's permit, upon issuance, shall be signed by the chief of police, and a fee fixed by the city council shall be paid by the applicant upon issuance. 
(Code 1967, § 29-31; Code 1981, § 27-56) 
Sec. 36-91. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from findings of the chief of police under section 36-90 shall be to the city council. 
(Code 1967, § 29-33; Code 1981, § 27-57) 
Sec. 36-92. - Signing by permittee. 
    Each person to whom a taxicab driver's permit is issued under this division shall write his usual signature with pen and ink in the space provided for that purpose on the permit issued to him immediately upon receipt of such permit, and such permit shall not be valid until so signed. 
(Code 1967, § 29-32; Code 1981, § 27-58) 
Sec. 36-93. - Posting in vehicle. 
    The driver of a taxicab shall at all times have the taxicab driver's permit, with his picture pasted thereon, as issued under this division, posted in the vehicle being driven by him, in such manner that it will be in full view of passengers. 
(Code 1967, § 29-35; Code 1981, § 27-59) 
Sec. 36-94. - Kept in good condition. 
    Taxicab driver's permits issued and posted under the provisions of this division and the photograph attached thereto shall be kept in good condition. The chief of police shall require the holder of a taxicab driver's permit to replace such permit and the photograph attached thereto when, in his opinion, the taxicab driver's permit has become dirty, disfigured or mutilated so that it cannot be read or the holder of the permit cannot be identified by his photograph. 
(Code 1967, § 29-36; Code 1981, § 27-60) 
Sec. 36-95. - Power of court to revoke or suspend. 
(a)  The court having jurisdiction may revoke or suspend a taxicab driver's permit issued under this division for repeated violations by the holder thereof of the traffic laws, failure to report an accident, operation of a vehicle not in good order, conviction of reckless driving, charging illegal rates, violation of laws and ordinances and failure or refusal to complete accepted calls in the absence of satisfactory reasons. 
(b)  In addition to the powers set out in subsection (a) of this section, the court having jurisdiction may revoke or suspend such taxicab driver's permit upon the presentation to the court of evidence that the driver is not a fit person to be entrusted with the responsibility of operating a taxicab. 
(Code 1967, § 29-38; Code 1981, § 27-61) 
Sec. 36-96. - Invalidation for conviction of crime. 
    Upon conviction of the holder of a taxicab driver's permit of the violation of any criminal law involving moral turpitude, the permit of the person so convicted shall become void and the holder of such permit shall forthwith surrender it to the chief of police. 
(Code 1967, § 29-37; Code 1981, § 27-62) 
Sec. 36-97. - Term. 
    Taxicab drivers' permits issued under this division shall remain in effect, unless revoked, suspended or invalidated as provided in this division. 
(Code 1967, § 29-34; Code 1981, § 27-63) 
PART III - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the land development regulations of the city adopted in 1985 and effective July 26, 1985, and as amended through September 6, 2009. Ordinances amending the land development regulations as compiled through September 6, 2009 have been included and are indicated by history notes appearing in parentheses at the end of the amended section. The absence of a history note indicates that the section is derived unamended from the land development regulations as amended through September 6, 2009. Capitalization has been conformed to that of the Code of Ordinances. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Any words appearing in brackets were added by the editor for clarity. 
Charter reference- Power of city council to adopt, administer and enforce zoning ordinance, § 7.102; appointment of members of board of zoning appeals, § 3.604. 
State Law reference- Planning, subdivision of land and zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2200 et seq. 

Article 1. - AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT 

Sec. 101.00. - Authority to establish zoning. 
    Whereas, by act of the General Assembly of Virginia as recorded in chapter 22, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, the governing body of any county or municipality may, by ordinance, classify the territory under its jurisdiction into districts of such number, shape and size as it may deem best suited to carry out the purpose of zoning, and in each district it may regulate the following: 
101.01  The use of land, buildings, structures, and other premises for agricultural, business, industrial, residential, floodplain and other specific uses. 
101.02  The size, height, area, bulk, location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, razing, or removal of structures. 
101.03  The areas and dimensions of land, water, and air space to be occupied by buildings, structures, and uses, and of courts, yards, and other open spaces to be left unoccupied by uses and structures, including variations in the sizes of lots based on whether a public or community water supply or sewer system is available and in use. 
101.04  The excavation or mining of soil or other natural resources. 
Sec. 102.00. - Authority to establish subdivision regulations. 
    Whereas, by act of the General Assembly of Virginia as recorded in the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, that all of chapter 22 requires the city council of the City of Buena Vista, Virginia adopt regulations to assure the orderly subdivision of land and county its development, to provide for the harmonious and economic development of the city, for the coordination of streets within subdivisions with other existing or planned streets, for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air, and for the distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, and prosperity including reasonable regulations and provisions that apply to or provide: 
102.01  For size, scale, and other plat details. 
102.02  For the coordination of streets within and contiguous to the subdivision with other existing or planned streets within the general area as to location, widths, grades, and drainage. 
102.03  For adequate provisions for drainage flood control and other public purposes, and for light and air. 
102.04  For the extent to which and the manner in which streets shall be graded, graveled, or otherwise improved and water and storm and sanitary sewer and other public utilities or other community facilities are to be installed. 
102.05  For the acceptance of dedication for public use of any right-of-way located within any subdivision which has been constructed or proposed to be constructed within the subdivision, any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, bicycle trail, drainage or sewerage system, waterline as a part of a public system, or other improvement, financed or to be financed in whole or part by private funds only if the owner or developer: 
(1)  Certifies to the governing body that the construction costs have been paid to the person constructing such facilities; or 
(2)  Furnishes to the governing body a certified check or cash escrow in the amount of the estimated costs of construction or personal, corporate, or property bond, with surety satisfactory to the governing body, in an amount sufficient for, and conditioned upon, the construction of such facilities, or a contract for the construction of such facilities and the contractor's bond, with like surety, in like amount and so conditioned or furnishes to the governing body a bank or savings and loan association's letter of credit on certain designated funds satisfactory to the governing body as to the bank or savings and loan association, the amount and the form; 
102.06  For monuments of specific types to be installed establishing street and property lines. 
102.07  That unless a plat be filed for recordation within six months after final approval thereof or such longer period as may be approved by the governing body such approval shall be withdrawn and the plat marked void and returned to the approving official. 
102.08  For the administration and enforcement of such ordinance, not inconsistent with provisions contained in this chapter, and specifically for the imposition of reasonable fees and charges for the review of plats and plans, for the inspection of facilities required by any such ordinance to be installed; such fees and charges shall in no instance exceed an amount commensurate with the services rendered taking into consideration the time, skill and administrator's expense involved. All such charges heretofore made are hereby validated. 
102.09  For payment by a subdivider or developer of land of his pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary sewerage and drainage facilities, located the property limits of the land owned or controlled by him but necessitated or required, at least in part, by the construction or improvement of his subdivision or development; provided, however, that no such payment shall be required until such time as the governing body or a designated department or agency thereof shall have established a general sewer and drainage improvement program for an area having related and common sewer and drainage conditions and within which the land owned or controlled by the subdivider or developer is located. Such regulations shall set forth and establish reasonable standards to determine the proportionate share of total estimated cost of ultimate sewerage and drainage facilities required to adequately serve a related and common area, when and if fully developed in accord with the adopted comprehensive plan, that shall be borne by each subdivider or developer within the area. Such share shall be limited to the proportion of such total estimated cost which the increased sewage flow and/or increased volume and velocity of stormwater runoff to be actually caused by his subdivision or development bears to total estimated volume and velocity of such sewage and/or runoff from such area in its fully developed state. Each such payment received shall be expended only for the construction of those facilities for which the payment was required, and until so expended shall be held in an interest-bearing account for the benefit of the subdivider or developer; provided, however, that in lieu of such payment the governing body may provide for the posting of a personal, corporate, or property bond, cash escrow or other method of performance guarantee satisfactory to it conditioned on payment at commencement of such construction. 
102.10  For reasonable provisions permitting a single division of a lot or parcel for the purpose of sale or gift to a member of the immediate family of the property owner, subject only to any express requirement contained in the Code of Virginia. Only one such division shall be allowed per family member, and shall not be for the purpose of circumventing this subsection. For the purpose of this subsection, a member of the immediate family is defined as any person who is a natural or legally defined offspring, spouse, or parent of the owner. 
102.11  For the partial or complete release of any bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee required by the governing body under this section within 30 days after receipt of written notice by the subdivider or developer of completion of part or all of any facilities required to be constructed hereunder unless the governing body notifies said subdivider or developer in writing of any specified defects or deficiencies in construction and suggested corrective measures prior to the expiration of said 30 day period; provided, however, that the governing body shall not be required to release such bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee in an amount to exceed 90 percent of the cost of the construction for which the bond was taken until such facilities have been completed and accepted by the governing body or state agency. For the purposes of this subsection, a certificate of partial or final completion of such facilities from a duly licensed engineer or from a department or agency designated by the local government may be accepted without further inspection of such facilities. 
Sec. 103.00. - Enactment. 
    Therefore, be it ordained by the city council of the City of Buena Vista, Virginia, for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, or general welfare of the public and of further accomplishing the objectives of title 15.2, chapter 22, of the Code of Virginia, as amended that the following be adopted as the Land Development Regulations of Buena Vista, Virginia incorporating the City of Buena Vista Zoning Ordinance, as amended and Subdivision Ordinance City of Buena Vista, Virginia, as amended. 
Article 2. - PURPOSES OF THE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 201.00. - Purposes. 
    The City of Buena Vista planning commission and City Council have undertaken to achieve the delicate balance between the individual property rights of its citizens and the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and accomplish the objectives of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2200 by reasonable restrictions on those property rights. Further, to comply with the provisions of chapter 22, the purposes of these regulations are: 
201.01  To provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood, and other dangers. 
201.02  To reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets. 
201.03  To facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community. 
201.04  To expedite the provision of adequate police and fire protection, disaster evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection, schools, parks, forests, playgrounds, recreational facilities, airports, and other public requirements. 
201.05  To protect against destruction of, or encroachment upon, historic areas. 
201.06  To protect against one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, undue density of population in relation to the community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, or loss of life, health, or property from fire, flood, panic, or other dangers. 
201.07  To encourage economic development activities that provides desirable employment and enlarges the tax base. 
201.08  To establish certain subdivision standards and procedures to assure the orderly subdivision of land and its development for the City of Buena Vista, Virginia. 
201.09  The subdivision standards and procedures are part of a long-range plan to guide and facilitate the orderly and beneficial growth of the community, and to promote the, public safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. More specifically, the purposes of these standards and procedures are to provide a guide for the change that occurs where land and acreage become urban in character as a result of development for residential, business, or industrial purposes, to provide assurance that the purchasers of lots are buying a commodity that is suitable for development and use; to make possible the provision of public services in a safe and efficient manner. 
Sec. 202.00. - Nonexclusionary intent. 
    It is not the intent of these regulations to exclude any economic, racial, religious, or ethnic group from enjoyment of residence, land ownership, or tenancy within the City of Buena Vista; nor is it the intent of this ordinance to use public powers in any way to promote the separation within the City of Buena Vista of economic, racial, religious, or ethnic groups, except as may be an incidental result of meeting the purpose outlined in section 201, herein. 
Article 3. - DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED IN THIS ORDINANCE 

Sec. 301.00. - General. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust, or partnership. The word "lot" includes "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes "structure." The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
Sec. 302.00. - Specific definitions. 
    When used in this ordinance the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section: 
302.01. - A. 
302.01-1  Accessory use or building means a structure subordinate or incidental to the principal structure on a lot in square footage and primary use. Accessory structures and uses include detached garages, storage buildings, pool houses, swimming pools, storage bins and material storage areas. 
302.01-2  Acreage. A parcel of land, regardless of area, described by metes and bounds which is not a numbered lot on any recorded subdivision plat. 
302.01-3  Administrator, the, means the official charged with the enforcement of the zoning ordinance and/or subdivision ordinance. He may be any appointed or elected official who is by formal resolution designated to the position by the governing body. He may serve with or without compensation as determined by the governing body. 
302.01-4  Agriculture means the tilling of the raising of crops, horticulture, and forestry, including the keeping of animals and fowl, and including any agricultural industry or business, such as fruit packing plants, dairies or similar use, not including abattoir. 
302.01-5  Airport means a place, either on land or on water, where aircraft may land to discharge or receive cargo and passengers, make repairs, or take in fuel. 
302.01-6  Airport hazard means any structure, tree, or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in landing or falling off at the airport. 
302.01-7  Alley means a platted service way secondary means full access to abutting properties. 
302.01-8  Alteration means any change in the total floor area, use, adaptability or external appearance of an existing structure. 
302.01-9  Animal hospital or clinic means establishment where treatment is received and no activity is conducted outside the main building. Kennels are not included. 
302.01-10  Apartment means a unit in a multifamily dwelling providing living quarters for a single family, in which separate access to the outside is usually not provided; and in which the major orientation of the unit is horizontal rather than vertical; or any condominium unit of similar physical character, appearance, and structure. 
302.01-11  Automobile graveyard means any lot or place which is exposed to the weather upon which more than five motor vehicles of any king, not displaying current Commonwealth of Virginia inspection certification are placed, located, or found. 
302.01-12  Automobile service station means any area of land, including structures thereon, used for the retail sale of gasoline or oil, automobile accessories, and incidental services including facilities for lubricating, hand washing and cleaning, or otherwise servicing automobiles, but excluding painting, major repair or automobile washing. 
302.02. - B. 
302.02-1  Basement means a story having part but nor more that one-half (1/2) of its height below grade. A basement shall count as a story for the purpose of height regulations, if it is used for business purposes, or for dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises. 
302.02-2  Board means the board of zoning appeals as established under this ordinance. 
302.02-3  Boarding house (rooming house) means a building or part thereof, other than a hotel, motel, or restaurant, where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation for three to ten unrelated persons where no cooking or dining facilities are provided in individual rooms and in which the length of stay usually exceeds one week in duration. A lodging house is also included in this definition. 
302.02-4  Building means any structure designed or intended for support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals or property. 
302.02-5  Building, accessory means a subordinate building located on the same lot as the main building, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the main building or use. No such accessory structure shall be used for housekeeping purposes. 
302.02-6  Building code means the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as adopted by the City of Buena Vista and as amended. 
302.02-7  Building, height of, means the vertical distance measured from the level of the edge of the pavement opposite the middle of the front of the structure to the highest point of the roof if a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between the eaves and the ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. For buildings set back from the road line, the height shall be measured from the average elevation of the ground surface along the front of the building. 
302.02-8  Building inspector means the building official appointed by the city council to administer and enforce the provisions of the building code, or his designated representative or agent. 
302.02-9  Building, main means a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
302.03. - C. 
302.03-1  Cellar means a story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade and which may not be occupied for dwelling purposes. 
302.03-2  Child care center means any facility other than a family day care home, providing care, protection, and guidance to a group of children during only part of the day. 
302.03-3  Clerk means the clerk of the circuit court having jurisdiction in the City of Buena Vista. 
302.03-4  Commission, the, means the City of Buena Vista planning commission. 
302.03-5  Common elements means all portions of a cooperative other than the units. 
302.03-6  Community center means community entertainment, recreation, or meeting place operated by a nonprofit organization. 
302.03-7  Communications equipment means any tower, dish or other equipment used to send or receive electronic transmissions for public or private use. 
302.03-8  Condominium means a dwelling unit in an apartment building or residential development which is individually owned, but in which the common areas are owned, controlled, and maintained through an organization consisting of all individual owners. 
302.03-9  Conversion building means a building that at any time before establishment of the cooperative was occupied wholly or partially by persons other than persons with an ownership interest in the cooperative organization owning or leasing the cooperative. 
302.03-10  Cooperative means real estate owned or leased by a cooperative organization. 
302.03-11  Cooperative interest means a leasehold interest under a proprietary lease coupled with ownership of an interest in the cooperative organization. 
302.03-12  Cooperative organization means any corporation or entity which owns or leases real estate and disposes of cooperative interests in such real estate. 
302.03-13  Cooperative unit means a physical portion of the cooperative designed for separate tenancy. 
302.03-14  Cul-de-sac means a circular turning area at the end of a dean end street. 
302.03-15  Curb grade means the elevation of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front, where no curb grade has been established, the zoning administrator shall establish such curb grade. 
302.04. - D. 
302.04-1  Dairy means a commercial establishment for the manufacture and sale of dairy products. 
302.04-2  Developer means an owner of property being subdivided, whether or not represented by an agent. 
302.04-3  Development means a tract of land developed or to be developed as a unit under a single ownership or unified control which is to contain three or more residential dwelling units. The term "development" shall not be construed to include any property which will be principally devoted to agricultural production. 
302.04-4  Driveway means any private way provided for the principal purpose of providing vehicular access to an off-street parking area or service in the case of drive-in type uses. 
302.04-5  Dwelling means any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential purposes, except hotels, boarding houses, lodging houses, tourist cabins, and automobile trailers. 
302.04-6  Dwelling, multifamily, means a building designed for, or occupied exclusively by, three or more families living independently of each other; the term includes condominiums of similar physical appearance, character, and structure. 
302.04-7  Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed for, or occupied exclusively by, one family. 
302.04-8  Dwelling, two-family (duplex), means a building designed for, or occupied exclusively by, two families living independently of each other. 
302.04-9  Dwelling unit. One or more rooms in a dwelling designed for living or sleeping purposes, and having at least one kitchen. 
302.05. - E. 
302.05-1  Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of land f or a specific purpose or purposes by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons. 
302.05-2  Engineer, civil, licensed or professional, means an engineer registered by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
302.06. - F. 
302.06-1  Family means one or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from persons occupying a boarding house, lodging house, or hotel, as herein defined. Private household workers employed and housed on the premises may be considered as included in the family occupying said premises. 
302.06-2  Family day care home means any private family home providing care, protection, and guidance to not more than ten children during only part of the day. Children related by blood or marriage to the person who maintains the home shall not be counted. 
302.06-3  Family, immediate member of, means any person who is a natural or legally defined offspring, spouse, or parent of the owner. 
302.06-4  Flood means a general temporary inundation of lands not normally covered by water that are used or usable by man. Concurrent mudslides shall be deemed to be included in this definition. 
302.06-5  Flood area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the total number of floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, but not including any attic space providing headroom of less than seven feet, unusable basement or cellar space not used for retailing, uncovered steps or fire escapes, open porches, accessory water or cooling towers, accessory off-street parking spaces, and accessory off-street loading berths. 
302.06-6  Flood hazard area means the maximum area of the floodplain which is likely to be flooded once every 100 years or for which mudslides can be reasonably anticipated. These areas are defined by the department of housing and urban developments flood hazard mapping or rate study mapping as appropriate. 
302.06-7  Floodplain means an area, usually a relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse, which has been in the past, or can be reasonably expected in the future, to be covered temporarily by a flood. 
302.06-8  Floodproofing means a combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding required for new construction in the floodway by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
302.06-9  Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas required to carry and discharge the waters of the 100 year flood. 
302.06-11  Frontage means the minimum width of a lot measured from one side lot line to the other, along a straight line on which no point shall be farther away from the street upon which the lot fronts, or from the front edge of the lot, than the building setback line as defined and required herein. 
302.07. - G. 
302.07-1  Garage, private, means accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than three automobiles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. On a lot occupied by a multiple-unit dwelling, the private garage may be designed and used for the storage of one and one-half (11/2) times as many automobiles as here are dwelling units blood or marriage to the operator of the facility shall not be counted. 
302.07-2  Governing body shall mean the city council of Buena Vista. 
302.08. - H. 
302.08-1  Home occupation means an accessory use carried on by the occupant of a dwelling in connection with which there is no display, no one is employed other than immediate members of the family residing on the premises, and the activities are conducted within the dwelling or accessory building. 
302.08-2  Hospital means an institution rendering medical, surgical, obstetrical, or convalescent care, including any institution licensed as a hospital by the state hospital board. 
302.08-3  Hospital, special care, means a special care hospital shall mean an institution rendering care primarily for mental or feeble-minded patients, epileptics, alcoholics, or drug addicts. 
302.08-4  Hotel means a building in which lodging, or board and lodging, are provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which cooking facilities may be provided or in which lodging facilities are provided primarily for travelers and in which the length of stay is primarily less than one week in duration. The term "hotel" includes the term "motel." 
302.09. - I. 
302.10. - J. 
302.11. - K. 
302.11-1  Kennel means any location where breeding, raising, grooming, caring for or boarding of dogs, cats, or other similar small animals for commercial purposes is carried on. 
302.12. - L. 
302.12-1  Land use plan means the Land Use Plan of the City of Buena Vista, as amended. 
302.12-2  Light industry means including warehousing and light manufacturing uses which produce some noise, traffic congestion or danger, but which are of such limited scale or character that they present no serious hazard to neighboring properties from-fire, smoke, noise, or odors. 
302.12-3  Livestock means any cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, mules or other equines (means a horse, pony, mule donkey or hinny, which is an offspring of a male horse and a female donkey). 
302.12-4  Livestock market means a commercial establishment wherein livestock is collected for sale, sold, or auctioned off. 
302.12-5  Loading space means a space within the plain building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks and other carriers. 
302.12-6  Lot means numbered and measured portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description in a site plan or a recorded plat, or by metes and bounds, intended to be a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, or transfer of ownership, or of development or separate use. The term applies to units of land whether in a subdivision or a development. 
302.12-7  Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. No alley, public way, public land, or area proposed for future street purposes is included within the net area of the lot. 
302.12-8  Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. Of the two sides of a corner lot, the front shall be deemed to be the shorter of the two sides fronting on streets. 
302.12-9  Lot coverage means the ratio of the horizontally projected area of the main and accessory buildings on a lot to the total area of the lot, except where otherwise defined herein. 
302.12-10  Lot, depth of, means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
302.12-11  Lot, double frontage (through), means an interior lot having frontage on two streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
302.12-12  Lot, interior, means any lot other than a corner lot. 
302.12-13  Lot of record means a lot or parcel of land whose existence, location, and dimensions have been recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Buena Vista at the time of the adoption of this ordinance. 
302.12-14  Lot width means the average horizontal distance between side lot lines. 
302.13. - M. 
302.13-1  Main use means the primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
302.13-2  Manufacture and/or manufacturing. The processing and/or of raw materials, or products, or either of them, into articles of substances of different character, or for use for a different purpose. 
302.13-3  Manufactured home, including mobile homes, means a structure subject to federal regulation which is transportable in one or more sections; is eight (8) body feet or more in width and forty (40) body feet or more in length in the traveling mode, or is three hundred twenty (321) or more square feet when erected on site; is built on a permanent chassis; is designed to be used as a single-family dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities; and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. For the purpose of this ordinance, manufactured homes shall be deemed to include mobile homes. 
302.13-4  Mobile home means a manufactured dwelling unit designated for long-term occupancy and constructed originally with wheels for movement (whether or not such wheels have later been removed) and which has plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. A camping vehicle or travel trailer shall not be considered a mobile home. 
302.13-5  Mobile home park means any development in which space is leased providing for three or more mobile homes intended for residential use for a period of time longer than 30 days. 
302.13-6  Mobile home stand means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designed to accommodate one mobile home. 
302.13-7  Mobile home subdivision means any area designated to accommodate three or more mobile homes intended for residential use on lots owned by the mobile home owner. 
302.13-8  Modification means a modification is a relaxation of the terms used in the zoning ordinance where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this ordinance, a modification is authorized from any provision contained in the zoning ordinance with respect to physical requirements on a lot or parcel of land, including but not limited to size, height, location or features of or related to any building, structure, or improvements; establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by modification, nor shall a modification be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning division or district or adjoining zoning divisions or districts. 
302.13-9  Modular building means, but shall not be limited to, single and multifamily houses, apartment units, commercial buildings, and permanent additions thereof, comprised of one or more sections that are intended to become real property, primarily constructed at a location other than the permanent site, built to comply with the Virginia Industrialized Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq., as regulated by the Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development, and shipped with most permanent components in place to the site of final assembly. For purposes of this chapter, a modular building shall not include a mobile office as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2401 or any manufactured building subject to and certified under the provisions of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC 5401 et seq.). 
302.13-10  Motor home or camper means a unit or subunit which is or becomes self-propelled and is designed for human habitation on a short-term basis. 
302.14. - N. 
302.14-1  Nonconforming lot means an otherwise legally platted lot that does not conform to the minimum area or width requirements of this ordinance for the district in which it is located either at the effective date of this ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments to the ordinance. 
302.14-2  Nonconforming use of structures means the otherwise legal use of a building or structure that does not conform to the use regulations of this ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this ordinance or as a result of subsequent amendments to the ordinance. 
302.14-3  Nonconforming structure means a structure existing at the time of enactment or amendment of this ordinance which does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance by reason of height or condition, or by reason of its impingement upon required yard areas. 
302.14-4  Nonconforming use of land means a use of land existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance, or at the time of a zoning amendment, which does not conform to the regulations of the use district in which it is located. 
302.14-5  Nursing home means any facility or any identifiable component of any facility in which the primary function is the provision, on a continuing basis, of nursing services and health-related services for the treatment and inpatient care of two or more nonrelated individuals, including facilities known by varying nomenclature or designation such as convalescent homes, skilled care facilities, intermediate care facilities, extended care facilities and infirmaries. 
302.15. - O. 
302.15-1  Off-street parking area means space provided for vehicular parking outside the dedicated street right-of-way. 
302.15-2  One-hundred year flood means a flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years. 
302.16. - P. 
302.16-1  Parking space. (Repealed 1-8-2009.) 
302.16-2  Parks, playgrounds and outdoor recreation areas means land publicly or privately owned devoted to recreational pursuits, usually an open area reserved for outdoor activities such as play, hiking, exercise or competitive sport not requiring structures for habitation 
302.16-3  Pen means a small enclosure used for the concentrated confinement and housing of animals or poultry; a place for feeding and fattening animals; a coop. Enclosed pasture or range with an area in excess of 100 square feet for each small animal or two hundred (200) square feet for each larger animal shall not be regarded as a pen. Any enclosure containing a hog is a hog pen. (See 302.78.) 
302.16-4  Performance guarantee means a bond with surety and/or cash deposit, escrow, or letter of credit approved by the governing body or its administrator in the amount equal to the full cost of improvements required by these regulations and providing for completion of said improvements within a definite term and to provide an additional ten percent of total estimate for administrative costs. 
302.16-5  Plat means including the terms: map, plan, plot, replat, or replot; a map or plan of a tract or parcel of land which is to be, or which has been subdivided. When used as a verb "plat" is synonymous with "subdivide." 
302.16-6  Prefabricated building means the completely assembled and erected building or structure, including the service equipment, of which the structural parts consist of prefabricated individual units or subassemblies using ordinary or controlled materials; and in which the service equipment 'may be either prefabricated or at-site construction. 
302.16-7  Professional means, when used in connection with "use" and "occupancy," a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in rendering personal, executive, sales, or administrative services or activities, including accountants, architects, professional engineers and land surveyors, doctors, lawyers, insurance offices, real estate offices, religious organizations, stockbrokers, and administrative agencies-considered professional in character. The term does not include repair or, sale of tangible personal property stored or, located within the structure nor any use which would create any loud noises or noxious odors. 
302.16-8  Property means any tract, lot, parcel, or several of the same collected together for the purpose of subdividing. 
302.16-9  Public service or storage buildings means governmental facilities necessary for public health, safety, and welfare. 
302.16-10  Public water and sewage systems means a water or sewage disposal system owned and operated by a municipality or any water or sewage disposal system serving three or more families which is properly licensed. 
302.16-11  Public utilities means public service structures such as power plants or substations; water lines. Treatment plants, or pumping stations, sewage disposal systems and treatment plants; or such similar operations publicly or privately owned furnishing electricity, gas, rail transport, communications or related services to the general public. 
302.17. - Q. 
302.18. - R. 
302.18-1  Ramada means a structure erected over a mobile home for the purpose of providing shade or shelter. 
302.18-2  Required open space means any space required in any front, side, or rear yard. 
302.18-3  Residential use means any place, building, or establishment used in whole or in part as a dwelling. 
302.18-4  Restaurant means any building in which, for compensation, food or beverages are dispensed to person, not residing on the premises for consumption on the premises, including, among other establishments, cafes, delicatessens, or refreshment stands. 
302.18-5  Restaurant, drive-in, means an eating and/or drinking establishment which caters to motor-driven vehicle business where the person being served may consume his food and/or drink while sitting in a motor-driven vehicle, as opposed to a restaurant serving exclusively inside or adjacent to the main building. 
302.18-6  Retail stores and shops means buildings for display and sale of merchandise at retail of for the rendering or personal services (but specifically exclusive of coal, wood, and lumber yards), such as the following, which will serve as illustrations drug store, newsstand, food store, candy shop, milk dispensary, dry goods and notions store, antique store and gift shop, hardware store, household appliance store, furniture store, florist, optician, music and radio store, tailor shop and beauty [shop] and barbershop. 
302.18-7  Right-of-way means access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose or purposes. 
302.18-8  Right-of-way line means the dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street, railroad, or public utility right-of-way. 
302.19. - S. 
302.19-1  Sawmill means a mill or machine for the processing of timber into lumber. 
302.19-2  Self-storage facility, also referred to as a mini-storage facility, means a facility consisting of individual storage spaces available for rent to the general public. 
302.19-3  Setback means the minimum distance by which any building structure must be separated from the front lot line. 
302.19-4  Setback line means a line generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no building or structure may be located above ground. 
302.19-5  Signs. 

3D SIGN 
302.19-5.1  3D sign means spherical, freeform, sculptural or other nonplanar sign area. The area of the sign is determined by using four vertical sides of the smallest four-sided polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure 

ARM SIGN 
302.19-5.2  Arm sign means a sign, whose face is suspended from a support arm at a right angle from a ground mounted pier, pillar, column or pole. 

AWNING SIGN 
302.19-5.3  Awning sign means a sign that is mounted, painted, or attached to an awning or canopy that is otherwise permitted by ordinance. 
302.19-5.4  Banner, flag, pennant means any bunting, plastic, paper, or similar material used for advertising purposes that is attached to any structure, staff, pole, line, framing, vehicles or any other similar object. 
302.19-5.5  Billboard means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. 
302.19-5.6  Changeable copy means that portion of a sign on which copy can be readily changed manually through the utilization of attachable characters or automatically through the electronic switching of lamp banks or illuminated tubes. Changeable copy includes mechanically controlled time and temperature displays. 
302.19-5.7  Channel letters means individual three dimensional letters or figures that are affixed to a building or a freestanding sign structure. 
302.19-5.8  Commercial off-premises sign means any sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, or entertainment, which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which the sign is located. 
302.19-5.9  Canopy sign means a sign which is perpendicular to and suspended below the ceiling or roof of a canopy or permanent awning. 


302.19-5.10  Copy means the letters, graphics or characters that make up the message on the sign face. 
302.19-5.11  Copy area means the total area within one or more rectangles which enclose the entire limits of the copy. 
302.19-5.12  Day-glow colors means bright florescent appearing colors, excluding signs illuminated by neon. 
302.19-5.13  Decorative flag means a flag or banner attached to light poles or other objects in a shopping center that provides a festive atmosphere to the center by colors, graphics, etc. and does not provide advertising space. 
302.19-5.14  Detached temporary sign means a temporary sign which is partially attached to a permanent building, or is attached to a temporary structure such as a pole or pipe, or any combination of the above. [The term] "detached temporary signs" do not include portable or vehicle mounted signs. 
302.19-5.15  Directional kiosk sign means a freestanding, multiple-sided, sign structure whose main purpose is to display signs or information. 
302.19-5.16  Directional signs means an on premises sign providing direction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic that may include advertising copy, such as business logograms. [The term] "directional signs" include such signs as exit and parking signs. 
302.19-5.17  Embellishment means structural or decorative elements of a sign incorporating representations of the significant architectural features of the associated building or development. [The term] "embellishment" does not include letters, numerals, figures, emblems, logos, colored bands or other features conveying a commercial advertising message. 

302.19-5.18  Facade means a building's exterior wall which is exposed to public view. 
302.19-5.19  Fascia signs means any sign painted on or attached to an exterior building wall, or any other permitted structure, on which a two dimensional representation may be placed, so that the sign does not extend more than 15 inches out from the wall or structure nor beyond the horizontal limits of the wall. Fascia signs may or may not be permanent. This definition includes banners or any other two dimensional medium. 

302.19-5.20  Flag-mounted sign means a sign which projects from the roof or wall of a building perpendicular to a wall surface. 

302.19-5.21  Flashing sign means any sign, except time and temperature displays that do not include advertising, which contains or is illuminated by lights which are intermittently on and off, which change intensity or color, or which create the illusion of motion in any manner, including animated signs which manifest a physical movement or rotation in one or more planes or the optical illusion of action or motion. 
302.19-5.22  Freestanding signs means any on-premises or off-premises sign supported independently of a building. The sign may take the form of single or multiple icons, product or corporate symbol, may involve a three dimensional or volumetric representation, may have single or multiple faces and may or may not be permanently fixed to the ground. 

302.19-5.23  Frontage (signs) means the site perimeter boundaries abutting a public road right-of-way other than a lane. 
302.19-5.24  Height (signs) means the vertical distance measured from the finished ground surface directly under the sign to the highest point of the sign. 
302.19-5.25  Home occupation sign means a sign directing attention to a product, commodity, or service available on the premises; but which product, commodity, or service is clearly a secondary use of the dwelling. 
302.19-5.26  Identification signs means a sign which contains only the name and addresses of a building, site, premises or occupants and the activity carried on in the building, site or premises, but does not include any other advertising copy. 
302.19-5.27  Illuminated signs means any sign having lighting directed on the sign face or from a light source located within the sign which is transmitted through a transparent or translucent sign face. 
302.19-5.28  Local advertising signs means a sign or portion of a sign on which the copy refers only to products or merchandise produced, offered for sale or obtainable at the premises on which the sign is displayed and which are related to the principal function of such premises. 
302.19-5.29  Logo means a readily identifiable symbolic representation used exclusively by an individual company or person to simplify product or business recognition which contains no additional advertising message. 
302.19-5.30  Marquee sign means a permanent roof structure which is attached to and supported on a building and projects over a building setback line. 

302.19-5.31  Memorial sign means signs usually located on tablets, plaques, or are cut into the facade of the building. They can include religious symbols, the names of the building or site, dates of erection, and other important historical facts. 
302.19-5.32  Menu sign means a sign located adjacent to a drive-through lane of a fast food service facility, which lists the products available and the prices, and is designed to be read by the occupant of a vehicle. 
302.19-5.33  Mobile sign means a sign attached to a vehicle, trailer or other mobile unit. 

302.19-5.34  Moving sign, including a scrolling marquee sign, means a sign whose entirety or components rotate, move and swing in any manner to attract attention and signs consisting of any flashing, blinking, indexing, fluctuating or otherwise animated lights and components including search lights and electric message boards. 

302.19-5.35  Monument sign means any sign not attached to a building in which the entire bottom of the sign is in contact with or is flush to the ground, the vertical dimension is greater than the horizontal dimension and is independent of any other structure. 


302.19-5.36  Noncommercial off-premises sign means any sign exhibiting noncommercial speech or message signage unrelated to the buying or selling of commodities or services. 
302.19-5.37  Official signs means a sign required by, or erected pursuant to, the provisions of federal, provincial or municipal legislation. 
302.19-5.38  Off-premises/off-site sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, product, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction sold, offered or existing elsewhere than upon the same lot where such sign is displayed. The term "off-premise/off-site sign" shall include an outdoor advertising sign (billboard) on which space is leased, rented, or donated by the owner thereof to others for the purpose of conveying a commercial or noncommercial message. 
302.19-5.39  On-premises/on-site sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, product, commodity, service, entertainment or attraction sold, offered or existing upon the same lot where such sign is displayed. 
302.19-5.40  Permanent signs means any sign that is anchored to a footing extending below grade or affixed to, or painted on, a building or other structure in which the copy has been painted or affixed in a durable manner. The copy on the sign shall relate to an activity, use or event of indefinite time duration. 
302.19-5.41  Pole sign means a high profile sign supported by one or more poles or similar structures and is permanently attached directly into or upon the ground. 

302.19-5.42  Portable sign means a portable a-frame sign constructed with two faces that rest at an angle less than 45 degrees to each other. Neither face shall exceed 3 feet in width or 12 square feet in area. 


302.19-5.43  Projecting signs means any sign that is supported by an exterior building wall and projects outward from the building wall by more than 15 inches. Projecting signs may or may not be permanent. Such signs may have either a flexible or rigid structure which extends outward from a building's exterior wall; may include icon, symbolic representations or volumetric signs, and includes signs suspended below the ceiling or roof of a building canopy. Typical signs include canopies and awnings. 


302.19-5.44  Pylon sign means a high profile sign having a solid base and permanently attached directly into or upon the ground. 

302.195.45  Replacement cost means the actual cost to replace or reconstruct a damaged structure or facility as determined by a qualified and approved appraiser. 
302.19-5.46  Roof sign means a sign located on the roof of any building, not including a false mansard roof or other fascia. 


302.19-5.47  Rooftop sign means any freestanding sign erected upon the roof of a building or canopy, or a sign attached to a building which projects vertically above the roof, eave, awning or parapet; however, this does not include signs attached to the vertical face of a parapet, awning or canopy; providing, the sign does not project above the Vertical face of the parapet, awning or canopy to which it is attached. 

302.19-5.48  Rotating signs means a sign or part of a sign which revolves. 
302.19-5.49  Seasonal or holiday decorations means temporary ornaments and displays erected in conjunction with seasonal or holiday activities such as Christmas or Canada Day where such ornaments and displays contain no local or general advertising of specific commercial services, merchandise or entertainment. 
302.19-5.50  Soffit sign means a sign which is suspended from the underside of a lintel, arch or other overhead spanning member and is hung perpendicular to a vertical wall surface. 
302.19-5.51  Sign means any visual medium, including its structure and other component parts, illuminated or not illuminated, which is used or capable of being used, on a permanent or temporary basis, to identify or convey information, or to advertise or attract attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution or business. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing signs include banners, placards, and painted messages, and signs attached to or painted on a vehicle (or trailer) that is parked on a property and being used for advertising purposes. Signs shall not include national flags, interior window displays of merchandise, or signs painted on or attached to a motor vehicle on a public roadway. 
302.19-5.52  Sign area means the entire area of the sign on which copy is intended to be placed including the advertising, surface, and any framing, trim, or molding but not including the support structure. In the case of double faced or multifaced sign, only half of the area of each face of the sign used to display advertising copy shall be used in calculating the total sign area. 
302.19-5.53  Sign base means the height of any monument base or other structure erected to support or ornament the sign shall be measured as part of the sign height. 

302.19-5.54  Sign placement area means the area for the building elevation surface which the sign is directly placed on. 
302.19-5.55  Sign structure means any structure which supports a sign, including materials used to conceal or improve the visual appearance of the structural parts. 
302.19-5.56  Sign structure height means the greatest vertical distance measured from the finished grade to the uppermost part of the sign. 
302.19-5.57  Site signs means a single or cumulative collection of properties forming a developable parcel that share accesses or traffic circulation that is not a public road right-of-way. This includes multiple occupancy business developments under a bare land condominium. 
302.19-5.58  Temporary business advertising sign means a temporary sign which is made of cloth, bunting, plastic, wood, vinyl, poster board, painted windows, or other similar materials, and which is located on site of the business use or activity, and is erected or placed for a prescribed period of time to promote, advertise, announce or provide the following information: 
1.  Designates, identifies, or indicates the name of the business, owner or occupant of the premises where the sign is located; or 
2.  Advertises the business conducted, the services available or rendered, or goods produced sold, or available for sale upon the premises where the sign is located. 
302.19-5.59  Temporary signs means including temporary business advertising signs, real estate signs, political signs, construction, and contractor, financing, and remodeling signs, employment opportunity signs, future tenant identification signs, garage sale signs, helium balloons, ambient air balloons, model home signs and flags. Seasonal window displays that contain traditional holiday characters and messages and which are intended to create or enhance holiday character of an area and not reference or display service available or rendered, or goods produced, sold or available for sale are not considered temporary signs. 
302.19-5.60  Tenant identification signs means may identify businesses or buildings. They may be a single tenant identification sign, multitenant identification sign or a building identification sign. 
302.19-5.61  Time and temperature sign means an electronically controlled changeable copy sign which conveys only information such as time, date, temperature, or atmospheric conditions, where different alternating copy changes are shown on the same copy area. Each message remains displayed for a specific minimum period of time with a total blackout between message changes. The copy shall not travel in any direction. Time and temperature signs shall be included in the permitted wall or freestanding sign area and shall not include any advertising. 
302.19-5.62  Volumetric signs means a sign that is a three-dimensional representation of an object for either on-premises or off-premises advertising purposes. The sign may have a rigid frame structure or be inflatable and may or may not be permanent. 
302.19-5.63  Warning signs means an on-premises sign providing a warning to the public, including such signs as "no trespassing" or "private driveway" signs. 
302.19-5.64  Window signs means any sign painted on, or affixed to, the inside or outside of a window, or installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from outside the premises. [The term] "window sign" does not include merchandise on display. 
302.19-5.65  Wall sign means any sign directly attached to an exterior wall of a building or dependent upon a building for its support with its exposed face parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of the building or structure on which it is placed. Signs directly painted on walls shall be considered wall signs. 

302.20-6  Site plan means the proposal for a development or a subdivision including all covenants, grants or easements and other conditions relating to use, location and bulk of buildings, density of development, common open space, public facilities, and such other information as is required in applicable sections of this ordinance. 
302.20-7  Special exception means a special use not permitted in a zoning district unless approved by the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the terms of this ordinance. 
302.20-8  Special use permit means a permit allowing a use within a zoning district for which a special exception is required. 
302.20-9  Story means that portion of a building, other than the basement, included between the surface of the floor next above it. If there be no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
302.20-10  Story, half, means a space under a sloping roof, which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level and in which space not more than two thirds of the floor area is finished off for use. 
302.20-11  Street means the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
302.20-12  Street centerline means a line generally parallel to the right-of-way lines divides the street right-of-way. 
302. 20-13  Street, half means a street that does not meet the minimum right-of-way width requirements set forth or referenced in this ordinance. 
302.20-14  Street, internal, means a private street providing access to lots within a development, but not including driveways. 
302.20-15  Street line means the dividing line between a street or road right-of-way and the contiguous property. 
302.20-16  Street, major, means a heavily traveled thoroughfare or highway that carries a large volume of through traffic, or anticipated traffic exceeding 500 vehicles per day. 
302.20-17  Street, other, means a street that is used primarily as a means of public access to the abutting properties with anticipated traffic of less than 500 vehicles per day. 
302.20-18  Street (road) means any public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
302.20-19  Street, service drive, means a public right-of-way generally parallel and contiguous to a major highway, primarily designated to promote safety by eliminating promiscuous ingress and egress to the right-of-way by providing safe and orderly points of access to the highway. 
302.20-20  Street width means the total width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel, including roadway, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, planting strips, and bikeways. 
302.20-21  Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
302.20-22  Subdivider means any individual, corporation or registered partnership owning any tract, lot, or parcel of land to be subdivided, or a group of two or more persons owning any tract, lot, or parcel of land to be subdivided who have given their power of attorney to one of their groups or another individual to act on their behalf in planning, negotiating for, in representing, or executing the legal requirements of the subdivision. 
302.20-23  Subdivision means the division of any tract, parcel, or lot of land into three or more parts, any one of which contains an area of less than two acres for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development. If a new street (see 302.158) is involved in any such division, any division of a parcel of land is a subdivision. The word "subdivision" shall be taken to include re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
302.20-23.1  Subdivide includes the resubdivision of lots of record or the vacation of plats. The term subdivide shall apply either to the process of subdivision or the land subdivided. 
302.20-23.2  To subdivide shall not include a bona fide division or partition of agricultural land into parcels of less than two acres for agricultural purposes or for building sites for the farmstead or tenant houses. Plats of divisions so excused will contain notice that the plat has not been approved for residential purposes and must be approved by the agent prior to recordation. The term "to subdivide" shall not include a single division of a lot or parcel for the purpose of sale or gift to a member of the immediate family of the owner. Only one such division shall be allowed per family member, and shall not be for the purpose of circumventing the provisions of the subdivision ordinance. A plat of the division is required to be approved by the agent prior to recordation. 
302.20-24  Surveyor means a land surveyor certified by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
302.21. - T. 
302.21-1  Television and/or radio stations means a broadcasting a facility licensed in the public interest, convenience, and necessity by the Federal Communications Commission, which includes transmitting and receiving equipment, studios, offices, utility buildings, and other necessary accessories required to operate a station. 
302.21-2  Tourist court, auto court, motel, hotel, cabin or motor lodge means building or buildings containing individual sleeping rooms, designed for, or used temporarily by, automobile tourists or transients, with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit. Cooking facilities may be provided for each unit. 
302.21-3  Tourist home means a dwelling where only lodging is provided for compensation for up to five persons (in contrast to hotels and boarding houses) and open to transients. 
302.21-4  Townhouse means a unit separated from adjacent units by a vertical wall with no openings, providing a dwelling for a single family, in which separate access to the outside is provided, and in which the major orientation of the unit is vertical rather than horizontal. 
302.21-5  Townhouse development means one or more single-family dwellings consisting of townhouses, with accessory parking, open space, and recreational and management facilities. 
302.21-6  Travel trailer means a vehicular, portable structure built on the chassis, designed to be used as a temporary occupancy for travel, recreation, or vacation; being of any length provided its gross weight does not exceed 40,500 pounds, or being of any weight provided its overall length does not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet. 
302.21-7  Travel trailer park or travel trailer camp means premises where travel trailers are parked temporarily in conjunction with travel, recreation or vacation 
302.21-8  Tree means a woody perennial plant having a single main stem 
302.22. - U. 
302.22-1  Use, accessory, means a subordinate use, customarily incidental to and located upon the same lot occupied by the main use. 
302.23. - V. 
302.23-1  Variance means a variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this ordinance, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning division or district or adjoining zoning divisions or districts. 
302.24. - W. 
302.24-1  Wayside stand, roadside stand, wayside market means any structure or land used for the sale of agricultural or horticultural produce, livestock or merchandise produced by the owner or his family on their farm. 
302.25. - Y. 
302.25-1  Yard means a space on the same lot with a main building, such space being open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
302.25-2  Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space, excluding steps, on the same lot with the main building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the right-of-way line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. On corner lots, the depth of the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
302.25-3  Yard, rear, means an open space, excluding steps, on the same lot with the main building, such space being unoccupied except possibly by an accessory building and extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main building projected to the side lines of the lot. On all corner lots the rear yard shall be the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
302.25-4  Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space, excluding steps, on the same lot with a main building, situated between the side line of the building and the adjacent side line of the lot extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. If no front yard is required, the front boundary of the side yard shall be the front line of the lot and if no rear yard is required, the rear boundary of the side yard shall be the rear line of the lot. On corner lots, the side yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its greatest dimension. 
302.26. - Z. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2004; Ord. of 4-10-2008; Ord. of 1-18-2009) 
Article 4. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 401.00. - Division of the City of Buena Vista into districts. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, the City of Buena Vista is divided into zoning districts named and described in the following sections. The boundaries of said zoning districts are hereby established and shown on the official zoning map maintained in the office of the zoning administrator and shown as originally adopted within article 12, zoning map et seq. 
Sec. 402.00. - Incorporation of the zoning map. 
    The zoning map entitled the "Official Zoning Districts Map for the City of Buena Vista, Virginia," dated July 26, 1985, as amended, hereinafter referred to as the official zoning map, with all notations, references, amendments, and dates thereof, and other information shown thereon, shall constitute a part of this ordinance. Said map shall be made a public record and shall be kept permanently in the office of the zoning administrator, where it shall be accessible to the general public. 
Sec. 403.00. - Map amendment. 
    If in accordance with the provisions of article 8, herein, changes are made in the district boundaries or other information portrayed in the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map within ten days after the amendment has been approved by the governing body, together with a numerical entry referring to the application for the amendment, submitted in accordance with article 8, herein, which shall be kept as a public record by the zoning administrator. Said numerical entry shall state the reference number of the application in the records of the zoning administrator and the date of the approval of the amendment by the governing body. Amendments to this ordinance, which involve matter portrayed on the official zoning map, shall become effective immediately upon being entered onto the official zoning map. The City of Buena Vista official zoning map, which shall be located in the office of the zoning administrator, shall be the final authority in determining the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the city. No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map except in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. 
Sec. 404.00. - Replacement of the official zoning map. 
    In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the governing body may, by resolution, adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map or any subsequent amendment thereof. Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map, or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
Sec. 405.00. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
    Unless district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions, and where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following shall apply: 
405.01  Unless otherwise indicated, district boundaries indicated as approximately following property lines, landlines, centerlines of streams, roads, highways, alleys, the shorelines of reservoirs, or other bodies of water or civil boundaries, shall be construed to follow such lines. 
405.02  District boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to the centerlines of streams, roads, highways, or rights-of-way of the same, or the shorelines of reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or said lines extended, shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning map. 
405.03  Where a district boundary line as appearing on the official zoning map divides a lot which is in single ownership at the time of this enactment, the use classification of the larger portion may, on application, be extended to the remainder by the governing body in accordance with article 8 of this ordinance. 
405.04  Where a public road, street, or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it is reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street, or alley. 
405.05  Where a district boundary is indicated to follow a river, creek, branch, or other body of water, said boundary shall be construed to follow the centerline at low water or at the limit of the jurisdiction, and in the event of change in the shoreline, such boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline with its reestablished center or channel. 
405.06  If no distance, curvature description, or other means is given to determine a boundary line accurately and the foregoing provisions do not apply, the same shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning map. In case of subsequent dispute, the matter shall be referred to the board which shall determine the boundary in accordance with section 806.01 of this ordinance. 
Article 5. - APPLICATION OF ZONING REGULATIONS 
    The regulations established herein within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniformly applied to each class of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided: 

Sec. 501.00. - Uses. 
    No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations, herein specified for the district in which it is or is to be located. 
501.01  Permitted uses. A permitted use is one which is allowed in the district in which the land is situated. Where the proposed use is permitted and is in accordance with other regulations herein, a zoning permit will be issued by the zoning administrator, without a public hearing. 
501.02  Conditional use. A conditional use is one which may be allowed when the Buena Vista City Council, after review of the application and hearing thereon, finds as a fact that the proposed use or uses are consistent with the comprehensive plan and the policies of the city and the public interest. Where the use is conditional, a zoning permit will be issued by the zoning administrator after such conditional use has been approved by the city council. 
Sec. 502.00. - Buildings. 
    No building shall hereafter be erected, constructed, or altered so as to exceed the height limit, to accommodate or house a greater number of families, or to occupy a greater percentage of the lot area than is required or specified in the regulations herein for the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 503.00. - Lots and yards. 
    No new lot or yard shall hereafter be created, nor shall any lot or yard existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance be altered, nor shall any building or structure, whether new or existing be moved, so that lot width, depth, or area requirements; front, side, or rear yard requirements; or inner or outer court requirements; or other requirements of this ordinance are not maintained, except when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use. No part of a yard or other open space required for any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building. Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed, except for the ordinary projection of sills, cornices, buttresses, ornamental feature, chimneys, flues, eaves, provided such projections shall not extended into the required yard areas for a distance exceeding two feet. 
Sec. 504.00. - Gardening. 
    Gardening shall be exempt from zoning permit requirements in any district allowing residential uses provided that such gardening shall not be objectionable by reason of odor, dust, noise, pollution, soil erosion, sedimentation, or drainage. 
Sec. 505.00. - Permits issued prior to adoption of ordinance. 
    Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the plans or construction of any building or structure for which a permit was granted prior to the effective date of this ordinance. However, if such construction does not commence within 30 days after this ordinance becomes effective, or if construction is discontinued for a period of six months or more, further construction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance for the district in which the operation is located. 
Sec. 506.00. - Single large buildings-conditional use required. 
    Single large buildings meeting or exceeding the size limits set forth below must receive a conditional use permit in accordance with article 8 of these regulations prior to construction: 
District Square Feet a) Low Density Residential R-1 10,000 square feet b) Residential R-2 10,000 square feet c) Residential Limited R-3 10,000 square feet d) Medium Density Residential R-4 10,000 square feet e) Residential R-5 10,000 square feet f) Mixed Business MB 10,000 square feet g) Institutional INST 25,000 square feet h) General Business B-1 50,000 square feet i) Planned Business B-2 50,000 square feet j) Light Manufacturing LM 400,000 square feet k) General Manufacturing GM Unlimited square feet  
506.01  Multiple buildings in connection with a common commercial enterprise shall be treated as a single building for the purpose of the size limitations contained herein, regardless of whether such buildings are on a common lot or owned by a common owner. 
506.02  The term "commercial enterprises," as used in this section, means any person or entity, or combination of persons or entities, engaged in a common business, industrial, or commercial undertaking. For the purposes of this section, residential uses shall not be considered commercial enterprises. 
(Ord. of 2-7-2006; Ord. of 5-10-2008) 
Article 6. - USES IN DISTRICTS 

Sec. 601.00. - Conservation District C-1. 
601.01  Intent of the Conservation District C-1. This district covers portions of the city which are occupied by various open uses such as agriculture, national forests and parks, state-owned forest and park lands and local government owned lands. This district is established for the specific purpose of providing recreation and open space uses, conservation of water and other natural resources reducing soil erosion, protecting watersheds, and reducing hazards from flood and fire. 
601.02  Permitted uses. Within the Conservation District C-1 the following uses are permitted: 
601.02-1  Wildlife areas or game refuges; 
601.02-2  Flood control and watershed structures; 
601.02-3  Parks, playgrounds and outdoor recreation areas; 
601.02-4  Public utilities; 
601.02-5  Public service or storage buildings; 
601.02-6  Nursery or tree farms; 
601.02-7  Fish hatcheries; 
601.02-8  Cemeteries; 
601.02-9  Timber production, forests; 
601.02-10  Agriculture; 
601.02-11  Public water and sewage systems. 
601.03  Conditional uses. When, after review of an application and hearing thereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the Buena Vista city council finds as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with the surroundings use, is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista, the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
601.03-1  Commercial radio, television, and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
601.03-2  Repealed 6-8-2008. 
601.04  Accessory uses. Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following rules are applicable: 
601.04-1  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2008) 
Sec. 602.00. - Low Density Residential District R-1. 
602.01  Intent of the Low Density Residential District R-1. This district is composed of certain quiet, low-density residential areas plus certain open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur. The regulations for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the district, to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life. To these ends, development is limited to relatively low concentration and permitted uses are limited basically to single unit dwellings providing homes for the residents plus, certain additional uses such as schools, parks, churches, and certain public facilities that serve the residents of the district. 
602.02  Permitted uses. Within Low Density Residential District R-1 the following uses are permitted: 
602.02-1  Single-family dwellings; 
602.02-2  Schools; 
602.02-3  Churches and other places of worship with attendant educational and recreational facilities. No recreational facility shall be located closer than 100 feet from any residential lot; 
602.02-4  Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings and grounds, tennis courts, swimming pools and outdoor recreational activities, all of a noncommercial nature. No public swimming pool or structure shall be located closer than 100 feet from any residential lot; 
602.02-5  Bed and breakfast homestay in accordance with article 14. 
602.03  Conditional uses. When, after review of an application and hearing thereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the Buena Vista City Council finds as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with the surroundings use, is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista, the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
602.03-1  Child care centers and family day care homes. The main structure shall not be located closer than 50 feet from any residential lot; 
602.03-2  Public utilities; 
602.03-3  Public water and sewage facilities; 
602.03-4  Public service or storage buildings; 
602.03-5  Commercial radio, television, and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met; 
602.03-6  Bed and breakfast inns in accordance with article 14; 
602.03-7  Single-family homes used as rental property in accordance with section 711 of the Buena Vista Land Development Regulations. 
602.04  Accessory uses. Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following rules are applicable: 
602.04-1  Home occupations provided the requirements of article 7, section 705 are met; 
602.04-2  Living quarters in main building of persons employed on the premises; 
602.04-3  Travel trailers, which may be stored within the minimum yard requirements and shall be prohibited from occupancy; 
602.04-4  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work; 
602.04-5  Signs as provided for in article 7; 
602.04-6  Parking as provided for in article 7. 
602.04-7  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997; Ord. of 7-12-2001; Ord. of 2-19-2009) 
Sec. 603.00. - Residential District R-2. 
603.01  Intent of Residential District. The intent of the R-2 [district] is to encourage residential neighborhoods and protect the essential character of such neighborhoods. The regulations for this district tend to protect against encroachment of commercial or industrial uses and other uses likely to generate noises, crowds, and concentrations of traffic, lights dust, odors, smokes or other obnoxious influences. 
603.02  [Permitted uses.] Within Residential District R-2 the following uses are permitted: 
603.02-1  Single-family dwellings; 
603.02-2  Two-family dwellings provided that the intent of this district is maintained in the design and use of two-family developments. Each living unit shall contain a minimum of 1,200 square feet; 
603.02-3  Schools; 
603.02-4  Churches and other places of worship with attendant, educational, and recreational facilities. No recreational facility shall be located closer than 100 feet from any residential lot; 
603.02-5  Public parks, playgrounds recreational buildings, and grounds, tennis courts, swimming Pools and outdoor recreational activities, all of a noncommercial nature. No public swimming pool or structure shall be located closer than 100 feet from any residential lot; 
603.02-6  Bed and breakfast homestay in accordance with article 14. 
603.03  Conditional uses. When, after review of an application and hearing hereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the Buena Vista City Council finds as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses, is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista, the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
603.03-1  Public utilities; 
603.03-2  Public water and sewage facilities; 
603.03-3  Child care centers and family day care homes. The main structure shall not be located closer than 50 feet from any residential lot; 
603.03-4  Homes for adults; 
603.03-5  Public service or storage buildings; 
603.03-6  Commercial television receiving towers; 
603.03-7  Commercial radio, television, and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met; 
603.03-8  Bed and breakfast inns in accordance with article 14; 
603.03-9  Single-family homes used as rental property in accordance with section 711 of the Buena Vista Land Development Regulations. 
603.04  Accessory Uses. Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following uses are also applicable: 
603.04-1  Home occupations provided that the requirements of article 7, section 705 are met; 
603.04-2  Living quarters in the main structure of persons employed on the premises; 
603.04-3  Travel trailers, which shall be stored within the minimum yard requirements and shall be prohibited from occupancy; 
603.04-4  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work; such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work; 
603.04-5  Signs as provided for in article 7; 
603.04-6  Parking as provided for in article 7. 
603.04-7  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997; Ord. of 7-12-2001; Ord. of 2-19-2009) 
Sec. 604.00. - Residential Limited District R-3. 
604.01  Intent of Residential Limited District R-3. The intent of the R-3 residential district is to protect the residential character of established neighborhoods and communities. The regulations for this district tend to reflect and protect established neighborhoods which reflect on long standing character. 
604.02  Permitted uses. Within the Residential Limited District R-3 the following uses are permitted: 
604.02-1  Single-family dwellings; 
604.02-2  Two- to four-family dwellings provided that the intent of this district is maintained in the design and use of two to four family developments. Each living unit hall contain a minimum of 960 square feet; 
604.02-3  Schools; 
604.02-4  Churches and other places of worship with attendant educational and recreational facilities. No recreational facility shall be located closer than 100 feet from any residential lot; 
604.02-5  Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings and grounds, tennis courts, swimming pools and outdoor recreational activities, all of a noncommercial nature. No public swimming pool or structure shall be located closer than 100 feet from any residential lot; 
604.02-6  Bed and breakfast homestay in accordance with article 14. 
604.03  Conditional uses. When, after review of an application and hearing thereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the Buena Vista City Council finds as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with the surrounding uses, is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista, the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
604.03-1  Child care centers and family day care homes. The main structure shall not be located closer than 50 feet from any residential lot; 
604.03-2  Public utilities; 
604.03-3  Public water and sewage facilities; 
604.03-4  Public service or storage buildings; 
604.03-4  Commercial radio, television, and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met; 
604.03-6  Bed and breakfast inns in accordance with article 14; 
604.03-7  Single-family homes used as rental property in accordance with section 711 of the Buena Vista Land Development Regulations. 
604.04  Accessory uses. Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following rules are applicable: 
604.04-1  Home occupations provided that the requirements of article 7, section 705 are met; 
604.04-2  Living quarters in the main structure of persons employed on the premises; 
604.04-3  Travel trailers, which may be stored within the minimum yard requirements and shall be prohibited from occupancy; 
604.04-4  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work; 
604.04-5  Signs as provided for in article 7; 
604.04-6  Parking as provided for in article 7. 
604.04-7  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997; Ord. of 7-12-2001; Ord. of 2-19-2009) 
Sec. 605.00. - Medium Density Residential District R-4. 
605.01  Intent of Medium Density Residential District R-4. The intent of the Medium Density Residential District is to provide for a range of development densities in accordance with the Buena Vista comprehensive plan. The regulations for this district provide for development which is not completely residential as it includes public and semipublic, institutional and other related uses. However, it is basically residential in character, and as such, is protected against encroachment of heavy commercial, industrial, and other uses likely to generate noise, crowds, and large concentrations of traffic, light, dust, odors, smoke, and other obnoxious influences. 
605.02  Permitted uses. Within Medium Density Residential District R-4 the following uses are permitted: 
605.02-1  Single-family dwellings; 
605.02-2  Two-family dwellings; 
605.02-3  Multifamily dwellings, apartments, townhouses, (as regulated in section 709 of this ordinance) and condominiums; 
605.02-4  Schools; 
605.02-5  Churches and other places of worship with attendant educational recreational facilities. No recreational facility shall be located closer than 100 feet from any residential lot; 
605.02-6  Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings and grounds, tennis courts, swimming pools and outdoor recreational activities, all of a noncommercial nature. No public swimming pool or structure shall be located closer than 100 feet from any residential lot; 
605.02-7  Professional offices in structures similar in character with surrounding neighborhoods; 
605.02-8  Tourist homes; 
605.02-9  Public water and sewage facilities; 
605.02-10  Public service or storage buildings; 
605.02-11  Bed and breakfast homestay in accordance with article 14; 
605.02-12  Single-family manufactured homes in individual lots. 
605.03  Conditional uses. When after review of an application and hearing hereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the Buena Vista City Council finds as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses, is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista, the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
605.03-1  General hospitals; 
605.03-2  Public utilities; 
603.03-3  Commercial operations which will: 
(1)  Not adversely affect the health or safety of persons residing in the neighborhood of the proposed use; 
(2)  Not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements; 
(3)  Not be in conflict with the intent of this district; and 
(4)  Comply with all other provisions regulating such uses; 
605.03-4  Boardinghouses; 
605.03-5  Family care homes, foster homes or group homes serving the mentally, retarded, developmentally disabled or others, rest homes, homes for adults, or nursing homes, provided that licensing requirements are met; 
605.03-6  Clubs, fraternities, lodges and meeting places of other organizations, provided that the buildings in which such meetings are housed shall be located at least 50 feet from any other lot; 
605.03-7  Commercial radio, television, and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met; 
605.03-8  [Bed and] breakfast inns in accordance with article 14; 
605.03-9  Single-family homes used as rental property in accordance with section 711 of the Buena Vista Land Development Regulations. 
605.04  Accessory uses. Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following uses are also applicable: 
605.04-1  Home occupations provided that the requirements of article 7, section 705 are met; 
605.04-2  Living quarters in main building of persons employed on the premises; 
605.04-3  Travel trailers which may be stored within the minimum yard requirements, and occupancy therein shall be prohibited; 
605.04-4  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work; 
605.04-5  Signs as provided for in article 7; 
605.04-6  Parking as provided for in article 7. 
605.04-7  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997; Ord. of 7-12-2001; Ord. of 6-10-2004; Ord. of 2-19-2009) 
Sec. 606.00. - Residential District R-5. 
606.01  Intent of the Residential District R-5. The intent of the Residential District R-5 is to allow low cost residential development in the form of mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions. 
606. 02  Permitted uses. Within Residential District R-5 the following uses are permitted: 
606.02-1  Mobile home parks in accordance with article 7; 
606.02-2  Mobile home subdivisions in accordance with article 7 and meeting the requirements of article 9; 
606.02-3  Permanent buildings housing management offices, child care centers, laundry facilities, or indoor recreational facilities or other service facilities may be permitted, provided that: 
(a)  Parking requirements for such facilities are met; 
(b)  Such uses are subordinate to the residential use and character of the park. 
606.02-4  Bed and breakfast homestays in accordance with article 14. 
606.03  Conditional uses. When after review of an application and hearing thereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the Buena Vista City Council find as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses, is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista, the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
606.03-1  Neighborhood commercial uses provided they are designed and intended to meet the service needs of persons residing in the park or subdivision and its immediate neighborhood; 
606.03-2  Commercial radio, television, and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met; 
606.03-3  Bed and breakfast inns in accordance with article 14. 
606.04  Accessory uses. Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following rules are applicable: 
606.04-1  Living quarters in main structure of persons employed on the premises; 
606.04-2  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, such buildings, shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work; 
606.04-3  Signs as provided for in article 7; 
606.04-4  Parking as provided for in article 7; 
606.04-5  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 607.00. - Planned Unit Development District R-6. 
607.01  Intent of Planned Development District R-6. The intent of the Planned Development District R-6 is to provide for larger scaled development and clustering of single-family residential dwelling units through design innovation to provide for a neighborhood with a variety of housing types and densities, neighborhood shopping facilities, schools, parks, playgrounds, off-street parking and, where necessary, land reserved to provide local employment opportunities. 
607.02  Permitted uses. Within Planned Development District R-6 the following uses are permitted: 
607.02-1  Single-family dwellings; 
607.02-2  Two-family dwellings; 
607.02-3  Multifamily dwellings, apartments, townhouses (as regulated in section 709 of this ordinance) and condominiums. 
607.03  Accessory uses. In addition to the principal uses, other commercial or noncommercial service uses may be permitted provided that: 
(a)  Such uses are intended primarily to serve the needs of the project area residents; 
(b)  Such uses are designed and located for the convenience of project area residents and to protect the character of the district; 
(c)  All subsequent changes in use shall be approved by the planning commission or its agent; 
(d)  All commercial uses shall not total more than ten percent of the total project area; and 
(e)  Construction of commercial facilities shall not begin until twenty-five (25) percent of the residential units or 250 dwelling units, whichever is less, of the total planned development has been completed. 
607.04  Uses permitted by approval. The development authorized within this district is regulated by a comprehensive development and management plan proposed by the developer and where conventional zoning lot restrictions are waived in favor of the detailed site plan and dedication of common open space. 
607.05  Qualifying requirements. A tract or parcel of land may be considered for R-6 Planned Residential District Zoning only if it meets the following conditions: 
607.05-1  Ownership requirements. The project area must be in one ownership or the application filed jointly by the owners of all land within the project area. The holder of a written option to purchase land shall, for the purposes of such application, be deemed to be an owner of such land; however, each and every project area in a Planned Residential District must be in single or common ownership before the final development plan is approved; 
607.05-2  Availability of public utilities. The project area must be located where public water and sewer systems are available or where a community water and sewer system can be developed as part of the project; 
607.05-3  Land suitability. Rezoning land to R-6 Planned Residential District may be denied if from investigation conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been determined that the land is not suitable for development because of inadequate road access, inadequate community facilities, excessive distance to employment area, nonconformity to city development plans, or other public health, welfare or safety objectives. 
607.06  Site design requirements. The following are the site design requirements for the R-6 Residential District: 
607.06-1  Maximum density. The gross residential density shall not exceed 10.5 dwelling units per acre; 
607.06-2  Common open space. Minimum open space shall be not less than 30 percent of the total area exclusive of buildings, streets, alleys, roads, parking areas, walks, patios and other similar improvements but inclusive of swimming pools and other active and passive recreational areas; 
607.06-3  Functional relationships. The site development plan shall be designed for convenient relationships between the various functional areas of the project such as residential, recreational, shopping, etc.; 
607.06-4  Lot design. The lot design, arrangement, and shape shall be such that lots will provide satisfactory and desirable sites for buildings, and be properly related to topography, and provide convenient and safe access; 
607.06-5  Street design. The street system within the project area shall be designed: 
(a)  According to functional street purposes and projected traffic flow; 
(b)  To discourage through traffic; 
(c)  To assure safe and convenient sight distances; 
(d)  To complement the natural topography; 
(e)  In coordination with existing and planned streets; and 
(f)  To be dust proof and passable year round. 
607.06-6  Street names and signs. The name of proposed streets shall not duplicate existing street names irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, driveway, place, lane or court. Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with other already existing and named streets, shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street names shall be indicated on the preliminary plan and final subdivision plat. Street signs shall be provided at all intersections; 
607.06-7  Street lighting. Street lighting shall be provided on all streets in the development; 
607.06-8  Pedestrian circulation. Provision shall be made for sidewalks and pedestrian walkways, which will enable residents, visitors, and/or patrons to walk safely and conveniently between the various functional areas of the project and adjacent circulation systems; 
607.06-9  Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in adequate amounts and in convenient locations. Wherever feasible, parking areas should be designed to preserve natural amenities and should avoid excessive concentrations of pavement by scattered landscaping and tree planting. Generally, two parking spaces should be provided for each dwelling unit; 
607.06-10  Water and sewer. All Planned Residential Districts shall be served by collective water and sewer systems as follows: 
(a)  Wherever feasible the project area water and sewer lines shall be connected to existing public systems. 
(b)  Where connections to existing public water or sewer systems are not feasible, the developer shall provide community water or sewer systems. 
607.06-11  Community facilities. Reservation or dedication of land for community facilities may be required if the need is created by the project area development or if proposed on the city development plan; 
607.06-12  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be provided throughout the project area in such locations to provide adequate fire protection; 
607.06-13  Drainage. The site development plan shall include a plan for adequate drainage. The street and lot plan shall be designed to avoid drainage problems. Where storm drains or drainage ditches are required, or where an existing waterway or drainage way traverses the project area, an easement or right-of-way shall be provided with adequate improvements to contain the drainage flows from the tributary area upstream of the watershed; 
607.06-14  Floodways. Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger of health, life, or property, or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Such land within the project area shall be used as common open space or other uses which would not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce conditions contrary to public welfare; 
607.06-15  Easements. Easements through the project area shall be provided for water, sewer, gas, telephone, power and other utilities as required by the respective utility departments, agencies or companies; 
607.06-16  Grading. The site development plan shall be designed to minimize the amount of grading required for development. To the extent feasible, the natural lay of the land shall be maintained except where grading is required for public health or safety; 
607.06-17  Natural amenities. The developer shall make every reasonable effort to protect and preserve the natural amenities of the site such as tree cover, waterways, scenic overlooks, etc. The site development plan shall be designed to maximize the use and enjoyment of natural amenities by project residents; 
607.06-18  Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening may be required to improve the project appearance or to provide a buffer between potentially conflicting uses. 
607.07  Data to accompany application. With the Planned Unit District there shall be submitted tentative, overall development plan which shall include: 
607.07-1  [Plan contents.] Scale accurate proposed development plan mapping of the project to include: 
(a)  Proposed land uses including residential types, commercial types, recreation and any other proposed use; 
(b)  Proposed street system including public and private right-of-way; 
(c)  Proposed parking areas and parking space delineations; 
(d)  Proposed plat showing subdivision lot lines; 
(e)  Proposed utility rights-of-way or easements including water, sewer, gas, power, and telephone; 
(f)  Proposed drainage plan; 
(g)  Proposed location of buildings, structures, and improvements; 
(h)  Property lines of proposed common property; 
(i)  Proposed pedestrian circulation system; 
(j)  Proposed landscaping plan; 
(k)  Proposed treatment of the project perimeter such as screening or landscaping; 
(l)  Relationships and tie-ins to adjacent property. 
607.07-2  [Supporting documentation.] Supporting documentation to include the following minimum data: 
(a)  A legal description of the project boundaries; 
(b)  A statement of existing and proposed property owners; 
(c)  Names and addresses of all adjacent property owners; 
(d)  A statement of project development objectives and character to be achieved; 
(e)  An approximate development schedule including dates of proposed construction beginning and completion and staging plan, if appropriate; 
(f)  A statement of intent regarding future selling or leasing of land areas, dwelling units, commercial area, etc.; 
(g)  Quantitative data including the number and type of dwelling units; parcel sizes, gross and net residential densities, total amount and percentage of open space, residential, commercial, and other land use types; 
(h)  Proposed building types including architectural style, height, and floor area; 
(i)  Approvals from the Virginia Department of Highways and the county health officer; 
(j)  Proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants which govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of property to be held in common ownership; 
(k)  A statement of proposed temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures to be taken; 
607.07-3  Application. Application for zoning meeting the foregoing requirements shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Ten copies of the original application are required to be filed with it. The zoning administrator shall forward the application and data to the planning commission for their review and recommendation. The planning commission shall consider the general plan for the community, the location, arrangement and size of lots, parks, school sites and other reservations of open space; the location, width and grade of streets; the location and arrangement of parking spaces; the location, arrangement and height of buildings; the location, arrangement and design of neighborhood business areas and accessory parking spaces; the gross densities proposed for the area; and such other features as will contribute to the orderly and harmonious development of the area, with due regard to the type and the character of adjoining neighborhoods and the peculiar suitability of the proposed uses; 
607.07-4  Processing fee. At the time of filing the preliminary plan application, the applicant shall deposit with the zoning administrator a check payable to the treasurer in the amount of $100.00 plus $1.00 for each dwelling unit proposed on the development plan; 
607.07-5  Appearance of developer. The planning commission and/or the city council may require the developer to appear to discuss the planned development; 
607.07-6  Preliminary plan approval. 
(a)  Within 60 days after the, filing of the preliminary development plan, the planning commission shall report to city council one of the following: 
(1)  Recommend approval of the plan as presented; 
(2)  Recommend approval of the plan as revised by concurrence of the planning commission and the developer; or 
(3)  Recommend disapproval; 
(b)  The city council shall give notice under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204 of a public hearing to be held not more than 30 days after the receipt of the planning commission's report. After the hearing, the city council disapproves or approves the preliminary development plan, or approves the preliminary development plan with modifications; 
(c)  If the preliminary development plan is approved, or approved with modifications by the city council, the zoning map shall be amended to show the R-6 Planned Unit Development. If the preliminary development plan is approved with modifications, the city council shall not amend the zoning map until the applicant has filed with the zoning administrator written consent to the plan as modified. 
607.07  Status of approval. No building permits shall be issued within the project area until the final development plan has been approved by the city under the procedures in the following sections. 
607.08  Final plan application. Within six months following the approval of the preliminary development plan, the applicant shall file with the zoning administrator ten copies of a final development plan containing in final form, the information required in the preliminary plan, including but not limited to, the final maps and documents specified above. In its discretion and for good cause, the planning commission may, upon receipt of a written application, extend for six months the period for filing of the final development plan; 
607.08-1  Phasing plan. If the project area is to be developed in stages, a phasing plan shall be submitted with the final development plan. The phasing plan shall delineate the areas to be developed in each phase and the approximate development schedule of each phase; 
607.08-2  Compliance with preliminary plan. The final development plan shall be in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan. The final development plan shall be deemed in substantial compliance providing modification does not involve any of the following and provided further that such modification does not exceed the limitations of this district's regulations: 
(a)  Variation of the proposed residential density or intensity of use by more than ten percent; 
(b)  Reduction of more than ten percent of the area reserved for common open space; 
(c)  Increase of the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more than ten percent; and 
(d)  Increase of the total ground area covered by buildings by more than five percent. 
607.08-3  Final pan approval. The planning commission shall review the final development plan, and shall approve the final development plan if it is in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan. The clerk of the court in whose office deeds are conveyed will record the final development plan in the manner provided for recording plats or subdivisions. 
607.09  Subdivision plat requirements. Final subdivision plats shall be submitted and recorded before the granting of building permits or before the sale of any lots. Subdivision plats may be submitted for portions of the project area in accordance with the phasing plan. Subdivision plats shall be drawn according to the following specifications: 
(a)  Subdivision plats shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink upon Mylar at a suitable scale. A blank oblong space three inches by five inches shall be reserved on the cover sheet and a one-inches by five-inch space shall be reserved on subsequent sheets for use of the approving authority; 
(b)  Subdivision plats shall show the accurate location and dimensions by bearing said distances with all curve data on all lots and street lines and centerlines of streets; boundaries of all proposed or existing easements, parks, school sites or other public areas; the number and area of all buildings sites; all existing public and private streets, their names, numbers and widths; existing and proposed easements for water, sewer, gas, power, telephone and other utilities; watercourses and their names; names of owners and their property lines, both within the boundary of the subdivision and adjoining said boundaries; 
(c)  Distances and bearings must balance and close with an accuracy of not less than one in ten thousand; 
(d)  The data of all curves along the street frontages shall be shown in detail at the curve or in a curve data table containing the following: delta, radius, arc, tangent, chord and chord bearings. 
607.09-1  Surveyor's certificate. Every subdivision plat shall be prepared by a surveyor duly licensed by the State of Virginia, who shall endorse upon each plat a certificate signed by him setting forth the source of the title of the land subdivided, and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the plat is of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated upon such tract, within an insert block or by means of a dotted boundary line upon the plat; 
607.09-2  Owner's statement. Every such plat, or the deed of dedication to which plat is attached, shall contain a statement to the effect that "the above and foregoing subdivision of (here insert the correct description of the land subdivided) as appears in this plat is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any," which shall be signed by the owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgements of deeds, and when thus executed and approved as herein specified shall be filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of the appropriate court, and indexed under the names of the landowners signing such statement and under the name of the subdivision; 
607.09-3  Recording of plat. The subdivider shall record the approved plat in the office of the clerk within 60 days after final approval; otherwise the agent shall mark the plat "void" and return the same to the subdivider. No lot shall be sold and the building permit shall not be issued until the plat has been approved and properly recorded. 
607.10  Required improvements. All improvements shown on the final development plan shall be installed by the developer at his cost. In cases where specifications have been established by state departments or local ordinances, such specifications shall be followed. The developer's performance bond shall not be released until construction has been inspected and approved by the appropriate official. 
607.10-1  Monuments. Monuments shall be provided to permanently identify lot and right-of-way lines. The monuments shall be installed as follows: 
(a)  Concrete monuments four inches in diameter or square two feet long, with a flat top, shall be put at all street corners, at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the project area, and at right angle points, and points of a curve in each street. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify property the location and shall be set flush with the finished grade; 
(b)  All other lot and parcel corners shall be marked with concrete monuments as above. 
607.10-2  Plans and specifications. Two blue or black line prints of the plans and specifications of all required physical improvements installed shall be prepared by a licensed engineer as certified by the State of Virginia and shall be submitted to the agent for review. The agent shall approve or disapprove of the construction plans within forty-five (45) days of submission. If approved, one copy bearing certification of such approval shall be returned to the developer. If disapproved, all papers shall be returned to the developer with the reason for disapproval stated in writing; 
607.10-3  Maintenance of common property. The developer shall create property owners as be responsible for maintaining all common property. The cost of maintaining common property shall be paid by property owner assessments and such assessments shall constitute a lien upon the individual properties; 
607.10-4  Advertising and sale. The developer shall not advertise for sale or sell any tract or lot within the project area until an approved plat has been properly recorded. Prospective property owners shall be informed of the homeowner's responsibility, the entire project area development plan, and the amount of officially approved water available to each lot in terms of gallons per day; 
607.10-5  Changes in final development. No changes may be made in the approved final plan during the construction of the planned development except upon application to the appropriate agency provided below: 
(a)  Minor changes in the location, setting, and character of buildings and structures may be authorized by the planning commission if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. No changes authorized by this section may increase the cubic volume of any building or structure by more than ten percent; 
(b)  All other changes in use and rearrangement of lots, blocks, and buildings tracts, any changes in the provisions of common open spaces, and all other changes in the approved final plan by the developer or any succeeding owner, or agent must be made under the procedure authorized by this ordinance. No amendments may be made in the approved final plans unless they are shown to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plan was approved or by changes in the development policy of the community. 
607.10-6  Development schedule and review. The construction and provision of all facilities and improvements on common property, which are shown on the final development plan, must proceed at the same rate as the construction of dwelling units. At least once every six months following the approval of the final development plan the zoning administrator shall review all of the building permits issued for the panned development and examine the construction which has taken place on the site. If he shall find that the rate at which facilities and improvements on common property have been constructed and provided, is not in accordance with the original development schedule, he shall forward this information to the building official who shall not issue any additional building permits until the scheduled facilities and improvements on common property have been provided; 
607.10-7  Failure to begin development. If no construction has begun or no use established in the planned development within one year from the approval of the final development plan, the final development plan shall lapse and be of no further effect. In its discretion, and for good cause, the planning commission may, upon receipt of written application, extend for one additional year the period for the beginning of construction or the establishment of a use. If a final development plan lapses under the provisions of this section, the clerk shall file a notice of revocation with the recorded subdivision plat. The zoning regulations applicable before the final development plan was approved shall then be in effect. 
607.11  Effectual clauses. 
607.11-1  Authority. This ordinance has been enacted under the authority granted under chapter 22 of the Code of Virginia, as amended; 
607.11-2  Validity. Should any article, section, subsection or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of this ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional; 
607.11-3  Private covenants. This ordinance bears no relation to any private easement, covenant, agreement, or, restriction, nor is the responsibility of enforcing such private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction implied herein to any public official. When this ordinance calls for more restrictive standards than are required by private contract, the provisions of this ordinance shall control; 
607.11-4  Penalties. Any developer who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 for each dwelling unit proposed in the final development plan. 
Sec. 608.00. - General Business District B-1. 
608.01  Intent of the General Business District B-1. Generally, this district covers that portion of the city intended for the conduct of general business to which the public requires direct and frequent access, but which is not characterized either by constant heavy trucking other than stocking and delivery of light retail goods, or by any nuisance factors other than occasioned by incidental light and noise of congregation of people and passenger vehicles. This includes such uses as retail stores, banks, theaters, business, offices, newspaper offices, printing presses, restaurants and taverns, and garages and service stations. 
608.02  Permitted uses. Within the General Business District B-1 the following uses are permitted: 
608.02-1  Department stores, variety stores, specialty shops, discount shops, and appliance stores; 
608.02-2  Bakeries; 
608.02-3  Laundries, dry cleaning shops and clothes dyeing establishments; 
608.02-4  One- or two-family dwellings; existing on the effective date of this section and dwelling units (apartments and efficiencies) in a building the first floor of which building is used for another permitted nonresidential use; 
608.02-5  Retail stores and shops; 
608.02-6  Theaters, assembly halls, playhouses and dinner theaters; 
608.02-7  Hotels; 
608.02-8  Banks and loan and finance offices, including drive-in types; 
608.02-9  Churches and other places of worship, and church school buildings; 
608.02-10  Libraries; 
608.02-11  Hospitals as defined in 302.82; 
608.02-12  Funeral home and/or mortuary; 
608.02-13  Automobile service stations and public garages (with major repair under cover); 
608.02-14  Clubs and lodges; 
608.02-15  Automobile sales; 
608.02-16  Lumber and building supply (with storage under cover); 
608.02-17  Plumbing and electrical supply (with storage under cover); 
608.02-18  Carpenter, electrical, plumbing, heating, appliance, bicycle, watch and shoe repair, painting, publishing, lithographing, upholstering, gunsmith or similar shops provided that any use shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building and provided that no part of a building for such use shall have any opening other than stationary windows or required fire exits within 100 feet of any residential district; 
608.02-19  Public utilities; 
608.02-20  Public service and storage buildings; 
608.02-21  Restaurants including dairy product stores and soda fountains, and drive-in restaurants; 
608.02-22  Newspaper offices and printing shops; 
608.02-23  Business and professional offices; 
608.02-24  Greenhouses; 
608.02-25  Police, fire and rescue squad stations; 
608.02-26  Post offices; 
608.02-27  Bus stations and taxi stands; 
608.02-28  Radio and television broadcasting studios; 
608.02-29  Public buildings and properties of a cultural, administrative, or service type; 
608.02-30  Individual residential uses associated with a permitted use such as the residence of an entrepreneur, but not including subdivisions and multifamily complexes; 
608.02-31  Parking garages and parking lots; 
608.02-32  Business and vocational schools; 
608.02-33  Off-street parking as required by this ordinance; 
608.02-34  Signs as provided in article 7; 
608.02-35  Museums; 
608.02-36  Picture frame manufacturing and assembling; 
608.02-37  Bed and breakfast Homestays and Inns in accordance with article 14; 
608.02-37  Karate, aerobic, dance, weight training, etc.; 
608.02-39  Child care centers and family day care homes. 
608.03  Conditional uses. When after review of an application and hearing thereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the Buena Vista city council finds as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses, is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista., the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
608.03-1  Wholesale and processing not objectionable because of dust, noise, or odors; 
608.03-2  Public billiard parlors and pool rooms, bowling alleys, dance balls, and similar forms of public amusement only after a public hearing shall have been held by the governing body on an application submitted to the body for such use. The governing body may request that the commission submit a recommendation to them concerning such use applications; 
608.03-3  Commercial radio, television, and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met; 
608.03-4  Athletic fields, stadiums, and arenas; 
608.03-5  Beverage manufacturing, bottling or distribution stations and food processing, packaging, or distribution stations; 
608.03-6  Circuses, carnivals, fairs, and sideshows; 
608.03-7  Drive-in theaters provided all parts of such drive-in shall be distant at least two hundred (200) feet from any residential district and provided that the screen shall be located as not to be visible from adjacent streets or highways and it shall be set back not less than two hundred (200) feet from the established right-of-way of said street or highway; 
608.03-8  Livestock market and sales pavilions; 
608.03-9  Overnight recreational vehicle park; 
608.03-10  Shooting range or gallery; 
608.03-11  Wholesale business, storage or warehouse provided that any such use shall be distant at least 50 feet from any residential district; 
608.03-12  Apartments in existing structures; 
608.03-13  Kennels and animal hospitals provided that any structure or premises used for such purposes shall be located at least two 7 hundred (200) feet from any residential lot; 
608.03-14  Swimming pools, skating rinks, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, or similar recreational use or facility if located at least two hundred (200) feet from any residential lot. 
608.04  Requirements for permitted uses in General Business District B-1. 
608.04-1  Final grading and site finishing are required on the parcel where uses are permitted in this district. The execution of this requirement must take into consideration traffic hazards. Landscaping will be restricted to a height of three feet within 50 feet of the intersection of two roads. 
608.05  Accessory uses. Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following rules are applicable: 
608.05-1  Living quarters in the main building of persons employed on the premises; 
608.05-2  Private parking garage; 
608.05-3  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work; 
608.05-4  Signs as provided for in article 7; 
608.05-5  Parking as provided for in article 7; 
608.05-6  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
608.05-7  Manufacture of goods to be sold as retail on site. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997; Ord. of 6-13-1991) 
Sec. 609.00. - Planned Business District B-2. 
609.01  Intent of the Planned Business District B-2. The B-2 Planned Business Zone is intended to permit the developments of neighborhood business areas; under one ownership or control in those areas of the city where there are areas of sufficient size in heavily populated sections and where sanitary sewers, street access, and public water supply are adequately provided. Within this district the location of buildings, design of buildings, parking areas and other open spaces shall be controlled in such a manner that it will not be a detriment to the adjoining residential property or to the neighborhood in general. 
609.02  Permitted uses. Within the Planned Business Zone, no buildings structure, or premises shall be used and no building or structure shall be erected or altered until and unless the same has been approved by the planning commission and by city council in accordance with the provisions contained in article 8, section 802.00 and until and unless the following conditions have been complied with: 
(A)  Uses permitted will be the same as those permitted in the B-1 Zone. 
(B)  There shall have been filed with the planning commission a written application for approval of a contemplated use within said district, which application shall be accompanied with the following information: 
a.  A plot plan indicating the location of present and proposed buildings, driveways, parking lots, landscaping, screening, and other necessary uses; 
b.  Preliminary architectural plans for the proposed building or buildings; 
c.  A description of the business operations proposed in sufficient detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing excessive auto or traffic congestion or problems of noise, glare, odor, fire, or safety hazards, or other factors detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the area; 
d.  Engineering or architectural plans for the handling of any of the problems of the type outlined in-Item C above, including the handling of stormwater and sewers and necessary plans for the controlling of smoke or other nuisances such as those enumerated under Item C above; 
e.  Any other information the planning commission or city council may need to adequately consider the effect that the proposed uses may have upon the area, and/or the cost of providing municipal services to the area. 
609.03  Area regulations. In this district the area regulations, maximum lot coverage, height regulations, and off-street parking shall comply with the requirements of the B-1 District. 
609.03-1  There shall be a twenty five (25) foot setback from all streets and all adjoining residential property. This setback shall act as a buffer between the business and residential uses. It shall be fully landscaped and maintained with grass and with trees or shrubbery of sufficient height and density to serve as a screen between the business zone and the residential zone. The buffer zone shall not constitute a site-distance obstruction at street intersections. The buffer zone shall be considered as part of the lot area but shall not be used for any business purpose such as buildings, parking lots, signs, or any accessory use. The buffer zone, upon completion of development of the project shall be at or near the same grade or plane which existed prior to the development of the planned business district property, unless otherwise expressly reviewed and approved by the planning commission and by City Council; 
609.03-2  These restrictions shall not apply to that portion of the lot fronting on the major business thoroughfare or thoroughfares. Entrances to the property will be allowed from the arterial streets only. 
609.04  Signs. 
609.04-1  For each shopping center, one ground sign having a maximum area of 100 square feet, maximum overall height of 30 feet, minimum distance from street line of ten feet indicating the name of the shopping center. In lieu of the shopping center name, the one sign may designate a business use or a combination of business uses within the center; 
609.04-2  For each individual business; signage attached to the building having a maximum area of one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage occupied by a single permitted use; 
609.04-3  For each individual business: if the setback of the business is greater than 300 feet, the maximum area may be increased by 0.5 square feet per linear foot of building frontage; (added 10-1997) 
609.04-4  All other regulations of article 7, section 706.00 shall apply. 
Sec. 610.00. - Light Manufacturing District (LM). 
610.01  Intent of Light Manufacturing District (LM). The intent of the (LM) Light Manufacturing District is to establish and preserve areas within the city that are suitable for business and light manufacturing uses that provide desirable employment consistent with the goal of maintaining environmental quality. The LM district is designed to permit a wide variety of manufacturing, business, industrial and warehouse uses and activities that occur primarily within enclosed structures, with minimal or no environmental impacts associated with smoke, odor and noise. 
610.02  Permitted uses. Within the Light Manufacturing District (LM) the following uses are permitted: 
610.02-1  Establishments engaged in the processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and products, from processed or previously manufactured materials. These establishments are capable of operation in such a manner as to control the external effects of the assembly of manufacturing process, such as smoke, noise, soot, dirt, vibration, odor, etc. A machine shop is included in this category. Also included is the manufacturing of apparel, electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios, and phonographs. Also the manufacture of small parts, such as coils, condensers, transformers, and crystal holders, equipment, camera and photographic equipment, ceramic products, cosmetics and toiletries, business machines, food, paper products (but not the manufacture of paper from pulpwood), musical instruments, medical appliances, tools or hardware, plastic products (but not the processing of raw materials) pharmaceuticals, or optical goods, bicycles, and any other product of a similar nature or requiring similar production characteristics. 
610.02-2  Automobile painting, upholstering, repairing, rebuilding, reconditioning, body and fender work, truck repairing or overhauling, tire retreading or recapping; 
610.02-3  Laboratories-pharmaceutical and/or medical; 
610.02-4  Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, dairy products and food products; 
610.02-5  Cabinets, furniture and upholstery shops 
610.02-6  Monumental stone works; 
610.02-7  Public service or storage buildings; 
610.02-8  Public utilities; 
610.02-9  Public water and sewage systems; 
610.02-10  Animal hospital, kennels; 
610.02-11  Wholesale business, storage warehouses; 
610.02-12  Equipment sales and rental; 
610.02-13  Laundries, dry cleaning and clothes dying establishments; 
610.02-14  Newspaper offices; 
610.02-15  Printing shops, including gravure, lithographic, flexographic, screen, digital, and other similar forms of printing; 
610.02-16  Business and professional office; 
610.02-17  Radio and television broadcasting studios; 
610.02-18  Call centers; data centers; 
610.02-19  Parking garages and lots; 
610.02-20  Picture frame manufacturing and assembling; 
610.02-21  Self-storage facility. Also referred to as a mini-storage facility A facility consisting of individual storage spaces available for rent to the general public. 
610.03  Conditional uses. When after review of an application and hearing thereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the Buena Vista City Council finds as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses, is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista, the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
610.03-1  Building material sales yards, plumbing supplies storage; 
610.03-2  Coal and wood yards, lumber yards, feed and seed stores; 
610.03-3  Contractor's equipment storage yards or plants, or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors, 
610.03-4  Commercial radio, television, and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met; 
610.03-5  Retail stores and shops; 
610.03-6  Public buildings and properties of a cultural, administrative, or service type; 
610.03-7  Museums; 
610.03-8  Art galleries; 
610.03-9  Recycling centers; 
610.03-10  Other uses of the same general character and compatible with the foregoing permitted and conditional uses. 
610.04.  Accessory uses. 
    Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following rules are applicable: 
610.04-1  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work; 
610.04-2  Signs as provided for in article 7; 
601.04-3  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
610.05  Requirements for permitted uses. 
610.05-1  Before a building permit shall be issued or construction commenced on any permitted use in this district, or a permit issued for a new use, the plans, in sufficient detail to show the operations and processes, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for study. The administrator may refer these plans to the planning commission for recommendation. Modifications of the plans may be required. 
610.05-2  All permitted and conditional uses are subject to the lighting regulations contained in appendix F. 
610.05-3  All permitted and conditional uses are subject to the size restrictions set forth in section 506.00 of the city's land development regulations. 
610.05-4  Sufficient area shall be provided to: 
(a)  Adequately screen permitted uses from adjacent business and residential districts; and 
(b)  Off-street parking of vehicles incidental to the industry, its employees, and clients; 
610.05-5  Automobile graveyards and junkyards in existence at the time of the adoption of this ordinance are to be considered as nonconforming uses. They shall be allowed up to three years after adoption of this ordinance in which to be completely screened, on any side open to view from a public road, the operation of use; 
610.05-6  The administrator shall act on any application received within 30 days after receiving the application. If formal notice in writing is given to the applicant, the time for action may be extended for a 30 day period. Failure on the part of the administrator to act on the application within the established time limit shall be deemed to constitute approval of the application. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997; Ord. of 1-13-2008) 
Sec. 611.0. - General Manufacturing District (GM). 
611.01  Intent of the General Manufacturing District (GM). The primary purpose of this district is to establish and preserve areas within the city that are suitable for business and industrial operations, which may create some nuisance, and which are not properly associated with, nor particularly compatible with residential, institutional, and commercial service establishments. This district allows a variety of industrial and warehouse uses. Manufacturing activities and uses within this district occur primarily with the enclosed structures, but uses have significant storage needs. 
611.02  Permitted uses. Within the General Manufacturing District (GM) the following uses are permitted: 
611.02-1  All uses permitted in the Light Manufacturing District (LM) except, Animal hospitals, kennels, laundries, dry cleaning and clothes dying establishments; newspaper offices; business and professional offices; radio and television broadcasting studios; parking garages and lots; 
611.02-2  Enterprises in which goods are generally mass produced from raw material on a larger scale through use of an assembly line or similar process, usually for sale to wholesalers or other industrial or manufacturing uses. Included in this use type are industries involved in processing and/or refining raw materials such as rubber, wood or wood pulp, forging, casting, melting, refining, extruding, rolling, drawing, and/or alloying ferrous metals, and the production of large durable goods such as automobiles and manufactured homes; 
611.02-3  Automobile assembling; 
611.02-4  Building materials sales yards, plumbing supplies storage; 
611.02-5  Coal and wood yards, lumber yards, feed and seed stores; 
611.02-6  Contractors' equipment storage yards and plants or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors; 
611.02-7  Boat building; 
611.02-8  Sawmills and planning mills; 
611.02-9  Brick manufacturing; 
611.02-10  Off-street parking as required by this ordinance; 
611.02-11  Signs as provided in article 7; 
611.02-12  Self-storage facility. Also referred to as a mini-storage facility. A facility consisting of individual storage spaces available for rent to the general public. 
611.02-13  Adult businesses. In addition to all other requirements, any adult business shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  The business shall be located at least 500 feet away from any residential or agricultural-forestall zoning district, and at least 500 feet from the property line of any land used for any of the following: 
I.  A dwelling; 
II.  A nursing home, assisted living facility, or similar institution; 
III.  An adult day care center; 
IV.  A child day care center; 
V.  A public or private educational facility, school, college or university; 
VI.  A public park; 
VII.  A public or private library, museum or cultural center; 
VIII.  A church or other place of worship; 
IX.  A hotel, motel or boardinghouse; 
X.  An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family entertainment; 
XI.  A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations of the state; and 
XII.  Any other adult business. 
(b)  Adult merchandise shall not be visible from any point outside the establishment. 
(c)  Signs or attention-getting devices for the business shall not contain any words or graphics depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in Buena Vista Land Development Regulations under section 712.00. 
(d)  The business shall not begin service to the public or any outside activity before 7:00 a.m. local time. Hours of operation for any adult movie theater, adult nightclub or other business providing adult entertainment shall not extend after 1:00 a.m. local time. Hours of operation for any adult bookstore, adult video store, adult model studio, adult store or any other adult business except an adult motel shall not extend after 12:00 midnight local time. 
(e)  In any adult business other than an adult motel or adult movie theater, there shall be no viewing of videotapes, computer disks, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, virtual reality devices, internet sites or files transmitted over the internet, or similar media characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in Buena Vista Land Development Regulations under section 712.00, while on the premises. 
(f)  Adult merchandise shall be located in a conspicuously marked separate room or other area inaccessible to persons under 18 years of age, with the room configured to that is remains open to plain view at all times. 
(g)  The interior of the enclosed premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures that at all times illuminate every place patrons are permitted access, with an illumination of not less than two-foot candles measured at floor level. 
(g1)  A foot candle is how bright the light is one foot away from the source. 
(h)  Wide angle mirrors must be used to provide the manager with continuous monitoring of all areas of the establishment. 
(i)  All owners, operators, managers, employees, associates, and entertainers shall be at least 18 years of age. 
(j)  The owner or operator shall operate and maintain a security camera and videotape or digital file system designed and installed by a private security service business licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. Surveillance cameras shall continuously monitor and record images of all entrances, exits, parking areas, and all areas of the establishment where the adult business is conducted, except for the sleeping rooms of an adult motel. Such cameras shall provide clear imagery of the establishment's premises, patrons and their vehicles and of any vehicles otherwise entering onto the premises. Videotapes or digital files systems recording activities in the areas under surveillance shall be preserved for a period of not less than four months. Authorized representatives of the Buena Vista Police or the Buena Vista Planning Department shall have prompt access to recovery of such videotapes or digital files upon request. 
(k)  The owner or operator shall provide adequate lighting for all entrances, exits and off street parking areas serving the adult business, and all areas of the establishment where the adult business is conducted, except for private rooms of an adult motel or the movie viewing areas in an adult movie theater. "Adequate lighting" means sufficient lighting for clear visual and security camera surveillance and recording of all images on the premises at all times one hour before dusk and one hour after dawn. 
611.03  Conditional uses. When after review of an application and hearing thereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the following uses may be: 
611.03-1  Manufacture or production of aluminum; 
611.03-2  Airports; 
611.03-3  Truck terminals; 
611.03-4  Sand and gravel operations; 
611.03-5  Mining operations; 
611.03-6  Petroleum storage; 
611.03-7  Junk yards and automobile graveyards in accordance with the provisions in Article 7; 
611.03-8  Manufacture, production, or processing of asphalt; 
611.03-9  Commercial radio, television, and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met; (Added by council 11-13-1997) 
611.03-10  Other uses of the same general character and compatible with the foregoing permitted and conditional uses. 
611.04  Requirements for permitted uses. 
611.04-1  Before a building permit shall be issued or construction commenced on any permitted use in this district, or a permit issued for a new use, the plans, in sufficient detail to show the operations and processes, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for study. The administrator may refer these plans to the planning commission for recommendation. Modifications of the plans may be required. 
611.04-2  Final grading and site finishing are required on parcels where uses are permitted in this district. The execution of this requirement must take into consideration traffic hazards. 
611.04-3  All permitted and conditional uses are subject to the lighting regulations contained in appendix F. 
611.04-4  All permitted and conditional uses are subject to the size restrictions set forth in section 506 of the city's Land Development Regulations. 
611.04-5  The administrator shall act on any application received within thirty (30) days after receiving the application. If formal notice in writing is given to the applicant, the time for action may be extended for a thirty (30) day period. Failure on the part of the Administrator to act on the application within the established time limit shall be deemed to constitute approval of the application. 
611.05  Accessory uses. Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following rules are applicable: 
611.05-1  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997; Ord. of 4-13-2008, § 611) 
Sec. 612.00. - Flood Hazard District FH-1. 
612.01  Purpose of Flood Hazard District [FH-1]. The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
(a)  Regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities and frequencies; 
(b)  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within areas subject to flooding; 
(c)  Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in floodprone areas to be protected and/or flood-proofed against flooding and flood damage; and 
(d)  Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
612.02  Applicability. These provisions shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Buena Vista and identified as being floodprone as stipulated in this ordinance. 
612.03  Compliance. No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provision of this ordinance and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this ordinance. 
612.04  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This ordinance supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in flood prone areas. However, any underlying ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. 
612.05  Description of districts. 
612.05-1  Basis of districts. The various floodplain districts shall include areas subject to inundation by waters of the 100-year flood. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the food insurance study (FIS) for Rockbridge County and Incorporated Areas, including the City of Buena Vista, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, dated April 6, 2000, as amended. 
A.  The floodway district is delineated for purposes of this ordinance, using the criteria that a certain area within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the 100-year flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. These areas included in this district are specifically defined in table 3 of the above referenced flood insurance study and shown on the accompanying flood insurance rate maps; 
B.  The flood-fringe district shall be that area of the 100-year floodplain not included in the floodway district. The basis for the outermost boundary of this district shall. be the 100-year flood elevations contained in the flood profiles of the above referenced flood insurance study, and as shown on the accompanying flood insurance rate maps; 
C.  The approximated floodplain district shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles of elevations are provided, but where a 100-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown as zone A on the flood insurance rate maps accompanying the flood insurance study. In determining the necessary elevations for the purpose of this ordinance, other sources of data may be used such as: 
(a)  Corps of Engineers, floodplain information reports; 
(b)  U.S. Geological Survey, floodprone quadrangles; 
(c)  USDA, Soil Conservation Service, flood hazard analyses; 
(d)  Known high-water marks from past floods; 
(e)  Tennessee Valley Authority Flood Reports; and 
(f)  Other sources. Where the specific 100-year flood elevations cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, then the applicant for the proposed use, development, and/or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the City of Buena Vista. 
612.05-2  Overlay concept. 
(a)  The floodplain districts described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as shown on the official zoning ordinance map, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions; 
(b)  Where there happens to be any conflict between the provisions or requirements of any of the floodplain districts, and those of any underlying districts, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply; 
(c)  In the event any provision concerning a floodplain district is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial discretion, the basic underlying district provisions shall remain applicable. 
612.06  Official zoning map. The boundaries of the floodplain districts are established as shown on the flood boundary and floodway map which is declared to be a part of this ordinance and which shall be kept on file at the city manager's office. 
612.07  District boundary changes. The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the council where natural or man-made changes have occurred, and/or more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers of other qualified agency or individual documents the need or possibility for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration. 
612.08  Interpretation of district boundaries. Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the zoning administrator. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the board of zoning appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires. 
612.09  District provisions. All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a zoning permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and with all other applicable codes and ordinances such as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Code and the Buena Vista Subdivision Regulations. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the zoning administrator shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility of system. Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or floodways of any watercourse, stream, etc., within a municipality, approval shall be obtained from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission (a joint permit application is available from any of these organizations). Further, notification of the proposal shall be given to all affected adjacent municipalities. Copies of such notifications shall be forwarded to both the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Soil and Water Conservation), and the Federal Insurance Administration. 
612.10  Floodway district. In the floodway district, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
612.10-1  Permitted uses. In the floodway district the following uses and activities are permitted provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance, and provided that they do not require structures, fill, or storage of materials and equipment: 
(a)  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting; 
(b)  Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching and swimming areas, hiking, and horseback riding trails, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, trap and skeet game ranges, and hunting and fishing areas; 
(c)  Accessory residential uses such as yard areas, gardens, play areas, and pervious loading areas; 
(d)  Accessory industrial and commercial uses such as yard areas, previous parking and loading areas, airport land strips, etc. 
612.10-2  Uses permitted by special exception. The following uses and activities may be permitted by special exception provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by this or any other ordinance: 
(a)  Structures except for mobile homes accessory to the use and activities in [sub]section [612.10-1](a) above; 
(b)  Utilities and public facilities and improvements such as railroads, streets, bridges, transmission lines, pipelines, water and sewage treatment planes, and other similar or related uses; 
(c)  Water-related uses and activities such as marinas, docks, wharfs, piers, etc.; 
(d)  Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials (where no increase in level of flooding or velocity is caused thereby); 
(e)  Temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals, and similar activities; 
(f)  Storage of materials and equipment provided that they are not buoyant, flammable or explosive, and are not subject to major damage by flooding, or provided that such material and equipment is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or movement, and/or, can be readily removed from the area within the time available after flood warning; 
(g)  Other similar uses and activities provided they cause no increase, in flood heights and/or velocities. All uses, activities, and structural development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the flood-proofing provisions contained in all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
612.11  Flood-fringe and approximated floodplain districts. In the flood-fringe and approximated floodplain districts, the development, and/or uses of land shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying district provided that all such uses, activities, and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and all other applicable codes and ordinances. Within the Approximated floodplain district, all new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions) greater the 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser; include within such proposals base flood elevation data. The applicant shall also delineate a floodway area based on the requirement that all existing and future development not increase the 100-year flood elevation more than one foot at any point. The engineering principal, equal reduction of conveyance, shale be used to make the determination of increased flood heights. Within the floodway area delineated by the applicant, the provision of section 612.10 shall apply. 
612.12  Special exceptions and variances additional factors to be satisfied. In passing upon applications for special exceptions and variances, the board of zoning appeals shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of the zoning ordinance and the following factors: 
612.12-1  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No special exception or variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within the floodway district that will cause any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood; 
612.12-2  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others; 
612.12-3  The proposed water supply and sanitation system and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions; 
612.12-4  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners; 
612.12-5  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
612.12-6  The requirements of the facility for a water front location; 
612.12-7  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use; 
612.12-8  The compatibility of the, proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future; 
612.12-9  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
612.12-10  The safety of access to the property in time of flood of ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
612.12-11  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; 
612.12-12  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this ordinance: the board of zoning appeals may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a special exception or variance, to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for protection and other related matters. Special exceptions and/or variances shall only be issued after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the granting of such will not result in: 
(a)  Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights; 
(b)  Additional threats to public safety; 
(c)  Extraordinary public expense; 
(d)  Create nuisances; 
(e)  Cause fraud or victimization of the public; or 
(f)  Conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
Special exceptions and/or variances shall only be issued after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the special exception and/or variance will be the minimum relief to any hardship. The board of zoning appeals shall notify the applicant for a special exception and/or variance, in writing, that the issuance of a special exception and/or variance to construct a structure below the 100-year flood elevation: 
(a)  Increases the risks to life and property; and 
(b)  Will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
A record of the above notification, as well as all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, shall be maintained and any variances which are issued shall be noted in the annual report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administrator. 
612.13  Existing structures in floodplain districts. A structure, or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
612.13-1  Existing structures and/or uses located in the floodway district, shall not be expanded or enlarged (unless the effect of the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements); 
612.13-2  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, located in any floodplain district to an extent or amount of less than 50 percent of its market value, shall be elevated and/or flood-proofed to the greatest extent possible, and/or reasonable; 
612.13-3  The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its location in a floodplain district to an extent or amount of 50 percent of more of its market value, shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code; 
612.13-4  Uses of adjuncts thereof which are, or become, nuisances shall not be permitted to continue. 
612.14  Flood hazard mitigation. Within the floodplain district as delineated, the following additional provisions shall be met: 
612.14-1  All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, and other critical electrical installations shall be permitted only at elevations at or above the level of the 100-year flood; 
612.14-2  Water supply systems, sanitary sewage systems, and gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to preclude infiltration of floodwaters; 
612.14-3  Adequate drainage shall be provided to minimize exposure to flood heights; 
612.14-4  The preliminary plat requirements shall include a map showing the location of the proposed subdivision and/or land development with respect to any designated floodplain district, including information, but not limited to, the 100-year flood elevations, boundaries of the floodplain districts, proposed lots and sites, fills flood or erosion protective facilities, and areas subject to special deed restrictions. 
612.15  Severability. In any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. 
612.16  Municipal liability. The degree of flood protection, sought by the provisions of this ordinance, is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts, or that land uses permitted within such districts, will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Buena Vista, or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
612.16-1  The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the special exception is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
Sec. 613.00. - Recreational District (REC). 
613.01  Intent of the Recreational District (REC). This district covers portions of the City which are occupied by various open uses such as agriculture, National Forests and Parks, state owned forest and park lands and local government owned lands. This district is established for the specific purpose of providing recreation and open space uses, conservation of water and other natural resources reducing soil erosion, protecting watersheds, and reducing hazards from flood and fire. 
613.02  Permitted uses. Within the Recreational District (REC) the following uses are permitted: 
613.02-1  Wildlife areas or game refuges; 
613.02-2  Flood control and watershed structures; 
613.02-3  Parks, playgrounds and outdoor recreation areas; 
613.02-4  Public utilities; 
613.02-5  Public service or storage buildings; 
613.02-6  Public water and sewage systems. 
613.03  Conditional uses. When, after review of an application and hearing thereon, in accordance with article 8 Herein, the Buena Vista City Council finds as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with the surroundings use, is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista, the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
613.03-1  Commercial radio, television, and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met; 
613.03-2  Cabins/cottages; 
613.03-2.1  Cabins/cottages. For definition purposes for this section: Cabins/cottages is a building or a group of buildings, whether detached or in connected units, designed primarily for transient travelers catering to the needs of the traveling public by furnishing sleeping accommodations with or without supplying food 
613.03-3  Nursery or tree farms; 
613.03-4  Fish hatcheries; 
613.03-5  Cemeteries: 
613.03-6  Timber production, forests. 
613.04  Accessory uses. Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following rules are applicable: 
613.04-1  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997; Ord. of 6-8-2008) 
Sec. 614.00. - Mixed Use District (MU). 
614.01  Mixed Use District. 
614.01-1  The Mixed Use District is primarily a business and residential district that incorporates and promotes a wide variety and intensity of uses. This district is designed to have a high level of human and business activity and vibrancy where business people can live and work in the same building, where residents and visitors can freely gather for shopping, entertainment and recreation. 
614.01-2  Insofar as allowed by the building codes, single structures may have multiple principal by-right uses. 
614.02  Purpose. The Mixed Use District is established for the purpose of encouraging appropriate uses to occur within an area of the community where the predominant character has been and will continue to be historical, municipal, cultural, residential, and commercial. It is intended that the types of land use activities that would be allowed within the district would not have a severe detrimental impact on existing historical, residential uses, or traditional commercial, or cultural uses which continue to be maintained in the district in order to promote this purpose: 
614.02-1  To attract environmentally acceptable commercial, recreational, institutional, and residential uses to the District; 
614.02-2  To encourage diversity in the community tax base through appropriate flexibility in land use and land use development; 
614.02-3  To optimize financial return on public infrastructure investments and expenditures, including municipal sewer, municipal water supply; 
614.02-4  To minimize adverse traffic impacts on and surrounding local streets and roadways; and 
614.02-5  To preserve valuable historical, cultural, and natural features within the District and to minimize adverse environmental impacts such as water, air, light. 
614.03  Uses permitted by right. 
614.03-1  All retail uses shall store tools, parts, goods, repairs, services, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure and if not in a permanent enclosed structure shall be required to apply for and receive an approved conditional use permit. For the definition of an enclosed structure; a permanent structure that is enclosed by all sides and has an enclosed roof, the structure may have doors, windows and other openings that can be closed to public view from the street, avenue or alley. 
614.03-1.1  Recreational uses: 
614.03-1.1-1  Athletic/recreational facilities; 
614.03-1.1-2  Public, nonprofit or institutional athletic facilities that offer a variety of programs such as karate, aerobic, dance, weight training, gymnasiums, etc., public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings and grounds, tennis courts, swimming pools, and outdoor recreational activities. 
614.03-1.2  Commercial uses: 
614.03-1.2-1  Air conditioning contracting and Supplies with tools, goods, repairs, equipment, and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-2  Archery stores; 
614.03-1.2-3  Art display stores; 
614.03-1.2-4  Art supply stores; 
614.03-1.2-5  Automobile service stations and public garages, (with tools, parts, goods, repairs, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure and major repair under cover) (no more than five vehicles without current state tags and current license allowed on each lot); 
614.03-1.2-6  Automobile sales and/or parts with tools, goods, repairs, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-7  Banks and loan and finance offices; 
614.03-1.2-8  Barber shops; 
614.03-1.2-9  Beauty parlors; 
614.03-1.2-10  Boat rental; 
614.03-1.2-11  Boot and shoe repair; 
614.03-1.2-12  Book lending; 
614.03-1.2-13  Bowling alley; 
614.03-1.2-14  Bridal shops; 
614.03-1.2-15  Business schools; 
614.03-1.2-16  Business office; 
614.03-1.2-17  Building supply with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-18  Bus depots and/or office for the sale of travel accommodations; 
614.03-1.2-19  Bicycles and their accessories with tools, goods, repair, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-20  Cameras and photographic supplies; 
614.03-1.2-21  Cable companies and the like; 
614.03-1.2-22  Candy and confections; 
614.03-1.2-23  Car washes; 
614.03-1.2-24  Circuses, carnivals, fairs, and sideshows; 
614.03-1.2-25  Carpenter contactor with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-26  Carpet shops with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-27  Catering; 
[614.03-1.2-27.1]  Cement finishing contracting with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-28  Chiropractic offices; 
614.03-1.2-29  Cigars, cigarettes, tobacco and smoking supplies; 
614.03-1.2-30  Clothing and wearing apparel; 
614.03-1.2-31  Coffee shops; 
614.03-1.2-32  Coins and collectible stores; 
614.03-1.2-33  Computer stores/sales and service; 
614.03-1.2-34  Construction yards with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-35  Convenience stores; 
614.03-1.2-36  Courier offices; 
614.03-1.2-37  Credit unions; 
614.03-1.2-38  Crematories; 
614.03-1.2-39  Dairy products; 
614.03-1.2-40  Dental offices; 
614.03-1.2-41  Department stores with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-42  Discount shops with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-43  Drive thru businesses; 
614.03-1.2.44  Dry cleaning shops; 
614.03-1.2-45  Dry goods; 
614.03-1.2-46  Dyeing shops; 
614.03-1.2-47  Electrical supply and contracting with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-48  Electronic audio/visual devices and their accessories; 
614.03-1.2-49  Express mail; 
614.03-1.2-50  Fast food establishments; 
614.03-1.2.51  Feed, grain and seeds with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-52  Fire stations; 
614.03-1.2.53  Flowers and plants shops; 
614.03-1.2-54  Food products; 
614.03-1.2-55  Fruit and vegetables stands as long as the product is grown by the seller; 
614.03-1.2-56  Furniture and household furnishings stores; 
614.03-1.2-57  Funeral homes; 
614.03-1.2-58  Gas stations with tools, goods, repairs, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-59  Glass blowing shop with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-60  Greenhouses; 
614.03-1.2-61  Grocery stores; 
614.03-1.2-62  Gunsmith; 
614.03-1.2-63  Hardware stores with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-64  Hat cleaning, tailoring, dressmaking; 
614.03-1.2-65  Healthcare facilities; 
614.03-1.2-66  Heating supplies and/or contractor with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-67  Home occupation (approved application required); 
614.03-1.2-67.1  Any single dwelling unit, whether as part of a multiunit residential structure or as a single-family residence, within this district in which both residential use and nonresidential use exists, shall be governed as a home occupation use with tools, goods, repairs, services, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure); 
614.03-1.2-68  Horse and tack stores with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-69  Hospitals; 
614.03-1.2-70  Hotels; 
614.03-1.2-71  Hunting supply stores; 
614.03-1.2-72  Inns; 
614.03-1.2-73  Insurance offices; 
614.03-1.2-74  Ice cream and soft drinks; 
614.03-1.2-75  Jewelry, watches and clocks; 
614.03-1.2-76  Kitchenware and crockery; 
614.03-1.2-77  Lawn moving [mowing] equipment repair with tools, goods, repairs, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-78  Laundries and dry cleaning shops, and clothes dyeing establishments; 
614.03-1.2-79  Leather, leather goods and luggage; 
614.03-1.2-80  Libraries; 
614.03-1.2-81  Lithographing; 
614.03-1.2-82  Lumber and building supply with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-83  Masonry contracting with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-84  Meat and fish stores; 
614.03-1.2-85  Medical offices; 
614.03-1.2-86  Movie theatres (indoor); 
614.03-1.2-87  Mortuaries; 
614.03-1.2-88  Motels; 
614.03-1.2-89  Moving company offices; 
614.03-1.2-90  Museum; 
614.03-1.2-91  Music and musical instruments; 
614.03-1.2-92  Newspaper and magazine offices; 
614.03-1.2-93  Novelties and variety goods; 
614.03-1.2-94  Nursing homes; 
614.03-1.2-95  Optical goods; 
614.03-1.2-96  Paint, wallpaper and painter's and decorator's supplies with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-97  Pet stores, such as dogs, cats and birds and pet supplies with tools, goods, animals, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-98  Picture frame manufacturing, supplies and assembling with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-99  Pharmaceutical supplies including drugs and medicines; 
614.03-1.2-100  Plumbing contractors with tools, goods, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-101  Police stations; 
614.03-1.2-102  Post offices; 
614.03-1.2-103  Printing shops; 
614.03-1.2-104  Professional offices; 
614.03-1.2-105  Public garages; 
614.03-1.2-106  Publishing, printing and lithographing; 
614.03-1.2-107  Public or private educational services; 
614.03-1.2-108  Public parks; 
614.03-1.2-109  Public playgrounds; 
614.03-1.2-109[.1]  Public and private field and recreational facilities; 
614.03-1.2-110  Public service organizations; 
614.03-1.2-111  Real estate offices and other professional services; 
614.03-1.2-112  Rescue squad stations; 
614.03-1.2-113  Retail shops with tools, goods, repairs, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-114  Rental shops with tools, goods, repairs, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-115  Shoe stores; 
614.03-1.2-116  Small engine repair with tools, goods, repairs, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-117  Specialty shops with tools, goods, repairs, services, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-118  Special care homes; 
614.03-1.2-119  Specialty schools; 
614.03-1.2-120  Sporting goods; 
614.03-1.2-121  Stationary and greeting cards; 
614.03-1.2-122  Tattoo parlors, shall follow all state regulations; 
614.03-1.2-123  Theaters of the performing arts; 
614.03-1.2-124  Therapeutic offices (therapy, psychology, mental health, etc.); 
614.03-1.2-125  Towing; 
614.03-1.2-126  Trailer rental stores; 
614.03-1.2-127  Upholstering shops with tools, goods, repairs, services, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure; 
614.03-1.2-128  Variety stores; 
614.03-1.2-129  Veterans organizations; 
614.03-1.2-130  Watch repair; 
614.03-1.2-131  Wine shops. 
614.03-1.3  Offices for the handling of: 
614.03-1.3-1  Administrative functions; 
614.03-1.3-2  Software development; 
614.03-1.3-3  Computer sales and service; 
614.03-1.3-4  Internet commerce and services. 
614.03-1.4  Professional services: 
614.03-1.4-1  Civic/institutional; 
614.03-1.4-2  Activity halls; 
614.03-1.4-3  Assembly halls; 
614.03-1.4-4  Accessory structures; 
614.03-1.4-5  Business, private, public and vocational schools and classrooms, academic facilities, administrative offices and associated support structures; 
614.03-1.4-6  Business and professional offices, including, but not limited to, tax preparation, engineers, and architects; 
614.03-1.4-7  Child care; 
614.03-1.4-8  Child day care (group) (preschool); 
614.03-1.4-9  Churches and other places of worship and church school buildings; 
614.03-1.4-10  Clubs and lodges, fraternities, and meeting places of other organizations; 
614.03-1.4-11  Community center; 
614.03-1.4-12  Cultural buildings; 
614.03-1.4-13  Curbs; 
614.03-1.4-14  Dancehall or auditorium used primarily for entertainment or recreation; 
614.03-1.4-15  Day care facility (adult); 
614.03-1.4-16  Dinner theatre; 
614.03-1.4-17  Gutters; 
614.03-1.4-18  Hospitals; 
614.03-1.4-19  Family day care; 
614.03-1.4-20  Fraternal organization (private); 
614.03-1.4-21  Funeral home and/or mortuary; 
614.03-1.4-22  Gym, dance, karate, art, pottery or similar schools or studios; 
614.03-1.4-23  Gutters; 
614.03-1.4-24  Libraries; 
614.03-1.4-25  Lodges; 
614.03-1.4-26  Manholes; 
614.03-1.4-27  Municipal building; 
614.03-1.4-2  Museums; 
614.03-1.4-29  Newspaper offices and printing shops; 
614.03-1.4-30  Parking lots; 
614.03-1.4-31  Playhouses; 
614.03-1.4-32  Police, fire, and rescue squad stations; 
614.03-1.4-33  Post offices; 
614.03-1.4-34  Professional services; 
614.03-1.4-35  Public buildings and properties of a cultural, administrative, or service type; 
614.03-1.4-36  Public service and storage buildings; 
614.03-1.4-37  Public utilities (water facilities, sewer facilities, pumping station facilities, cable facilities, communication cables and facilities, wastewater inlets, etc.); 
614.03-1.4-38  Radio and television broadcasting studios exclusive of transmitter facilities (upper levels only); 
614.03-1.4-39  Social organizations (private); 
614.03-1.4-40  Trade schools. 
614.03-1.5  Residential/lodging: 
614.03-1.5-1  Bed and breakfast home stays and inns in accordance with article 14; 
614.03-1.5-2  Boarding houses; 
614.03-1.5-3  Child care centers and family day care homes; 
614.03-1.5-4  Family care homes, foster homes or group homes serving the mentally retarded developmentally disabled or others, rest homes, homes for adults, or nursing homes, provided that licensing requirements are met; 
614.03-1.5-5  Hotels/motels; 
614.03-1.5-6  Single-family detached dwellings; 
614.03-1.5-7  Townhouses; 
614.03-1.5-8  Tourist homes. 
614.03-1.6  Restaurant/food/entertainment: 
614.03-1.6-1  Bakeries. 
614.03-1.6-2  Restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, dairy product stores, lunch rooms, soda fountains, drive-in and retail sale of any goods normally associated with such establishments, portable food stands (moved this from the general permitted use list). 
614.03-1.7  Miscellaneous: 
614.03-1.7-1  Bus/railroad stations and taxi stands; 
614.03-1.7-2  Parking garages and parking lots; 
614.03-1.7-3  Off-street parking as required by this ordinance; 
614.03-1.7-4  Signs as provided in article 7; 
614.03-1.7-5  The manufacture or processing of the following goods and products provided that it is combined with retail sales of such products on the premises, and that no less than 50 percent of the square footage of the first floor shall be dedicated to retail sale of the goods and products (with tools, goods, repairs, services, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure); 
614.03-1.7-6  Artificial flowers; 
614.03-1.7-7  Bakeries (not industrial type bakeries); 
614.03-1.7-7.1  Industrial for bakeries shall mean wholesale on a large scale; 
614.03-1.7-8  Chemical manufacturing associated with retail sale of drugs and medicines; 
614.03-1.7-9  Clothing or wearing apparel and their accessories, except boots and shoes; 
614.03-1.7-10  Commercial indoor recreation facilities; 
614.03-1.7-11  Dental and orthopedic appliances and supplies; 
614.03-1.7-12  Engraving, grinding and repair of optical products; 
614.03-1.7-13  Indoor and outdoor concert facilities; 
614.03-1.7-14  Packaging of feed, grain and seeds with tools, goods, repairs, services, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure); 
614.03-1.7-15  Printing and book publishing and binding; 
614.03-1.7-16  Repair of watches and clocks and other small articles and appliances; 
614.03-1.7-17  Repair of household furnishings with tools, goods, repairs, services, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure); 
614.03-1.7-18  Any public uses or use by a semi-public agency whose activities are primarily nonprofit in nature. 
614.04  Conditional uses. When after review of an application and hearing hereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the Buena Vista City Council finds as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses, is consistent with the intent of this Ordinance and of the Comprehensive Plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista, the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
614.04-1  Athletic fields, stadiums, and arenas; 
614.04-2  Beverage manufacturing, bottling or distribution stations and food processing, packaging, or distribution stations; 
614.04-3  Commercial radio, television, and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met; 
614.04-4  Drive-in theaters provided all parts of such drive-in shall be distant at least 200 feet from any Residential District and provided that the screen shall be located as not to be visible from adjacent streets or highways and it shall be set back not less than 200 feet from the established right-of-way of said street or highway; 
614.04-5  Dormitories; 
614.04-6  Kennels and animal hospitals provided that any structure or premises used for such purposes shall be located at least 200 feet from any residential lot with tools, goods, animals, services, equipment and/or supplies in a permanent enclosed structure (animal enclosures shall be soundproof); 
614.04-7  Any person (property owner or otherwise) shall obtain a conditional use permit when any single-family home, building or other structure is altered, constructed or used to generate rental income and/or where five or more unrelated people (individually) pay rent. See section 711 of the Buena Vista Land Use Regulations concerning rental minimum requirements; 
614.04-8  Multifamily homes/apartments/efficiencies; 
614.04-9  Two-family homes and rentals; 
614.04-10  Multi-unit residential uses which may be in combination as a mixed use, with nonresidential uses permitted in this district, subject to the following limitations and this includes new construction; 
614.04-11  Residential rental units shall be limited to the second or higher floor, unless an existing dwelling at the time of passage of this section (April 4, 2013) (in the Mixed Use Zoning District only); 
614.04-11B  Residential use apartment, on the ground level floor, provided the dwelling is located at the rear of the structure and is occupied by the current property owner(s) or business owner(s) of a business operating in the structure. Furthermore, the ground floor residential area should not be visible from the commercial space and shall not occupy more than 50 percent of total ground floor area as shown in a floor plan provided to the city for review and the remaining ground level commercial area shall be a minimum of 500 square feet; 
614.04-12  Public billiard parlors and pool rooms, bowling alleys, dance balls [halls], and similar forms of public amusement; 
614.04-13  Public utilities limited to public service structures such as power plants or substations or such similar operations publicly or privately owned furnishing electricity, gas, rail transport, communications, or related services to the general public; 
614.04-14  Radio and television broadcasting studios; 
614.04-15  Swimming pools, skating rinks, miniature golf courses, or similar recreational use or facility if located at least 100 feet from any residential lot; 
614.04-16  Wholesale business, storage or warehouse provided that any such use shall be distant at least 50 feet from any Residential District; 
614.04-16.1  Wholesale and processing not objectionable because of dust, noise, or odors. 
614.05  Accessory uses. Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following rules are applicable: 
614.05-1  Accessory buildings and facilities such as garage, carport, tool shed, noncommercial greenhouse, workshop (private), tennis court, shed and portable structure; 
614.05-2  Accessory uses shall be located behind the main building on a lot; 
614.05-3  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met; 
614.05-4  Manufacture of goods to be sold as retail on site; 
614.05-5  Parking as provided for in article 7; 
614.05-6  Private parking garage; 
614.05-7  Signs as provided for in article 7; 
614.05-8  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work; 
614.5-9  Travel trailers, which may be stored within the minimum yard requirements and shall be prohibited from occupancy. 
614.06  Yard setbacks, minimum dwelling/building size, minimum lot size, parking requirements and maximum height. 
614.06-1  For residential purposes see the Residential Limited (R-3) Zoning District Regulations which is contained in the Land Use Regulations. 
614.06-2  For business purposes see the B-1 Zoning District in the Buena Vista Land Use Regulations. 
614.06-3  Parking shall be at the rear of the building (in this district) unless there is not adequate parking spaces available at the rear of the building to meet the requirements as set forth in the Land Use Regulations article 7, then other arrangements shall be made to meet the minimum requirements and presented to the planning commission on their site plan. 
614.06-4  Any conversion from one use to another shall use the regulations before the conversion for minimum requirements. 
614.07  Requirements for submittal of site plan to the planning commission. 
614.07-1  The site plan shall be submitted to the building inspector for his approval prior to the site plan being submitted to the office of planning and zoning. 
614.07-1.1  Building inspector shall only sign the site plan with his signature and the date only after the plan has met the appropriate building code requirements. 
614.07-2  The site plan may be required to be submitted to any city department for their respective approval prior to this being submitted to the office of planning and zoning if applicable. 
614.07-3  The office of planning and zoning may waive a department heads signature and date should such not be applicable. 
614.07-4  A formal application for a conditional use permit. 
[614.07-5  Reserved.] 
614.07-6  All submittals shall be uniform in scale. 
614.07-7  A copy of the plat. 
614.07-8  A sketch of the general development is required for each rental covered under this article. The plans shall show the following information: 
614.07-9  Address location(s) of the rental unit(s) or efficiency/efficiencies. 
614.07-10  All existing and proposed streets. 
614.07-11  The distances to all lot lines and public rights-of-way. 
614.07-12  The location of all existing and proposed structures on the lot. 
614.07-13  Number of floors, floor area, height and location of each building and proposed general use for each building. If a multifamily residential building, the number, size and type of dwelling units. 
614.07-14  Location of rental unit(s) or efficiencies: is it at the rear of building, first floor, second floor, etc. 
614.07-15  Location of proposed fencing. 
614.07-16  Number of rental units or efficiencies. 
614-07-17  Label each building and/or rooms as apartment, efficiency or otherwise. 
614.07-18  Show the size (length and width) of each room, including ceiling height of each room, and location of access to the unit(s) or efficiencies. 
614.07-19  Length and width of each room to be rented. 
614.07-20  Each room on the site plan shall be designated as a kitchen and location of sink, stove and cupboards, bedroom #1, bedroom #2, living room, hallway bathroom(s) and location of sink, bath and stool in each, and identify each additional room. 
614.07-21  Ceiling heights in each room. 
614.07-22  Door entrances to each room within the rental. 
614.07-23  Exterior entrance and location on floor plan. 
614.07-24  Dumpster location on lot or trash handling to be addressed with site plan for each tenant. 
614.07-25  All off-street parking shall be shown with size and width of each parking spot and its location (rear, side, front of building, elsewhere). 
614.07-26  If parking space(s) provided is not in the rear or side of the property, please show on site plan approximate location of parking spaces and distance from parking space(s) to the dwelling units or efficiencies. If owner is leasing this property, please provide name and phone number on site plan. 
614.07-27  Any additional items as deemed necessary by the office of planning and zoning and the planning commission. 
614.08  Items to be considered prior to granting a conditional use permit. 
614.08-1  The impact on property values. 
614.08-2  Traffic generation. 
614.08-3  Parking. 
614.08-4  The population density of the neighborhood. 
614.08-5  The effect on the existing infrastructure. 
614.08-6  Number of occupants of each dwelling unit. 
614.08-7  Any of the above could cause this conditional use permit to be denied if not meeting the minimum requirements. 
614.08-8  Shall meet all the requirements of section 711 of the Buena Vista Land Use Regulations. 
614.09  Maximum lot coverage. 
614.09-1  Buildings may at a maximum take up 100 percent of lot area. 
614.10  Multiple buildings on a single lot. 
614.10-1  A lot may have multiple buildings on a single lot as long as the aggregate of the areas of the buildings do not exceed 100 percent of the lot area. 
614.11  Building height. 
614.11-1  Buildings shall be limited to 3 stories in height or one story greater than contiguous buildings, up to a maximum height of 40 feet, unless a conditional use for additional height is granted. 
614.12  Yards. 
614.12-1  On in-fill lots in the district located on Beech Avenue and on 29th Street west of Ridge Avenue, new commercial and multifamily buildings shall be located at the front lot line maintaining the traditional downtown pattern of adjacency to the pedestrian way. New business buildings are required to abut adjacent structures. However, buildings requiring access to rear or side parking areas will be allowed a one travel lane width a maximum width of 18 feet. 
614.13  Prohibited uses. 
614.13-1  Any use of land, building, structure, or equipment which would be injurious noxious or offensive by way of the creation of adverse traffic impacts or conditions, odors, fumes, smoke, dust, vibration, noise or other objectionable features, or hazardous to the community on account of fire or explosion or any other cause shall be prohibited in this district. 
614.13-2  Other land use activities which are specifically prohibited within this district include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following: 
614.13-2.1  Sexually oriented businesses. 
614.13-2.2  Wireless communication facilities. 
614.13-2.3  Manufactured housing. 
(Ord. No. 13-04, Att. B, 4-4-2013; Ord. No. 14-01, Exh. A, 3-6-2014) 
Article 7. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 701.00. - Area regulations. 
    Area and density regulations are provided by district in the lot regulations, table 1 and table 2. 
701.01  Modification of yard requirements. Yard requirements may be modified to provide: 
701.01-1  An uncovered porch may project into a required front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet; 
701.01-2  A patio may be included as open space in meeting open space requirements and may be included as yard area in meeting yard dimension requirements provided no structure is closer than five feet of the property line. No patio or open court area may be located in the front yard of a lot without adequate screening; 
701.01-3  Minimum setback requirements of this ordinance for yards facing streets shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on developed lots within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same street is less than the minimum. In such cases, the setback on such lot may be less than the required setback but not less that the average of the existing setbacks on the existing developed lots; 
701.01-4  Signs advertising sale or rent of premises may be erected up to the property line. 
701.02  Special provisions for corner lots. 
701.02-1  Of the two sides of a corner lot the front shall be deemed to be the shorter of the two sides fronting on streets; 
701.02-2  The side yard on the side the side street shall be 15 feet or more for both main and accessory buildings; 
701.02-3  For subdivisions platted after the enactment of this ordinance each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of one hundred 50-five (155) feet or more. 
Sec. 702.00. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, adopted Jan. 18, 2018, repealed § 702.00, which pertained to additional buildings on a single lot. 
Sec. 703.00. - Off-street parking. 
    Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on every lot on which any permitted or conditional use established in accordance with this ordinance. 
703.01  General requirements. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following general requirements are specified: 
703.01-1  Parking spaces for all dwellings shall be located on the same lot with the main buildings to be served; 
703.01-2  If an off-street parking space cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the main use is conducted, such space may be provided on other off-street property, provided such space lies within 600 feet of the property line of such main use; 
703.01-3  The required number of parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time; 
703.01-4  Area reserved for off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance shall not be reduced in the area, encroached upon or changed to any other use unless the use which it serves is discontinued or modified; 
703.01-5  Off-street parking existing it the effective date of this ordinance in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use. Existing off-street parking which is provided in an amount less than the requirements stated hereinafter shall not be further reduced. 
703.02  Site requirements. All off-street parking shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
703.02-1  All such parking areas, except those serving one- and two-family dwellings, shall be maintained in a dust-proof condition; 
703.02-2  Lighting facilities shall be so arranged that light is reflected away from adjacent properties; 
703.02-3  The parking lot shall be adequately drained. 
703.03  Parking space requirements for all districts. In all districts, except the core business district which begins at the intersection of Beech Avenue, and 29th Street, thence with Beech Avenue to its intersection with Sycamore Avenue, thence with Sycamore Avenue to its intersection with 15th Street, thence with 15th Street to its intersection with Magnolia Avenue, thence with Magnolia to its intersection with Park Avenue, thence; with Park Avenue to its intersection with 26th Street, thence with 26th Street to its intersection with Beech Avenue, there shall be provided off-street automobile storage or parking space with vehicular access to a street or alley, and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirement for the specific land use set forth. 
Land Use Parking Requirements 703.03-1 Dwellings a. One- and two-families 2 spaces for each dwelling unit b. Multifamily, townhouses 11/2 spaces per dwelling unit except for efficiency apartments for which one space per dwelling unit shall be provided c. Hotels, motels 1 space for each bedroom, plus 1 additional space for each 2 employees d. Mobile home parks/subdivisions 2 spaces per mobile home e. Travel trailer parks 1 space for each travel trailer, motor home, or camper. f. Boarding[houses] and roominghouses, dormitories 1 space for each bedroom 703.03-2 Public assembly a. Newly constructed churches and other places of worship 1 space for each 10 seats in the main auditorium or sanctuary. b. Private clubs, lodges and fraternal or sororal buildings not providing overnight accommodations 1 space for each 600 square feet c. Theaters, auditoriums, coliseums, stadiums, and similar places of assembly 1 space for each 10 seats d. Schools, including kindergartens, playschools, and day care centers 1 space for each employee, including teachers and administrators, plus 5 spaces per classroom for high school and colleges e. Skating rinks, dance halls, exhibition halls, pool rooms, and other places of amusement or assembly without fixed seating arrangements 1 space for each 200 square feet of floor area f. Bowling alleys 2 spaces for each alley 703.03-3 Health facilities a. Hospitals and similar uses 1 space for each 2 beds, plus 1 space for each staff doctor, plus 1 space foe each 4 employees on the maximum working shift b. Kennels and animal hospitals A net parking area equal to 30 percent of the total enclosed or covered area c. Medical, dental, and health offices and clinics At least 10 spaces; 3 additional parking spaces shall be furnished for each doctor and dentist having office in such clinics in excess of 3 doctors or dentist, plus 1 space per each 2 staff and employees d. Homes for adults and similar uses 1 space for each 4 beds plus 1 space for every 3 employees 703.03-4 Businesses a. Automobile repair establishments 1 space for each 300 square feet, with a minimum of 10 spaces b. Food stores 1 space for each 200 square feet of floor area designated for retail sales only. c. Restaurants, including bars, cafes, taverns, night clubs, lunch counters, and all similar dining and/or drinking establishments 1 space for each 4 seats provided for patron use, plus 1 space per employee on average shift d. Office buildings, including banks, business, commercial and professional offices and buildings but not including medical, dental, and health offices and clinics 1 space for each 300 square feet of ground floor area, plus 1 space for each 500 square feet of upper floor space e. General business, commercial or personal service establishments catering to the retail trade 1 space for each 200 square feet of floor area designated for retail sales f. Governmental offices 1 space for each 300 square feet of ground floor area, plus 1 space for each 500 square feet of upper floor area and 1 space for each governmental vehicles g. Shopping centers 1 space per 200 square feet of retail sales area h. Furniture stores 1 space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area i. Public utilities, such as telephone exchanges and substations, radio and TV stations, and electric power and gas substations 1 space for each employee on the maximum shift, plus a parking area equal to 25 percent of the gross floor area j. Mortuaries and funeral parlors 5 spaces per parlor unit or chapel unit, or 1 space per 4 seats, whichever is greater 703.03-5 Industries a. Manufacturing and industrial establishments not catering to the retail trade 1 space for each 3 employees on the maximum working shift, plus 1 space for each company vehicle or mobile equipment operating from the premises b. Wholesale establishments 1 space for every 50 square feet of customer service area, plus 2 spaces for each 3 employees on the maximum working shift, plus 1 space for each company vehicle operating from the premises  
703.03-6  Design and improvement of parking. Please reference tables H-1 and table 2 at the rear of this section (703.00). 
703.03-6.1  Parking space design. Except as provided below, all parking spaces shall be standard spaces, designed to accommodate full-sized passenger vehicles. 
703.03-6.1-1  Parking space sizes. Standard spaces shall be a minimum of 9 feet by 18 feet; and parallel parking spaces shall be a minimum of 8 feet wide by 20 feet long. 
703.03-6.2  Handicap spaces. When a business, state, or local government, or other entity re-stripes or creates a new parking lot, it shall provided accessible parking spaces as required by the ADA Standards for Accessible Design. Failure to do so would violate the American Disability Act. 
703.03-6.2-1  Handicap spaces. See table H-1 at rear of this section (703.00) 
703.03-6.2-2  Vertical clearance of at least 114 inches to accommodate van height at the van parking spaces(s), the adjacent access aisle, and on the vehicular route to and from the van accessible space. 
703.03-6.2-3  An additional sign that identifies the parking space(s) as van accessible. 
703.03-6.2-4  Specifically designated parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be located on level ground as the parking spaces closest to the designated accessible primary entrance(s). Where possible, spaces shall be located so that handicapped persons do not have to cross roadways. 
703.03-6.2-5  Handicapped parking spaces shall be identified and reserved by an appropriately marked sign erected on a post or building at each space. Sign shall be mounted high enough so it can be seen while a vehicle is parked in the space. 
703.03-6.2-6  If the accessible route is located in front of the space, install wheelstops to keep vehicles from reducing width below 36 inches. 
703.03-6.2-7  Access aisle of at least 60 inches width must be level (1:50 maximum slope in all directions). Be the same length as the adjacent parking space(s) it serves and must connect to an accessible route to the building, Ramps must not extend into the access aisle. Where buildings have multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, the accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located closest to the accessible entrances. 
703.03-6.2-8  Boundary of the access aisle must be marked. The end may be squared or curved shape. 
703.03-6.2-9  When accessible parking spaces are added to an existing parking lot, locate the spaces in the most level ground close to the accessible entrance. An accessible route shall always be provided from the accessible parking to the accessible entrance. An accessible route never has curbs or stairs, shall be at least 3 feet wide and has a firm, stable, slip resistant surface. The slope along the accessible route should not be greater than 1:2 in the direction of travel 
703.03-6.2-10  Two parking spaces may share an access aisle. 
703.03-6.2-11  Total Handicapped Parking Spaces required: 
Total Number of Parking Spaces (per lot) Total Minimum Number of Accessible Parking Spaces (60" and 96" aisles) Column A Van Accessible parking Spaces with minimum 96" Wide Access Aisle Accessible Parking Spaces with Minimum 60" Access Aisle 1-25 1 1 0 26-50 2 1 1 51-75 3 1 2 76-100 4 1 3 101-150 5 1 4 151-200 6 1 5 201-300 7 1 6 301-400 8 1 7 401-500 9 2 7 501-1,000 2% of total parking provided in each lot 1/8 of column A 7/8 of column A 1,001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000 1/8 of column A 7/8 of column A  
703.03-6.3  Parking lot design. The design and layout of parking lots shall conform to the following standards: 
703.03-6.3-1  Circulation aisle width. See table 1 at the [end] rear of this section (703.00). 
703.03-6.4  All maneuvering, except parallel parking, shall be designed so that a vehicle may enter an off-street parking space in one forward motion and may exit in one reverse motion and one motion forward. 
703.03-6.5  Circulation within a parking area shall be designed so that a car entering 
703.03-6.6  Circulation aisle for emergency access. The minimum width of a drive aisle needed for an emergency response vehicle shall be 20 feet. 
703.03-6.7  Vehicle overhang. Vehicular overhang is permitted, provided no vehicle shall overhang into a sidewalk which would reduce the encumbered width of a sidewalk to less than four feet. A vehicle is permitted to overhang onto a landscaped area by two feet. 
703.03-6.8  All unused right-of-way between the public street and the parking lot shall be landscaped and maintained by the landowner. 
703.03-6.9  A permanent curb, bumper, or wheel stop or similar device at least six inches in height shall be installed adjacent to sidewalks, planters and other landscape areas, parking lot fixtures and buildings and walls to protect these improvements from vehicular damage and the stopping edge of such protected bumper shall be placed no closer than two feet from the above noted improvements. 
703.03-6.10  All parking spaces shall be delineated and separated by a painted divider (stripe) and shall be maintained in a clear and visible manner. Measurements for parking spaces shall be taken from the center of the painted divider to the center of the painted divider. 
703.03-6.11  Controlled access required. All parking spaces, (including garage spaces) required for any land use other than single family or two family dwellings shall be designed and located to provide for vehicle maneuvering on the site so that vehicles will enter any adjacent right-of-way or private road in a forward direction. 
703.03-6.12  Surfacing of parking areas. Required parking and circulation areas shall be surfaced with asphalt concrete or Portland cement concrete, or other approved all-weather, hard, noneroding surface. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to insure that the surface is maintained free from significant cracks or holes. 
703.03-6.13  Drive through facilities. The following requirements apply to any use with drive-through facilities: 
703.03-6.13-1  Separation and marking of lanes. Drive-through aisles shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide and shall be separated from other circulation aisles for ingress and egress, or aisles providing access to any parking space. Each aisle shall be striped, marked or otherwise distinctly delineated. 
703.03-6.14  Loading requirements. Loading shall be provided as identified below: 
703.03-6.14-1  No maneuvering within public rights-of-way. All site designs shall be designed so as to prevent truck back up maneuvering within the right-of-way. 
703.03-6.14-2  Design. The location, number, size and access of the loading area hall be determined pursuant to design review. 
703.03-6.15  All required parking spaces shall be provided on the same building site as the use of the building for which they are required. 
703.03-6-16  Required Parking spaces for single family and duplex dwellings located in the front yard shall not be used for, or obstructed by, storage of material, equipment or inoperable vehicles. 
703.03-6-17  Bicycle racks. When bicycle spaces are provided, a bicycle rack shall be installed. The bicycle rack shall be designed to allow a bicycle to be secured to the rack. The location of the bicycle rack shall not encroach into the sidewalk which would reduce the unencumbered width of the sidewalk to less than four feet or interfere with any handicap access. 
703.03-7  Fire lane requirements, markings and signs. 
703.03-7.1  The Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, as amended, the fire official is authorized to require and designate public or private fire lanes as deemed necessary and shall be consulted. This is to prevent parking in front of or adjacent to fire hydrants and/or to provide access for fire fighting equipment and apparatus. Markings and signs are to be provided and maintained by the owner or agent of the owner of the property involved. All enforceable fire lanes shall be marked as follows: 
703.03-7.2  Curb and pavement markings. 
703.03-7.2-1  The curb shall be painted hot traffic yellow. 
703.03-7.2-2  In areas without curbs, a six inch hot traffic yellow border shall be applied parallel to the roadway, at the edge of the pavement. 
703.03-7.2-3  Approved signs. 
703.03-7.2-4  A sign shall be positioned at the beginning and end of the fire lane an at 100 foot intervals throughout the fire lane or as designated by the fire official. 
703.03-7.2-5  here fire lanes are less than 50 feet in length, a single sign positioned in the center is permissible with arrows pointing in both directions. 
703.03-7.2-6  Signs shall be mounted on posts and must not exceed a setback of 6 feet from the curb or edge of the roadway. 
703.03-7.2-7  The sign shall be positioned where clearly visible to traffic. 
703.03-7.2-8  The sign is to be mounted not less than 7 feet from the ground to the bottom of the sign, unless otherwise directed. 
703.03-7.2-9  Signs shall not be obscured from view by bushes, shrubs, etc. 
703.03-7.4  Sign lettering and construction. 
703.03-7.4-1  Lettering on sign. "NO PARKING FIRE LANE TOWING ENFORCED" arrows to point to and indicate the area designated as fire lane. 
703.03-7.4-2  Red letters on white background with 3/8 " red stripe around the entire outer edge of the sign. 
703.03-7.4-3  Lettering size: 
(a)  NO PARKING = two inches; 
(b)  FIRE LANE = two inches; 
(c)  TOWING ENFORCED = one inch; 
(d)  ARROW = one inch; 
(e)  Metal construction sign approximately 12 inches by 18 inches. 


(Ord. of 1-18-2008) 
Sec. 704.00. - Junk storage and automobile graveyards. 
704.01  Criteria for the location of junkyards or automobile graveyards. (See Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348.) No junkyard or automobile graveyard shall be established, any portion of which is within one thousand feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of an interstate or primary highway or within five hundred feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of any other highway, except junkyards or automobile graveyards which are: 
704.01-1  Screened by natural objects, plantings, fences, or other appropriate means so as not to be visible from the main-traveled way of the highway, or otherwise removed from sight; 
704.01-2  Located in areas which are zoned for industrial use; 
704.01-3  Not visible from the main-traveled way of the highway. 
704.03  Licensed automobile graveyards or junkyards in existence at the time of adoption. Licensed automobile graveyards or junkyards in existence at the time of the adoption of this ordinance, as amended, are considered as nonconforming uses (see section 708.03). 
Sec. 705.00. - Home occupations. 
    This ordinance uses a permit approach to the control of home occupations. The use of permits is to ensure compatibility of home occupations with surrounding residential uses. Custom or traditions are not to be considered as criteria for the evaluation of home occupations. The administrator may request advice from the planning commission as appropriate. 
705.01  Special requirements. Home occupation, where permitted, must meet the following special requirements: 
705.01-1  The applicant must be the owner of the property on which the home occupation is to be located, or must have written approval of the owner of the property if the applicant is a tenant; 
705.01-2  The home occupation shall be operated only by the members of the family residing on the premises and no article or service shall be sold or offered for sale except as may be produced by members of the family residing on the premises; 
705.01-3  The home occupation when restricted to the main building shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the floor area within said building; 
705.01-4  The home occupation shall not generate excessive traffic or produce obnoxious odors, glare, noise, vibration, electrical disturbance, radioactivity, or other conditions detrimental to the character of the surrounding area, and in general, shall give no evidence of nonresidential character of use other than through the use of a sign meeting requirements for professional name plates, as spelled out in section 706.03-3; 
705.01-5  The building in which the home occupation is to be located must be an existing structure ready for occupancy and not a proposed structure. 
705.02  Expiration and revocation. A zoning permit for home occupations shall expire or be revoked under the following conditions: 
705. 02-1  Whenever the applicant ceases to occupy the premises for which the home occupation permit was issued. No subsequent occupant of such premises shall engage in any home occupation until he shall have been issued a new permit after proper application; 
705.02-2  Whenever the holder of such a permit fails to exercise the same for any period of six consecutive months. 
705.02-3  Whenever the city council finds that the holder of the permit has violated the conditions of the permit for one or more of the special requirements in section 705.00. 
Sec. 706.00. - Signs. 
706.1  Intent. The purpose of the following sign requirements is to promote and protect the public health, welfare, and safety by regulating existing and proposed outdoor advertising, and outdoor signs of all types. It is intended to protect property values, create a more attractive economic and business climate, and enhance and protect the scenic and natural beauty of the City of Buena Vista. It is further intended to reduce sign or advertising distraction and obstructions that may be caused by signs overhanging or projecting over public right-of-way, provide more open space, curb the deterioration of the natural environment, and enhance community development. 
706.01  Definitions. See 302.19-5. 
706.02  Administration. 
706.02-1  Permit required. 
706.02-1.1  The erection, remodeling or removal of any sign shall require a permit from the zoning administrator; 
706.02-1.2  All sign permit applications shall be accompanied by detailed drawings indicating the dimensions, location and engineering of the particular sign and plat plans when applicable. 
706.03  General regulations. 
706.03-1  Permitted signs. Signs shall be permitted in the various zoning districts as accessory uses in accordance with the regulations contained in this section. 
706.03-2  Prohibited signs. 
706.03-2.1  Rooftop signs and all other signs that project above the fascia wall or roofline; 
706.03-2.2  Revolving and rotating signs; 
706.03-2.4  Strings of light bulbs not permanently mounted on a rigid background used in connection with commercial premises for commercial purposes other than traditional holiday decorations; 
706.03-2.5  Posters; 
706.03-2.6  Wind-driven signs (except banners and pennants); 
706.03-2.7  Action image signs; 
706.03-2.8  Scrolling marquee signs. 
706.03-3  Exempted signs. Signs posted, displayed or erected under the direction public officials or court officers in the performance of official duties. These signs include informational signs of a public or quasi-public nature identifying or locating civic, educational or cultural purpose, and signs drawing attention to public parking lots, rest rooms, or to other public convenience relating to such places or activities are permitted. 
706.03-4  Conditional use signs in all districts. Freeform signs (see [section] 706.19-11) and signs with three or more sides (see section 706.19-10). 
706.04  Number of signs. 
706.04-1  In general there shall be no more than three types of signs employed per structure. (e.g. freestanding, awning, projecting, window, or wall.) See zoning district regulations for standards for number of signs permitted in specific districts. 
706.05  Specific district standards. More strict or specific requirements for sign standards setout in other sections of these regulations take precedence over the standards set forth in this section 
706.06  Nonconforming signs. All signs in existence at the time of the passage of this ordinance, which do not conform to this ordinance, shall be classified as nonconforming, but may be continued providing they are properly maintained during the life of such advertisement or advertising structure; no such sign shall be: 
706.06-1  Structurally changed to another nonconforming sign, although its content may be changed; 
706.06-2  Structurally altered in order to prolong the life of the sign, except to meet safety requirements; 
706.06-3  Altered so as to increase the degree of nonconformity of the sign; 
706.06-4  Enlarged; 
706.06-5  Continued in use if a change of use occurs as defined in the zoning ordinance, or if the premises promoted by the sign comes under new ownership or tenancy and such sign is proposed to be remodeled, repainted or otherwise changed for the purpose of displaying the new name or other new identification of the premises 
706.06-6  Or re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the appraised replacement cost. 
706.07  Removal of abandoned signs. 
706.07-1  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city, after making a reasonable attempt to notify such property owner, from ordering the removal of a nonconforming sign that has been abandoned. For purposes of this section, a sign shall be considered abandoned if the business for which the sign was erected has not been in operation for a period of at least two years. 
706.07-2  Any sign that exceeds the two-year period shall be removed by the owner of the property on which the sign is located, if notified by the city to do so. If, following such two-year period, the city has made a reasonable attempt to notify the property owner, the city through its own agents or employees may enter the property upon which the sign is located and remove any such sign whenever the owner has refused to do so. The cost of such removal shall be chargeable to the owner of the property. 
706.07-3  Nothing herein shall prevent the city from applying to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order requiring the removal of such abandoned nonconforming sign by the owner by means of injunction or other appropriate remedy. 
706.08  Illumination. 
706.08-1  Permanent signs may be illuminated as provided by this ordinance and specified by approved sign criteria, if applicable, in accordance with the following regulations: 
706.08-1.1  Externally-illuminated, building-mounted signage may be illuminated by either ground-mounted lights or building-mounted light bars. In either situation, the light source shall be totally screened from view. The lighting must be steady, stationary, with a shielded light source that does not cause glare. 
706.08-1.2  Externally-illuminated, freestanding signage shall be illuminated by ground-mounted lights, with the light source being totally screened from view. The lighting must be steady, stationary, with a shielded light source that does not cause glare. 
706.08-1.3  Internally-illuminated signs may not create glare or reflection which in any way interferes with traffic safety. 
706.08-1.4  Internally-illuminated signs in residential and office districts shall be required to have an opaque background and translucent copy. 
706.08-1.5  Flashing or intermittent forms of illumination are prohibited; and 
706.08-1.6  All illuminated signs shall require a sign permit and shall comply with all provisions of the adopted electrical code. 
706.08-1.7  Neon window signs may be permitted in cases where they are custom designed to be compatible with the building historic and/or architectural character, and where their color has been selected to harmonize with the building's exterior colors. 
706.08-1.8  Gas-filled light tubes shall be allowed for indirect illumination and when placed in such a manner that the tubes are not exposed to view from any point along the public roadway or sidewalk. 
706.08-1.9  Illuminated signs shall not be permitted to shine onto residential properties and traveled ways. 
706.09  Banners. 
706.09-1  Temporary banners are allowed in accordance with the following schedule: 
Banner Type Time allowed to be displayed Business Opening 30 Days Charitable or Civic Event 45 Days  
706.10  Awnings. 
706.10-1  Awnings are to be treated as signs for permitting, maintenance and repair purposes. 
706.10-2  Awnings are permitted to be placed on the front or side exterior of buildings. 
706.10-3  Awnings may not be placed on a building in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Awnings may not obstruct lighting within the pedestrian way. 
706.10-4  Awnings must be located above transom windows allowing a minimum of eight (8) feet clearance above grade or the sidewalk. 
706.10-5  Awnings must maintain a three foot setback from the edge of the sidewalk. 
706.10-6  Replacement awnings must be of a metal tube frame with canvas cover. Awning materials form and colors should compliment the building architecture and that of adjacent buildings. 
706.10-7  Signs painted on or attached as part of an awning cover must be attached flat against the surface of the awning. The sign may not extend beyond the valance or be attached to the underside. 
706.10-8  Letters shall not exceed eight (8) inches in height. 
706.11  Ground and freestanding signs. 
706.11-1  Freestanding sign height and area requirements. 
706.11-1.1    
Distance from street right-of-way line (feet) Maximum height above grade (feet) Maximum size allowed per side (square feet) 0 10 20 5 10 30 10 12 40 15 12 50 20 14 60 25 16 70 30 18 80 36 and more 18 90  
706.11-2  Ground signs sign height and area requirements. 
Distance from street right-of-way line (feet) Maximum height above grade (feet) Maximum size allowed per side (square feet) 0 7 45 5 8.5 60 10 10 75 15 and more 12 90  
706.11-2.1  Ground signs which exceed 31/2 feet (42 inches) in height, and freestanding signs which do not maintain free air space between a height of 31/2 feet and 6 feet (72 inches) above the adjacent street elevation, shall be set back from the right-of-way line a distance as established in the sight distance triangle table contained in this subsection. A freestanding sign shall not be construed to have free air space if such sign has a base, the width of which exceeds 50 percent of the width of its face or three feet, whichever is smaller. In addition, freestanding and ground signs shall not be located closer to the right-of-way line than allowed in the tables below that apply to such signs. 
706.11-2.2  [Sight distances.] 
Type of street Y distances (feet) X distances (feet) Safe sight distance (feet) Arterial Right 135 15 500 Left 270 Collector Right 120 15 400 Left 220 Local Right 100 15 300 Left 150  
706.11-2.2-1  [Sight lines.] 

706.11-3  The maximum size for ground and freestanding signs shall be 90 square feet per side. The maximum height for freestanding signs shall be 18 feet above grade. The maximum height for ground signs shall be 12 feet above grade. No freestanding or ground sign shall be built within 15 feet of any interior side lot line. The minimum horizontal distance between freestanding or ground signs located on the same lot shall be seventy-five (75) feet. 
706.11-4  The maximum combined sign area of all faces of a freestanding or ground sign shall be two times the maximum sign area allowed per side, based on setback. Any limitation imposed by other stricter district regulations on the size of the face of a sign shall also apply to the entire side of the sign. 
706.11-5  The required setback of any freestanding or ground sign shall be measured from the street right-of-way line of the street frontage which is the basis for the allotment of such sign. Any such setback shall be measured perpendicularly from the street right-of-way line to the nearest portion of the sign face or structure. 
706.11-6  When a freestanding or ground sign is placed on a lot with two or more street frontages, such sign shall be said to be adjacent to a particular street frontage when it is located closer to that street frontage than any other street frontage. 
706.11-7  No more than one freestanding or ground sign per street frontage shall be permitted for any property; except, however, election signs and for sale and for rent signs. 
706.11-8  If a lot has more than one street frontage, the freestanding or ground sign permitted for each frontage must be located adjacent to the street frontage which is the basis for the allotment of such sign. 
706.11-9  The sign face of a single face sign must be most nearly parallel to the street frontage to which it is adjacent. The sign faces of a multiface sign must be most nearly perpendicular to the street frontage to which they are adjacent. 
706.11-10  A drive-in restaurant, when located on a lot with frontage on only one street, shall be permitted one additional freestanding or ground sign for the sole purpose of a menu board for the drive-thru customers. Such sign shall not exceed five feet in height, 35 square feet in area and shall be limited to one face. 50 percent of the square footage of such sign shall be exempted from the total allowed for the property. 
706.11-11  All supporting structures of ground signs shall be of the same or similar materials or colors of the associated building(s) which house the businesses or activities advertised on the sign. 
706.11-12  When electrical service is provided to freestanding signs or ground signs, all such electrical service shall be underground. 
706.12  Canopy signs. 
706.12-1  No canopy sign shall project above the top of the canopy upon which it is mounted. 
706.12-2  No canopy sign shall project from the face of a canopy. 
706.12-3  Under-canopy signs which are perpendicular to the face of the building shall be deemed to be projecting wall signs. 
706.12-4  Under-canopy signs which are parallel to the face of the building shall be a minimum of eight feet above grade and shall be deemed to be flush wall signs. 
706.13  Individual letters or symbols. 
706.13-1  These may be attached to an awning, marquee, building surface, wall, signboard or raceway. 
706.13-2  Letters or symbols shall not project more than 12 inches from the building surface. 
706.13-3  Such letters and symbols shall not obscure the architectural features of the building to which they are attached. 
706.13-4  Such letters and symbols shall not extend above the lowest part of the roof, nor beyond the ends of the wall to which they are attached. 
706.13-5  Neon tubes shall be covered with a faceplate. 
706.13-6  Letters or symbols shall have an aggregate area not exceeding 1.5 square feet for each foot of building face parallel to a street lot line, or ten percent of the wall area to which they are affixed, whichever is less. When a lot fronts on more than one street, the aggregate sign area facing each street frontage shall be calculated separately. 
706.14  Mural signs. 
706.14-1  A special use permit is required for all new signs of this type. Mural signs shall comply with the dimensional requirements of a wall sign. 
706.15  Projecting signs. 
706.15-1  One projecting sign per business is permitted with a single flat face not exceeding ten square feet. 
706.15-2  The total area of a three dimensional sign shall be determined by enclosing the largest cross-section of the sign in an easily recognizable geometric shape and computing its area which shall not exceed nine square feet. 
706.15-3  Such sign shall be hung at right angles to the building and shall not project nearer than two feet to the curb line. 
706.15-4  The supporting framework shall be in proportion to the size of such sign. 
706.15-5  The top of the sign may be suspended in line with one of the following, whichever is the most successful application of scale, linear continuity, and visibility as determined by the zoning administrator: 
706.15-5.1  Suspended between the bottom sills of the second story windows and the top of the doors and windows of the ground floor; or, 
706.15-5.2  The lowest point of the roof of a one story building. 
706.15-6  Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet above grade when located adjacent to or projecting over a pedestrian way. If projecting over an alley or driveway, the clearance must be at least 13 feet. 
706.16  Roof signs. 
706.16-1  Signs shall not exceed height of 30 percent of the building on which they are attached. 
706.16-2  Signs shall be installed in such a manner that there are no visible angle iron supports, guy wires, braces or secondary supports. Signs shall appear to be integral part of the roof. 
706.16-3  No portion of the sign shall extend above the highest portion of the building or roof where the sign is attached. 
706.17  Temporary signs, including political advertisements. 
706.17-1  Not allowed longer than 45 days; 
706.17-2  Shall be removed by sign owner within five days after the date of the event or activity to which the sign makes reference, or if he fails to do so, by the zoning administrator at the owner's expense, five days following registered notification of the owner; 
706.17-3  Political signs may not be placed in the public right of way. They may be placed on the back side (nonstreet side) of sidewalks. Political signs may not be placed on public property, such as fences or buildings with out permission from the city nor may they be placed on light or power poles; 
706.17-4  There is no limit on the number of political signs 1 that may be placed on private property, as long as the property owner grants permission to erect the signs; and 
706.17-5  There are no time limits on political signs on private property. 
1 Political signs, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-109. 
706.18  Wall signs. 
706.18-1  Such sign shall not project more than 18 inches from the building surface. 
706.18-2  Such sign shall not obscure architectural features of the building, not limited to features such as arches, sills, moldings, cornices, and transoms. 
706.18-3  Such sign shall not extend above the lowest point of the roof, nor beyond the ends of the wall to which it is attached. 
706.18-4  Such signs shall have an aggregate area not exceeding 1.5 square feet for each lineal foot of building face parallel to a street lot line, or ten percent of the wall area to which it is attached. Where the lot fronts on more than one street, the aggregate sign area facing each street frontage shall be calculated separately. 
706.18-5  Where two or more wall signs are affixed to one wall, the gross display area shall be the sum total area of all signs. 
706.18-6  Wall signs shall not extend higher than the cave line or top of the parapet wall of the principal building. 
706.19  Window signs. 
706.19-1  Any sign which is painted or mounted onto a window pane, or which is hung directly inside the window with the purpose or effect of identifying any premises from the sidewalk or street. Window signs shall not exceed more than 30 percent of the window area in which type are displayed 
706.20  Measuring the height of signs. 
706.20-1  Height shall be the distance from the top of the sign structure to the top of curb or crown of roadway where no curb exists. The height of any monument base or other structure erected to support or ornament the sign shall be measured as part of the sign height 


706.20-2  Wall or fascia mounted signs. Height shall be the distance from the top of the sign structure to the top of curb or crown of road where no curb exists. 

706.20-3  Sign clearance is measured from the bottom of the sign structure to the top of curb or crown of road where no curb exists. 

706.21  Measuring sign area. 
706.21-1  The area of signs with regular geometric shapes shall be measured using standard mathematical formulas. Regular geometric shapes shall include, but not be limited to, squares, rectangles, triangles, parallelograms, circles, ellipses or combinations thereof. 
706.21-2  The total measured area of a sign shall include the area of all writing representation, lines, emblems or figures contained within all modules, together with any air space, material or color forming an integral part or background of the display if used to differentiate such sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. 
706.21-3  The entire face of a sign, including the advertising, surface, and any framing, trim or molding but not including the support structure shall be counted and considered to be part of the maximum total sign area allowance. 
706.21-4  Calculation of sign area. 

706.21-5  Sign area. For all signs, except multitenant signs, is computed by including the entire area within a single, continuous, rectilinear perimeter of not more than eight straight lines, enclosing the extreme edge of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display. It does not generally include any background, supporting framework, or bracing that is incidental to the display itself. In case of two sided signs, the area shall be computed as including the maximum single display surface. For multitenant signs, the total sign area shall include the area which surrounds the lettering and the logos for all tenants (i.e., sign area for each tenant is not computed individually). 

706.21-6  Sign copy mounted or painted on an illuminated surface or illuminated architectural element of a building, shall be measured as the entire illuminated surface or illuminated architectural element which contains sign copy; and 

706.21-7  Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area distinctively painted, textured or constructed as a background for the sign copy, shall be measured as the area contained within the outside dimensions of the background panel or surface; 

706.21-8  Sign copy mounted as individual letters or graphics against a wall or fascia of a building or other structure that has not been painted, textured or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive background for the sign copy, shall be measured as the area enclosed by the smallest single rectangle that will enclose all sign copy; 

706.21-9  Where there are a number of sign faces: One face: Area of the single face only; 

706.21-9.1  Two faces: If the interior angle between the two faces is 45 degrees or less, the area will be the area of one face only; if the angle between the two sign faces is greater than 45 degrees, the sign area will be the sum of the areas of the two faces; 

706-21-9.2  Three or more sides: The sign area will be the sum of the areas of each of the faces; 

706.21-10  Spherical, free-form, sculptural, other nonplanar signs: Sign area will be the sum of the areas using only the four vertical sides of the smallest cube that will encompass the sign. 

706.21-12 Canopy sign. 
706.21-12.1 Maximum area is 50 percent of canopy area. 
706.21-12.2 Under canopy sign. 
706.21-12.3 Area: 4 square feet. 
706.22  Sign maintenance. 
706.22-1  Any signage that has been approved or that has been issued a permit shall be maintained by the owner or person in possession of the property on which the sign is located. Maintenance shall be such that the signage continues to conform to the conditions imposed by the sign permit. 
706.22-2  Any damaged sign base shall be repaired within 60 days. 
706.22-3  Any metal pole covers and sign cabinets shall be kept free of rust and rust stains. 
706.22-4  Any internally illuminated sign cabinets or sign panels which have been damaged shall remain un-illuminated until repaired. 
706.21-5  Any signage which has been damaged to such extent that it may pose a hazard to passersby, as determined by the zoning administrator, shall be repaired or removed immediately. 
706.21-6  Legal nonconforming signage which has been damaged to the extent of more than 50 percent of its reproduction value shall be removed or altered so as to conform to the provisions of part 5. 
706.21-7  Failure to comply with these sign maintenance requirements shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. 
State Law reference- Political signs, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-109. 
Sec. 707.00. - Mobile homes. 
    Any mobile home placed in the City of Buena Vista after the date of enactment or amendment of this ordinance, shall meet the following requirements: 
707.00-1  All mobile homes shall meet the plumbing requirements and the electrical wiring and connection, construction, blocking, and anchoring requirements of the Virginia State Building Code and shall display the seal of a testing laboratory approved by the State of Virginia; 
707.00-2  All mobile homes shall be completely skirted; such that no part of the undercarriage shall be visible to a casual observer, in accordance with methods and materials approved by the building official; 
707.00-3  All mobile homes shall be supplied with public water and wastewater disposal or such individual service evidenced by permits from the health department. 
707.01  Mobile home lot requirements. 
707.01-1  Individual mobile home lot requirements are found in table 2. 
707.02  Mobile home park and setback requirements. All mobile home parks shall meet the following minimum area and setback requirements: 
707.02-1  All mobile home parks shall have a minimum area of at least three acres. A minimum of three spaces shall be completed and ready for occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted; 
707.02-2  The overall density of any mobile home development shall not exceed seven units per gross acre. The density of any particular acre within such park shall not exceed eight units per gross acre; 
707.02-3  No main or accessory building shall be located closer than 25 feet to any property line of a mobile home park. 
707.03  Mobile home standard requirements. All mobile home stands shall meet the following requirements: 
707.03-1  The area of any mobile home stand shall not be less than 3,400 square feet; 
707.03-2  No mobile home or permanent building shall be closer than 71/2 feet to any stand line; 
707.03-3  The minimum length of a mobile home stand shall be 85 feet. The minimum width shall be 40 feet; 
707.03-4  The rear yard of each mobile home stand may be provided with a clothesline which shall be exempt from setback and other requirements of mobile home accessory structures. 
707.04  Mobile home accessory structures. All mobile home accessory structures erected or constructed after the date of enactment or amendment of this ordinance must meet the following requirements: 
707.04-1  All mobile home accessory structures must meet the plumbing, electrical connection, wiring, construction, and other applicable requirements of the Building Code; 
707.04-2  Except in the case of an awning, ramada, or other shade structure, where a mobile home accessory structure is attached to the mobile home unit, a substantial part of one wall of the accessory structure shall be flush with part of the mobile home unit, or such accessory structure shall be attached to the mobile home unit in a substantial manner by means of a roof. All mobile home accessory structures, whether attached or detached, shall be designed and constructed as freestanding structures. No detached mobile home accessory structure, except ramadas, shall be erected closer than 71/2 feet to a mobile home; 
707.04-3  Mobile home accessory structures, except ramadas, shall not exceed the height of the mobile home; 
707.04-4  No mobile home accessory structure shall be erected or constructed on any mobile home lot or stand except as an accessory to a mobile home. 
707.05  Mobile home park application and site plan. Applicants for mobile home parks shall meet the following special requirements: 
707.05-1  Site plans shall be legibly drawn at a scale consistent with its purpose; 
707.05-2  The following information shall be required of site plans: 
a.  The date of the site plan, the name of the surveyor and the number of sheets comprising the site plan; 
b.  The scale and the north designation; 
c.  The name and signature of the owner, and the name of the proposed park; said name shall not closely approximate that of any existing mobile home park or subdivision in the City of Buena Vista; 
d.  A vicinity map showing the location and area of the proposed park; 
e.  The boundary lines, area, and dimensions of the proposed park, with the locations of property line monuments shown; 
f.  The names of all adjoining property owners; 
g.  Proposed layout, including interior streets with dimensions and such typical street cross sections and centerline profiles as may be required in evaluating the street layout; water, sewer, drainage, and utility lines, facilities and connections, with dimensions shown; location and type of solid waste collection facilities; interior monuments and lot lines, dimensions, and areas of mobile home lots, common open space and recreation areas, common parking areas, and other common areas; locations and dimensions of mobile home stands and parking spaces, managements offices, laundry facilities, recreation buildings, and other permanent structures; location and nature of fire-fighting facilities, including hydrants, fire extinguishers, and other fire fighting equipment; location of fuel storage facilities and structure of high flammability; and location and dimensions of landscaping amenities, including street lights, sidewalks, planted areas, significant natural features to be retained, and fencing and screening; 
707.05-3  The site plan shall be accompanied by a narrative statement describing how the standards and requirements set forth herein are to be met; a statement from the health official certifying approval of the proposed site plan; and where appropriate, statements from the highway engineer certifying approval of the street and drainage; water and sewer, or utility system layouts by the owner/operator. 
707.06  Mobile home park design standards. 
707.06-1  Streets. An internal street system shall be provided to furnish convenient access to mobile home stands and other facilities in the park, shall be designed such that connection to existing drainage and utility systems is convenient, and shall meet the following requirements; in addition to such other reasonable standards and requirements as may be established by the city council; 
a.  All internal streets shall be permanently paved with a durable, dust-proof, hard surface. Minimum pavement widths shall be 16 feet for streets; 
b.  Dead end streets shall be limited in length to 600 feet, shall be provided with cul-de-sacs with turning areas of not less than 40 feet in radius; 
c.  Streets shall be adapted to the topography, shall follow the contours of the land as nearly as possible, and shall have safe grades and alignments; 
d.  Driveway entrances to mobile home parks from any public street or road shall conform to the current construction standards of the department of highways and transportation. 
707.06-2  Vehicle parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for the use of occupants at the minimum ratio of 2.0 car spaces (each space containing a minimum of 180 square feet) for each mobile home. Each off-street parking space shall be paved or graveled and have unobstructed access to either a public or private street. On street parking is prohibited unless the paved street on which the mobile home fronts is expanded to accommodate additional parking lanes or parking bays. 
707.06-3  Lighting. All streets and walkways within the mobile home development shall be lighted. 
707.06-4  Disposition of garbage and rubbish. It shall be the responsibility of the mobile home park to collect or cause to be collected and disposed of garbage and rubbish as frequently as may be necessary. Dumpsters may be used with the approval of the health department, but shall be so located as to not be more than one hundred 50 (150) feet from any mobile home. 
707.06-5  Installation of storage tanks. Gasoline, liquefied petroleum, gas, or oil storage tanks shall be so installed as to comply with all county, state and federal fire prevention and protection regulations. 
707.06-6  Open spaces. Where mobile home lot sizes are relied on primarily to provide for open space, lots and stands shall be so grouped as to maximize the amount of usable space, while meeting the minimum yard requirements set forth in section 707.01 of this ordinance. 
707.06-7  Record of tenants for mobile home parks. The operator of a mobile home park shall keep an accurate register of all tenants occupying mobile homes located in the park. The register shall show the name and permanent residence address of the owner and occupants of any mobile home located in the park; the make and registration of any mobile home; the time and date of arrival and departure; and such other information as might be necessary to provide information about the occupants of the mobile home. These records shall be open to the law enforcement officers and public officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of three years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. 
707. 06-8  Certificate of use and occupancy required. No mobile home or accessory structure shall be occupied in any mobile home park until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the city building inspector to the effect that the mobile home park or the portion thereof for which such certificate is requested is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter and the Uniform Building Code. Such certificate shall not be issued until after the same has been approved by the health department, zoning administrator and other agencies concerned. 
Sec. 708.00. - Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses. 
    It is the intent of this ordinance to recognize that the elimination of existing lots, buildings, and structures or uses that are not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance is as much a subject of health, safety, and general welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of new uses that would violate the provisions of this ordinance. It is, therefore, the intent of this ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue, but not to encourage their survival, permit their expansion, or permit their use as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. Therefore, any structure or use of land existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance, and amendments thereto, but not in conformity with its regulations and provisions, may be continued subject to the following provisions: 
708.01  Lots of record. Where a lot of record at the time of enactment of this ordinance does not contain land of sufficient area or width to permit conformity with the dimensional requirements of this ordinance, the following provisions shall apply: 
708.01-1  A single nonconforming lot of record at the time of enactment or amendment of this ordinance may be used as a building site, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width of the lot shall conform to the regulation for the district in which such lot is located. Variances of yard requirements may be obtained only through appeal to the board, as outlined in section 807.00 herein. 
708.02  Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the time of enactment or amendment of this ordinance that could not be built in the district in which it is located by reason of restrictions on lot coverage, height, yard dimensions, or other requirements, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
708.02-1  Any structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by the building official may be restored to a safe condition, provided that the requirements of this section are met, and that the cost of restoration of the structure to a safe condition shall not exceed 75 percent of its replacement cost at the time of the building official declaration; 
708.02-2  No nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity; and any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity; 
708.02-3  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 708.02-2 above, whenever repairs on or installation of plumbing fixtures in residential structures is required by law or administrative action of the health official or the building official, such alterations shall be permitted, provided that where such alterations require an addition to the structure, such addition shall be no nearer the lot line than permitted by the requirements of this ordinance. Where an existing residential structure exceeds these requirements the said addition shall extend no nearer the lot line than the existing building line; 
708.02-4  Should a nonconforming structure be moved, it shall thereafter conform to the yard dimension requirements of the district in which it is located after it is moved; 
708.02-5  Should a nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of a structure be destroyed by any means, it shall not be reconstructed to a greater degree of nonconformity. 
708.03  Nonconforming uses of land. Where a lawful use of land exists at the time of enactment or amendment of this ordinance that would not be permitted by the regulations imposed herein and where such is either: 
(1)  An accessory use involving the use of no separate accessory structure; or 
(2)  A principal use involving no individual structure, such use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
708.03-1  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the time of enactment or amendment of this ordinance; 
708.03-2  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the time of enactment or amendment of this ordinance; 
708.03-3  In the event that such use ceases for reason other than destruction for a period of more than one year any subsequent use shall conform to all requirements of this ordinance for the district in which the land is located; 
708.03-4  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this ordinance shall be constructed in connection with such nonconforming use. 
708.04  Nonconforming uses of structure. Where a lawful use involving an individual structure or structures in combination, exists at the time of enactment or amendment of this ordinance, that would not be permitted in the district in which it is located under the requirements of this ordinance, such use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
708.04-1  No structure existing at the time of enactment or amendment of this ordinance devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended, moved, or structurally altered, except repairs on or installation of plumbing fixtures required by law or administrative action of the health official or the building official, or the changing of interior partitions or interior remodeling; or in changing the use of the structure to a conforming use; 
708.04-2  A nonconforming use of a structure may be extended to include use of the entire structure, but shall not be extended to include either additional structures or land outside the structure; 
708.04-3  When a nonconforming use of a structure or structures and premises in combination is discontinued or abandoned for one year, or for 18 months during any three year period, except when government action impedes access to the premises; or when a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use; the structure and premises shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Sec. 709.00. - Special regulations for townhouses. 
709.01  No more than ten townhouses shall be included in any townhouse grouping. 
709.02  Attached dwellings shall be separated by a noncombustible party wall to the roof line, with a fire resistance of not less than two hours duration. 
709.03  Each townhouse building shall front on a street dedicated to public use. If access is to be provided by means of privately owned and maintained streets, the streets including curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be developed according to standards found in subdivision street requirements by the Virginia Department of Highways and Transportation by authority of section 33.1-12, 33.1-69, and 33.1-229 of the Code of Virginia (1950) as amended. 
709.04  Common areas shall be maintained by and be the sole responsibility of the developer-owner of the townhouse development until such time as the developer-owner conveys such common area to homeowners' association whose members shall be all the individual owners of the townhouses in the townhouse development. Said land shall be conveyed to and be held by said homeowners' association solely for recreational and parking purposes of the owners of the individual townhouse lots in the development. In the event of such conveyance by the developer-owner to a homeowners' association, deed restrictions and covenants shall provide, among other things, that any assessments, charges for cost of maintenance of such common areas shall constitute a pro-rata lien upon the individual townhouse lots. Maintenance of townhouse exteriors, lawns, refuse handling, taxes, lighting, and drainage shall be provided in a similar manner so as to discharge any responsibility from the City of Buena Vista. 
Sec. 710.00. - Fences. 
710.01  No fragile, readily flammable material such as paper, cloth or canvas shall constitute a part of any fence, nor shall any such material be employed as an adjunct or supplement to any fence. 
710.02  In the case of corner lots in residential districts, there shall be no planting, fence or obstruction to vision more than three feet high, less than 20 feet from the intersection of two street lines. 
710.03  No barbed wire fence shall be erected or maintained within the limits of the City of Buena Vista unless the following conditions are met: 
710.03-1  In all cases where a barbed wire fence is requested, a building permit must be obtained. 
710.03-2  No barbed wire may be installed in a residential district or on a lot occupied residentially. 
710.03-3  Barbed wire is permitted as an integral part of the security fence for nonresidential properties. Not exceeding three strands may be permitted on the top of a fence, providing that the arms do not project over public property. The minimum height of the bottom strand of barbed wire shall not be less than six feet from the finished grade. 
710.03-4  A barbed wire fence may be erected or maintained around a tract of land used for agricultural purposes upon the date of enactment of these regulations. 
710.04  In no case shall razor wire or equivalent be permitted in any zone within city limits except as used by official governmental agencies. 
710.05  No fence shall be maintained with protruding nails, boards, wires or other similar materials that may endanger the public. 
710.06  Electric fences. As used in this section, [the term] "electric fence" shall mean a fence designed to conduct electric current along one or more wires thereof so that a person or animal touching any such wire or wires will receive an electric shock. 
710.06-1  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to electrify, operate or use any electric fence, or for any person exercising supervision or control over any real property to permit any other person to electrify, operate or use any electric fence, on any property in this city zoned for residential use. 
710.06-2  This section shall have no application to any electric fence maintained, operated or used on the premises of any farm five acres in size or larger, regardless of zoning. As used in this section, [the term] "farm" shall mean a parcel of land devoted to production for sale of plants or animals or to the production of plant or animal products useful to man. 
(Ord. of 8-14-1999) 
Sec. 711.00. - Homes used as rental property; conditional use permit required. 
711.00.1  Property owners are required to obtain a conditional use permit when any single-family home is altered, constructed or used to 1) generate rental income and 2) where five or more unrelated persons (individually) pay rent. 
711.01  Specific conditions imposed are: 
711.01-1  Any front yard, side yard or rear yard that is less than that required by this Code is not further reduced; 
711.01-2  Any exterior addition or alteration does not change the general appearance and character of the building from a single detached dwelling. 
711.02  The dwelling shall have a minimum gross floor area as follows: 
711.02-1  R-1 Zoning District - 1,200 square feet. 
711.02-2  R-2 Zoning District - 1,200 square feet. 
711.02-3  R-3 Zoning District - 960 square feet. 
711.02-4  R-4 Zoning District - 960 square feet. 
711.02-5  MU Zoning District - 960 square feet. 
711.02-6  Any other Zoning District - 960 square feet. 
711.03  Requirements for rentals dwelling type properties: 
711.03-1  The basement area cannot be calculated in the floor area. 
711.03-2  Each dwelling unit must contain at least one bathroom and one kitchen and one bedroom. 
711.03-3  Sleeping will only be allowed in bedrooms. 
711.03-4  Off-street parking shall conform to the requirements of article 7. 
711.03-5  Dwellings covered under this article shall be inspected and approved by the building inspector as being in compliance with the latest minimum requirements of the International Building Code, the International Residential Code or the International Property Maintenance Code, whichever is applicable before occupancy shall be granted. 
711.03-6  Three substantiated nuisance or noise complaints or any one violation of conditions required by city council will be grounds for revocation of the conditional use permit. Substantiation shall be accomplished pursuant to a complaint heard before the General District or Circuit Court for the City of Buena Vista pursuant to the nuisance and noise control ordinance of the city. Substantiation shall exist when there has been a finding of guilt. 
711.03-7  Each dwelling is subject to an annual inspection by the city to ensure Code compliance. 
711.04  Submission requirements. 
711.04-1  All applicants for a conditional use permit for must submit: 
711.04-1.1  The site plan shall be submitted to the building inspector for his approval prior to the site plan being submitted to the office of planning and zoning. 
711.04-1.2  Building inspector shall only sign the site plan with his signature and the date only after the plan has met the appropriate building code requirements. 
711.04-1.3  The site plan may be required to be submitted to any city department for their respective approval prior to this being submitted to the office of planning and zoning if applicable. 
711.04-1.4  The office of planning and zoning may waive a department head's signature and date should such not be applicable. 
711.04-1.5  All submittals shall be uniform in scale. 
711.04-1.6  A copy of the plat. 
711.04-1.7  A sketch of the general development is required for each rental covered under this article. 
711.04-1.8  Address and location(s) of the existing or proposed rental unit(s) or efficiency(ies). 
711.04-1.9  All existing and proposed streets. 
711.04-1.10  The distances to all lot lines and public rights-of-way. 
711.04-1.11  The location of all existing and proposed structures on the lot. 
711.04-1.12  Number of floors, floor area, height and location of each building and proposed general use for each building. If a multifamily residential building, the number, size and type of dwelling units. 
711.04-1.13  Location of rental unit(s) or efficiencies: is it at the rear of building, first floor, second floor, etc. 
711.04-1.14  Location of proposed fencing. 
711.04-1.15  Number of rental units or efficiencies. 
711.04-1.16  Label each building and/or rooms as apartment, efficiency or otherwise. 
711.04-1.17  Show the size (length and width) of each room, including ceiling height of each room, and location of access to the unit(s) or efficiencies. 
711.04-1.18  Length and width of each room to be rented. 
711.04-1.19  Each room on the site plan shall be designated as a kitchen and location of sink, stove and cupboards, bedroom #1, bedroom #2, living room, hallway bathroom(s) and location of sink, bath and stool in each, and identify each additional room. 
711.04-1.20  Ceiling heights in each room. 
711.04-1.21  Door entrances to each room within the rental. 
711.04-1.22  Exterior entrance and location on floor plan. 
711.04-1.23  Location of any driveways. 
711.04-1.24  Dumpster location on lot and/or trash handling to be addressed with site plan for each tenant. 
711.04-1.25  All off-street parking shall be shown with size and width of each parking spot and its location (rear, side, front of building, elsewhere). 
711.04-1.26  If parking space(s) provided is not in the rear or side of the property, please show on site plan approximate location of parking spaces and distance from parking space(s) to the dwelling units or efficiencies. If owner is leasing this property, please provide name and phone number on site plan. 
711.04-1.27  Any additional items as deemed necessary by the office of planning and zoning and the planning commission. 
711.04-1.28  Conversion - Site plan shall be submitted to the office of planning and zoning and in turn be submitted to the planning commission for their approval. 
711.04-1.29  Existing structures may be converted for single unit or multi-unit residential rental uses, multifamily rental use, and shall meet the minimum requirements as set forth in this section and shall meet all for buffer zones, off-street parking, rental sizes and height. 
711.04-1.30  Any conversion which involves an existing nonresidential or multifamily use rental, or one which would result in the creation of a combination of nonresidential rental and residential rental use, or which would result in the creation of a multi-unit rental dwelling shall meet the minimum requirements as set forth in this section and shall meet all for buffer zones, off-street parking, rental sizes and height limitations. 
711.04-1.31  Parking shall be meet the requirements of section 703 of the Buena Vista Land Use Regulations. 
711.04-1.32  It shall be the responsibility of the landlord to show on the application the location and size of each parking space for all rental property. 
711.04-1.33  Failure to observe any regulation shall result in penalties as allowed by the Land Use Regulations in article 11, Violation and Penalty. 
711.05  Items to be considered prior to granting a conditional use permit. 
711.05-1  The impact on property values. 
711.05-2  Traffic generation. 
711.05-3  Parking. 
711-05-4  The population density of the neighborhood. 
711.05-5  The effect on the existing infrastructure. 
711.05-6  Number of occupants of the each dwelling unit. 
711.06  Conditions. 
711.06-1  The planning commission and/or the city council may apply conditions to the property to maintain the intent of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 13-05, Att. C, 4-4-2013) 
Sec. 712.00. - Adult oriented businesses. 
712.01  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
712.01-1  Adult bookstore or adult video store means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, videotapes, computer disks, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, virtual reality devices or similar media that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," offered for sale or rental for any form of consideration. 
712.01-2  Adult business means any adult bookstore, adult video store, adult model studio, adult motel, adult movie theater, adult nightclub, adult store, or business providing adult entertainment, or any other establishment that regularly exploits an interest in matter relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or regularly features live entertainment intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons. 
712.01-3  Adult entertainment means dancing, modeling, or other live entertainment if the entertainment is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons: or the showing of films, motion pictures, videotapes, slides, photographs, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, or other media that are characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
712.01-4  Adult merchandise means magazines, books, other periodicals, videotapes, films, motion pictures, photographs, slides, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, virtual reality devices, or other similar media that are characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; instruments, devices or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs; or, lingerie or leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices. 
712.01-5  Adult model studio means a commercial establishment, including a lingerie store or novelty store, in which a person performs or simulates specified sexual activities, exposes specified anatomical areas, or engages in other performances intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of the patrons. 
712.01-6  Adult motel means a motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment that: 
(i)  Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, internet, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and advertises the availability of this sexually-oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or 
(ii)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a time period of less than ten hours; or 
(iii)  Allows a tenant or occupant to sub rent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten hours. 
712.01-7  Adult movie theater means an enclosed building regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons, excluding movies that have been rated G, PG, PG-13 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
712.01-8  Adult nightclub means a restaurant, bar, club, or similar establishment that regularly features adult entertainment. 
712.01-9  Adult store means an establishment having adult merchandise as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade. 
712.01-10  Associate means any entity or person acting in concert with an owner, operator, manager or employee in the management or control of the adult business, whether or not compensated. 
712.01-11  Employee means an individual working or performing services for any adult business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise, who provides services on behalf of any adult business to the patrons of such business, whether or not the individual receives any remuneration, gratuity, tips of any kind, or other compensation, or pays the permittee or manager for the right to perform or entertain in the adult business. 
712.01-12  Live entertainment means entertainment provided in person including, but not limited to, musical performances, music played by disc jockeys, public speaking, dramatic performances, dancing, modeling, or comedy performances. 
712.01-13  Specified anatomical areas means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
712.01-14  Specified sexual activities means human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; sexual intercourse or sodomy; or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast, including masturbation. 
712.02  Permit required from chief of police-Application; issuances; duration; renewal. 
712.02-1  Every person either operating or desiring to operate an adult business, in addition to obtaining any required business license from the commissioner of revenue, shall apply to the chief of police, or designee, for a permit to conduct such activity. Each such application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $300.00 and any additional documented costs as incurred by the Buena Visa Police Department or any other department for the City of Buena Vista, Virginia. Such additional costs shall be paid immediately upon receipt of such. 
712.02-2  Information required on and with the permit application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
712.02-2.1  The applicant's full name, any previous or current aliases, age, sex, race, weight, height, hair and eye color, mailing address, residential address, telephone number, date and place of birth, driver's license number, and social security number. 
712.02-2.2  If the applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name other than that of the applicant; he or she must state: 
1)  The adult business's fictitious name; and 
2)  Submit the required registration documents. 
712.02-2.3  Names and addresses of at least three references. 
712.02-2.4  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, penalty or punishment assessed, and jurisdiction of each. 
712.02-2.5  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, holds or has held any other licenses under this ordinance or other similar adult business ordinances, in the name of this business or any other, from any other locality within the past five years, and if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses. 
712.02-2.6  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under this ordinance or other similar adult business ordinance from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
712.02-2.7  Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership, a member or manager of a limited-liability company (LLC), or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this ordinance or other similar adult business ordinance from another city or county, whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation. 
712.02-2.8  Photograph and fingerprints of applicant. 
712.02-2.9  Location of the proposed adult business, including a legal description of the property, street address and telephone number(s), if any. 
712.02-2.10  A criminal records check of the applicant shall be provided by the applicant with the application, along with the applicant's written authorization to investigate whether the information provided by the applicant is true. 
712.02-2.11  A description of the intended business activity, including a sketch or diagram, drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches, showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. 
712.02-2.12  If adult entertainment is to be provided, a detailed description of such entertainment. 
712.02-2.13  Written declaration, dated and signed by the applicant, in affidavit form that the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
712.02-2.14  For a partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement. 
712.02-2.15  For a corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and controlling stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
712.02-2.16  For a limited-liability company (LLC), the LLC shall state its complete name, the date of its formation, evidence that the LLC is in good standing under the laws of its state of organization, the names, addresses and capacity of all members. 
712.02-2.17  For any other legal entity, "applicant" shall include each officer, director, partner, member or other principal of the entity and the managers and other associates of the business. 
712.03  Chief of police action on application. The chief of police or designee shall act on the application within 30 days of the filing of an application containing all the information required by this section, unless information requested from other law enforcement agencies is not received within that 30 day period, in which case the chief of police or designee shall have an additional 30 days to act on the application. upon expiration of the applicable time period, unless the applicant requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time, the applicant may, at its option, begin operating the business for which the permit is sought, unless and until the chief of police or designee notified the applicant of a denial of the application and stated the reasons for denial. 
712.03.1  The applicant shall be issued a permit unless the city's investigation or the information furnished by the applicant shows any of the following: 
712.03.1-1  The applicant has failed to provide information required by this section or has falsely or misleadingly answered a question. 
712.03.1-2  The applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past five years. 
712.03.1-3  The applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude or a crime involving obscenity laws within the last five years. 
712.03.1-4  The applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked or suspended within the last 12 months under any statute or ordinance requiring a permit to operate an adult business. 
712.03.1-5  Failure of the applicant's business to comply with the city's business license, zoning, building, plumbing, utility, health, electric, or fire prevention codes, or with any other applicable city or state laws or regulations. 
712.03.1-6  The application fee has not been paid. 
712.03.1-7  The applicant is under the age of 18 years of age. 
712.03.1-8  The applicant or a person residing with the applicant is overdue in payment to the City of Buena Vista for taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to any business. 
712.03.1-9  The applicant is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
712.04  Application denied. If the application is denied, the chief of police or designee shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reasons for the denial in writing. 
712.05  Validity of permit. The permit shall be valid for 12 months from the date thereof and may be renewed in the same manner as it was initially obtained. The application fee for a renewal permit shall be $300.00 and any additional documented costs as incurred by the Buena Visa Police Department or any other department for the City of Buena Vista, Virginia. Such additional costs shall be paid immediately upon receipt of such. No permits shall be transferable. 
712.06  Change of ownership. Any changes in the ownership or principals of the business entity to which the permit is issued or in the managers or other associates of the business will automatically make the permit void. Such changes shall be immediately reported to the chief of police or designee and a new application may be submitted for review. 
712.07  Employee license application. Before any application may be issued an adult business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the City of Buena Vista, the following information: 
712.07-1  The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names) or aliases used by the individual. 
712.07-2  Age, date and place of birth. 
712.07-3  Height, weight, hair and eye color. 
712.07-4  Present residence address and telephone number. 
712.07-5  Present business address and telephone number. 
712.07-6  Date, issuing state and driver's license number or other identification card information. 
712.07-7  Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
712.07-8  [Contents.] Attached to the application form for an adult business employee license as provided above, shall be the following: 
712.07-8.1  A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
712.07-8.2  A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state or country has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application. 
712.07-8.3  A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony within the past five years or has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude or a crime involving obscenity laws within the last five years, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each. 
712.08  Grounds for revocation. 
712.08-1  The chief of police or designee may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter for the following: 
712.08-1.1  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false or misleading statement contained in the application. 
712.08-1.2  Conviction of the permittee for any felony, crime involving moral turpitude, or crime involving the obscenity laws after the permit is issued. 
712.08-1.3  The permittee or an employee or associate of the permittee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of illegal controlled substances in or on the premises. 
712.08-1.4  The permittee or an employee or associate of the permittee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises. 
712.08-1.5  The permittee or an employee or associate has refused to allow an inspection of the adult business premises as authorized by this chapter. 
712.08-1.6  On two or more occasions within a 12 month period, employees or associates of the adult business at the time of the offenses committed an offense in or on the permitted premises for which a conviction has been obtained constituting: 
712.08-1.6-1  Aiding, abetting or harboring a runaway child. 
712.08-1.6-2  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution. 
712.08-1.6-3  Exposing minors to harmful materials. 
712.08-1.6-4  Dissemination of obscenity. 
712.08-1.6-5  Sexual assault. 
712.08-1.6-6  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit. 
712.08-1.6-7  The permittee is convicted of violations regarding any taxes or fees related to the adult business. 
712.08-1.6-8  The permittee has failed to operate or manage an adult business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner. 
712.08-1.6-9  The permittee or an employee of the permittee, except a permittee or employee of a permittee of an adult motel, has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual activity to occur in or on the permitted premises. 
712.08-1.6-10  The permittee has been operating an adult business not approved under the applicable permit. 
712.08-1.6-11  The permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
712.08-1.6-12  The permittee's business fails to comply with other applicable city or state laws or regulations. 
712.09  Revocation of license. When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued an adult business license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
712.10  Procedure upon denial of an application or revocation of a permit. 
712.10-1  If the chief of police or designee denies an application or revokes a permit, the chief of police shall notify the applicant or permittee in writing of such action, the reasons therefore, and the right to request a hearing. To receive a hearing, the applicant or permittee must make a written hearing request which must be received by the chief of police or designee within ten days of the date of the notice of denial or revocation. If a timely hearing request is not received by the chief of police or designee, the decision of the chief of police or designee shall be final. If a hearing is properly requested, it shall be held within ten days from receipt of the hearing request. The hearing shall be presided over by the chief of police or designee. The applicant or permittee shall have the right to present evidence and argument or to have counsel do so. Within five days of the hearing the chief of police or designee shall render a decision which shall be final. A permittee must discontinue the operation of its business when the decision to revoke the permit becomes final. 
712.10-2  When an imminent threat of substantial harm to the public health or safety requires such action, unless the matter is one for which another city official has specific enforcement authority, the chief of police or designee may immediately revoke a permit issued under this chapter by so stating in a written notice to the permittee. When action is taken pursuant to this subsection, the permittee shall immediately discontinue operation of its business, but shall have the right to a hearing as stated in subsection (1) of this section. 
712.11  Availability of prompt judicial review and determination. After denial of an initial or renewal application or after revocation of a permit by the chief of police or designee, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in the circuit court of the city. Any such request for judicial review shall be filed within 30 days of when the administrative action becomes final. The city will facilitate the applicant's obtaining prompt review and determination. 
712.12  Inspection. 
712.12-1  In addition to any existing legal authority, an applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, zoning department, or other city departments or agencies to inspect an adult business for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and all applicable laws, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
712.12-2  The provisions of subsection (1) of this section shall not apply to sleeping rooms of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer. 
712.13  Regulations pertaining to adult businesses providing adult entertainment. 
712.13-1  For the purposes of this section, adult entertainment is defined as dancing, modeling, or other live entertainment if the entertainment is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons. 
712.13-2  No person shall provide adult entertainment for patrons of an adult business except upon a stage located in an area open to all patrons of the business. The stage shall be at least 18 inches above the level of the floor and separated by a distance of at lease three feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons. No patron shall be permitted within three feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. 
712.13-3  The adult business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male entertainers, which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than them. 
712.13-4  The adult business shall provide entertainers access between the stage and the dressings rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If separate access is not physically feasible, the establishment shall provide a walk aisle at least four feet wide for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers which prevents any physical contact between patrons and entertainers. 
712.13-5  No entertainer shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer while in or on the premises of the adult business. 
712.13-6  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer. A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to an entertainer shall place the gratuity in a container that is at all times located separately from the entertainers for the purpose of preventing any physical contact between a patron and an entertainer. No entertainer shall solicit any gratuity from any patron. 
712.13-7  Patrons must be at least 18 years of age. 
712.13-8  No operator, or no manager of an adult business shall cause or allow an entertainer to contract to or engage in any entertainment such as a "couch," a "straddle" or "lap" dance with a patron while in or on the premises of an adult business. No entertainer shall contract to or engage in a "couch," a "straddle" or "lap" dance with a patron while in or on the establishment premises. For purposes of this subsection, "couch," "straddle" or "lap" dance is defined as an employee of the establishment intentionally touching any patron while engaged in any specified sexual activity or other activity intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons, or the exposure of any specified anatomical area. 
712.13-9  This section shall not apply to an employee of an establishment who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bartender, comes within three feet of a patron. No employee shall engage in any specified sexual activity or other activities intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons, or expose any specified anatomical area while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bartender. 
712.14  Regulations pertaining to adult motels. 
712.14-1  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in Buena Vista Land Development Regulations 712.01-6. 
712.14-2  No person who is in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have an adult business permit shall rent or sub-rent a sleeping room to a person, and within ten hours from the time the room is rented, rent or sub-rent the same sleeping room again. 
712.14-3  For the purpose of subsection [712.14-2] (2) of this section, the term "rent" or "sub-rent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
712.15  Transfer of permit prohibited. 
712.15-1  A permittee shall not operate an adult business at any place other than at the address designated in the approval permit. 
712.15-2  A permittee shall not transfer its permit to another person. 
712.16  Violations. 
712.16-1  Except as permitted in Buena Vista Land Development Regulations 611.02-24, operation of an adult business without a permit is prohibited. Violations of this chapter shall be unlawful and subject to the provisions of Buena Vista Land Development Regulations 1103.00. 
712.17  Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon adoption, but any adult business currently operating in the city shall have 30 days from the date of the adoption to apply for a permit and 90 days after obtaining the permit to comply with any other applicable new requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2008(02), § 712) 
Article 8. - ADMINISTRATION 
    These regulations shall be administered in accordance with the provisions below. 

Sec. 801.00. - Zoning administrator. 
801.01  Appointment. The zoning administrator shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the City of Buena Vista City Council which shall fix the compensation of the zoning administrator. 
801.02  Powers and duties relating to zoning. The zoning administrator is authorized and empowered on behalf of and in the name of the Buena Vista City Council to administer and enforce the provisions set forth herein to include receiving applications, inspecting premises, issuing zoning permits and certificates of occupancy for uses and structures which are in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. The zoning administrator shall have all necessary authority on behalf of the Buena Vista City Council to administer and enforce this ordinance, including the ordering, in writing, the remedy for any condition found in violation of this ordinance, and the bringing of legal actions, including injunction, abatement, or other appropriate action or proceeding, to insure compliance with this ordinance. The zoning administrator does not have the authority to take final action on applications or matters involving variances nor on conditional uses or other special exemptions, on which final action is reserved to the board of zoning appeals or governing body. 
801.02-1  The zoning administrator does not have the authority to take final action on applications or matters involving variances. 
801.02-2  Powers and duties relating to modifications. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to make a decision on the application for modification. The decision of the zoning administrator shall constitute a decision within the purview of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2311, appeals to the zoning board. and may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals as provided by that section. The zoning administrator shall respond within ninety days of a request for a decision or determination on zoning matters within the scope of his authority unless the requester has agreed to a longer period. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2008) 
Sec. 802.00. - Zoning and building permit procedures. 
    Zoning and building permits shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions and procedures: 
802.01  Issuance and display. The zoning administrator shall issue a zoning and building permit for any permitted use or structural alteration, provided such proposed use of land or structure, or structural alteration, is in conformance with the provisions set forth herein. The zoning and building permit shall indicate whether the use is a permitted use, a conditional use, or a variance and shall be conspicuously posted and displayed on the premises during the period of construction or reconstruction. 
802.02  Application procedure for permitted uses. Applications for a zoning and building permit shall be submitted to the zoning administrator according to the following provisions: 
802.02-1  An application for a zoning and building permit for a permitted use shall be accompanied by two copies of an acceptable site plan with such reasonable information shown thereon as shall be required by the zoning administrator. Such site plan shall include, as a minimum, the following: lot dimensions with property line monuments located thereon; location and size of existing and proposed structures; yard dimensions and the use of structures; easements (private and public); watercourses; fences; street names and street right-of-way lines; and such other information regarding abutting property as directly affects, the application; 
802.02-2  Each application for a zoning and building permit, upon issuance of the permit, shall be accompanied by payment of a fee; 
802.02-3  If the proposed use or construction described in the application required by [sub]section 802.02-1 [of this section] are in conformity with the provisions set forth herein and other appropriate codes and regulations of the City of Buena Vista, including but not limited to the required: 
(1)  Health department approval of septic tank system; 
(2)  Highway department entrance permit; 
(3)  Flood insurance, floodplain ordinance; 
(4)  Erosion and sediment control ordinance plan; 
The zoning administrator shall sign and return one copy of the site plan to the applicant and shall issue a zoning and building permit. The zoning administrator shall retain the application and one copy of the site plan for his records; 
802.02-4  If the application and site plan submitted describes work which does not conform to the requirements set forth herein, the zoning administrator shall not issue a zoning and building permit, but shall return one copy of the site plan to the applicant along with a signed refusal in writing. Such refusal shall state the reasons for refusal and shall cite the portions of this ordinance with which the submitted plan does not comply. The zoning administrator shall retain one copy of the site plan and one copy of the refusal. 
802.03  Application procedures for conditional uses. Applications for a conditional use permit for a conditional use shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, who shall refer the application to the governing body for a public hearing. Applications for zoning permits for conditional uses must be submitted in accordance with the following procedures: 
802.03-1  An application shall be accompanied by two copies of an acceptable site plan drawn in accordance with applicable provisions of [this] section 802.00 of this ordinance, with such reasonable information shown thereon as may be required by the zoning administrator. Such site plan shall include, as a minimum, the following: the dimensions with property line monuments located thereon; location and size of existing and proposed structures; yard dimensions and the use of structures; easements (private and public); watercourses, fences, street names and street right-of-way lines; and such other information regarding abutting property as directly affects the application. 
802.03-2  Each application for a zoning and building permit for a conditional use or other special exception shall be accompanied by payment of a fee as set forth in article 10 to help defray the cost of publicizing and conducting the public hearing; 
802.03-3  The application shall be sent to the commission for review and recommendation, and said commission shall have 60 days within which to submit a report. If the commission fails to submit a report within a 60-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed conditional use; 
802.03-4  The governing body shall consider the proposed conditional use or other special exception after notice and public hearing in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, 1950, as amended, and shall take action on the proposed conditional use within 30 days from the date of the public hearing; 
802.03-5  In evaluating the proposed conditional use or other special exception, the governing body shall address the following concerns: 
(a)  The effect of the proposed use or special exception, on existing and projected traffic volumes in the neighborhood; 
(b)  The current and future need for the proposed use in the City of Buena Vista; and 
(c)  The character of the existing neighborhood and the effect of the proposed use or special exception on existing property values; 
802.03-6  Conditions set forth in [subsection] article 802.03-5 [of this section] for the various conditional uses are minimum. In approving a proposed conditional use or other special exception, the governing body may stipulate such additional requirements as are necessary to protect the public interest. The governing body may require the applicant to furnish a performance bond in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the fulfilling of any and all conditions and requirements stipulated by the governing body; 
802.03-7  If the governing body approves the application for a zoning and building permit for a proposed conditional use, the zoning administrator shall issue a conditional use permit, indicating the conditional nature of the use; 
802.03-8  If the governing body disapproves the application for a zoning and building permit for a conditional use or other special exception, the governing body shall inform the applicant of the decision in writing within 30 days from the date of the public hearing, stating the reasons for disapproval. The zoning administrator shall retain one copy of the site plan and one copy of the refusal, and shall keep them as a public record; 
802.03-9  A property owner, or his appointed agent, shall not initiate action for a conditional use permit relating to the same conditional use affecting the same parcel of land more often than once every 12 months; 
802.03-10  A conditional use permit must be put into effect six months after the date the permit is issued, unless otherwise provided in the permit itself; 
802.03-11  Renewal of a conditional use permit does not require a public hearing unless the original conditions in the permit are changed, however notice of the renewal will be shown on the agenda of the city council; 
802.03-12  Upon change of ownership, any conditioned use permit for the property shall expire. 
802.04  Application procedures for ordinance or map amendment. The Buena Vista City Council may from time to time, amend these regulations or district maps whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice require. Any resolution or motion by the governing body or planning commission proposing the rezoning shall state the above public purposes therefor. 
802.04-1  Applications for amendments initiate by any person, firm, or corporation owning the subject property shall be submitted in writing to the zoning administrator and shall be accompanied by two copies of an acceptable site plan, where applicable, of the proposed amendment with such reasonable information shown thereon as shall be required by the zoning administrator. Where site plans are required, they shall show, as a minimum, the following: lot dimensions with property line monuments located thereon; location and size of existing and proposed structures; yard dimensions and the use of structures; easements (private and public) watercourses, fences; street names and street right-of-way lines; and such other information regarding abutting property as directly affects the application. Proposals for amendments not initiated by either the commission or the city council shall be accompanied by payment of a fee as set forth in article 10. 
802.04-2  The commission shall consider the proposed amendment after notice and public hearing in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, as amended. The commission shall then present the proposed amendment along with site plans and explanatory materials, where applicable, to the city council with its recommendations. If the commission fails to submit its recommendations within 60 days of the first meeting of the commission after the proposed amendment has been referred to it, the commission shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
802.04-3  The Buena Vista City Council shall consider the proposed amendment after notice and public bearing in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2200, 1950, as amended, and shall take action on the proposed amendment within 30 days from the date of the public hearing. The city council and the commission may hold a joint public hearing in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204; 
802.04-4  Any petition, for an amendment may be withdrawn prior to action thereon by the city council at the discretion of the person, firm or corporation initiating such a request, upon written notice to the zoning administrator; 
802.04-5  No more than one application for any amendment affecting a specific parcel of land may be initiated during any single 12-month period. 
802.05  Procedures for proffering conditions to zoning district regulations. 
802.05-1  Intent. The intent of this section is to provide (pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2296 through 15.2-2303, 1950, as amended) to the zoning district regulations or the zoning district map; 
802.05-2  Proffer of conditions. An owner may proffer reasonable conditions, in addition to the regulations established elsewhere in this ordinance, as part of an amendment to the zoning district regulations or the zoning district map. The proffered conditions shall be in writing and shall be made prior to the public hearing before the city council. In addition: 
(a)  The rezoning itself must give rise to the need for the conditions. 
(b)  The conditions proffered shall have a reasonable relation to the rezoning. 
(c)  The conditions proffered shall not include a cash contribution to the city. 
802.05-3  Expiration. Any zoning permit shall automatically expire six months from the date of issuance if the person, firm, or corporation to which the permit has issued has not clearly demonstrated that the permit is being exercised for the purpose for which it was issued, or if the work so authorized is suspended or discontinued for a period of one year. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2008) 
Sec. 803.00. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    Certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the zoning administrator in accordance with the following provisions: 
803.01  Certificate of occupancy required. A certificate of occupancy shall be required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
803.01-1  A building hereafter erected; 
803.01-2  A building hereafter altered so as to affect height, or the side, front, or rear yard dimensions; 
803.01-3  A change of type of occupancy or use of any building or premises. 
803.02  Issuance of certificate of occupancy. The zoning administrator shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy, as stated on the application for such certificate and signed thereto by the owner or his appointed agent, is found to conform to the applicable provisions set forth herein and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan submitted for the zoning and building permit. 
803.03  Denial of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provision set forth herein. 
Sec. 804.00. - Board of zoning appeals. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the Circuit Court of Buena Vista. 
804.01  Initial appointment. The initial appointment of the board shall be as follows: One member for one year; one member for two years; one member for three years; one member for four years; and one member for five years. 
804.02  Terms of office. Appointments shall be for five years each. The secretary of the board of zoning appeals shall notify the circuit court at least 30 days in advance of the expiration of any term of office. A member whose term expires shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed. 
804.03  Public offices held. No member shall hold any public office except that one member shall be a member of the commission. 
804.04  Compensation. Members of the board may receive such compensation as may be authorized by the governing body. 
804.05  Support. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the governing body, the board of zoning appeals may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal council, consultants, and other technical and clerical services. 
804.06  Vacancies. Appointments for vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall in all cases be for the unexpired term. Members shall be removable for cause by the circuit court upon written charges and after hearing held after at least 15 days' notice. 
Sec. 805.00. - Rules of procedure. 
    The board shall observe the following procedure: 
805.01  Said board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and consistent with other ordinances of the City of Buena Vista and general laws of the commonwealth for the conduct of its affairs. 
805.02  Said board shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary from its own membership who shall serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. 
805.03  Said board will keep a full public record of its proceedings and shall submit a report of its activities to the city council at least once each year. 
805.04  All meetings of said board shall be open to the public. 
805.05  Any member of said board shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before said board with respect to property in which the member has an interest. 
805.06  The meetings of said board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times is a chairman of said board may determine. 
805.07  The chairman, or in his absence the vice-chairman or acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
805.08  A quorum shall be at least three members. 
805.09  A favorable vote of three members of said board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which said board is empowered. 
Sec. 806.00. - Powers and duties of the board of zoning appeals. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall have the following duties and powers: 
806.01  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of the ordinance. 
806.02  To authorize upon original application in specific cases, such variance from the terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, when, owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in unnecessary hardship; provided that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done as follows: 
806.02-1  When a property owner can show that this property was acquired in good faith and where by reason of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, size or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the effective date of the ordinance, or where by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation or conditions of such piece of property, or of the use or development of property immediately adjacent thereto, the strict application of the terms of the ordinance would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the property or where the board is satisfied, upon the evidence heard by it, that the granting of such variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship approaching confiscation, as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience sought by the applicant, provided that all variances shall be in harmony with the intended spirit and purpose of the ordinance; 
806.02-2  No such variance shall be authorized by the board unless it finds that: 
(1)  The strict application of the ordinance would produce undue hardship; 
(2)  Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity; and 
(3)  The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and that the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variation; 
806.02-3  No such variance shall be authorized except after notice and hearing as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, 1950, as amended; 
806.02-4  No variance shall be authorized unless the board finds that the condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the ordinance; 
806.02-5  In authorizing a variance, the board may impose such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed structure for use as it may deem necessary in the public interest, and may require a guarantee or bond to insure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
806.03  To hear and decide applications for special exceptions for issuance of a special use permit as are authorized in this ordinance. In considering an application for a special exception, the board of zoning appeals shall apply the standards set forth in the sections of this ordinance authorizing such special exception. 
Sec. 807.0. - Application for variances, modifications and special exceptions. 
    Applications for variances from this ordinance or for special exceptions for which this ordinance provides may be made by any property owner, tenant, governmental official, department, board, or bureau. 
807.01  Application. Application shall be made to the zoning administrator. The applications for a variance or for a special exception shall be accompanied by such reasonable information as may be required by the zoning administrator. Any application for a variance shall include, as a minimum, the following: lot dimensions with property line monuments located thereon; locations and size of existing and proposed structures; yard dimensions and the use of structures; easements (private and public); watercourses; fences; road names and road right-of-way lines; and such other information regarding abutting property as directly affects the applications. The applications and any accompanying maps, plans, or other information shall be transmitted promptly to the secretary of the board. The zoning administrator shall also transmit a copy of the application and materials to the local commission which may send a recommendation to the board within 30 days or appears as a party to the hearing. 
807.02  Posting and land. The zoning administrator shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question one or more signs, each of which shall not be less that six square feet in area, shall contain the telephone number or address of an office in the City of Buena Vista from which information regarding the application may be obtained; and the cost of each shall be paid by the applicant prior to the public hearing. These signs shall be posted at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. Neither the holding of any public hearing nor the validity of any action on an application or an appeal, shall be affected by the unauthorized removal of any sign duly posted in accordance with this section. 
807.03  Hearing and action. The secretary shall place the matter on the docket to be acted upon by the board. No such variance or special exception shall be authorized except after notice and hearing as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, 1950, as amended. The board shall decide same within 30 days from the date of such hearing. 
807.04  Limitation of hearings. A property owner, or his appointed agent, shall not initiate action for a hearing before the board relating to the same parcel of land more often than once every 12 months without specific approval of the board. 
807.05  Withdrawal of application. Any petition for a hearing before [the] board may be withdrawn prior to action thereon, by said board at the discretion of the person, firm or corporation initiating such request upon written notice to the secretary of said board. 
807.06  Fee. Each application for a variance or special exception shall be accompanied by payment of a feeling as set forth in article 10 to help defray the cost of publicizing and conducting the public hearing. Upon withdrawal of an application, the fee required will be refunded provided no expenditures have been made for publicizing or conducting the public hearing at the time the notice is received. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2008) 
Sec. 808.00. - Procedure for requesting a hearing before the board of zoning appeals. 
    Requests for a hearing before the board of zoning appeals for an administrative review shall observe the following procedures: 
808.01  An appeal to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved by, or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City of Buena Vista affected by, any decision of the zoning administrator within 30 days after the decision. 
808.02  Application for appeal shall be submitted to the zoning administrator who shall refer the application to the board, such applications shall specify the grounds for appeal. 
808.03  The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action being appealed was taken. 
808.04  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board that by reason of acts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the board or by a court of record, and on notice to the zoning administrator and for good cause shown. 
808.05  The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals; the board shall consider appeals after notice and hearing as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, 1950, as amended, and decide the same within 30 days from the date of such public hearing. 
808.06  In exercising the powers granted the board in section 806.00 of this ordinance, the said board may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions, or determination of the zoning administrator, and to that end shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator and may issue or direct the issuance of a zoning and building permit. 
808.07  Any application for appeal before the board may be withdrawn prior to action hereon by said board at the discretion of the person, firm, or corporation initiating such a request upon written notice to the secretary of said board. 
808.08  Each application for an appeal shall be accompanied by payment of a fee as set forth in article 10 to help defray the cost of publicizing and conducting the public hearing. Upon withdrawal of an application, the fee required will be refunded provided no expenditures have been made for publicizing or conducting the public hearing at the time the notice is received. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2008) 
Sec. 809.00. - Decision of board of zoning appeals. 
809.01  Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board, or bureau of Buena Vista may present to the circuit court of Buena Vista a petition specifying the grounds on which aggrieved within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. 
809.02  Upon the presentation of such petition, the court shall allow a writ of certiorari to review the decision of the board and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served upon the aggrieved attorney, which shall not be less than ten days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision being appealed, but the court may, on application, on notice to the board, and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. 
809.03  The board shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision being appealed and shall be verified. 
809.04  If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a commissioner to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly, or in part, or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
809.05  Costs shall not be allowed against the board, unless it shall appear to the court that it acted in bad faith or with malice in making the decision being appealed. 
Sec. 810.00. - Administration of the subdivision regulations. 
810.01  Subdivision ordinance administrator. The subdivision administrator shall be appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the Buena Vista City Council which shall fix the compensation of the administrator. 
810.02  Powers and duties relative to subdivision administration. The subdivision administrator is authorized and empowered on behalf of and in the name of the Buena Vista City Council to administer and enforce the provisions set forth in article 9 of these regulations, other pertinent provisions, and Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2240 et seq., 1950, as amended. The administrator may call for opinions or decisions, either verbal or written, from other departments in considering details of any submitted plat. This authority, by the agent, shall have particular reference to the resident highway engineer and the health official. 
810.03  Subdivision administration process. Figure 2 outlines the administrative process followed under the provisions of the subdivision regulations found in article 9. 
Article 9. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2240 et seq. 

Sec. 901.00. - Subdivision requirements. 
    Under the authority to establish subdivision regulations recorded in article 1, section 102, and the purposes outlined in article 2 at sections 201.08 and 201.09, the regulations established herein constitute minimum requirements which shall apply to all subdivisions, except as hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 902.00. - Statutory provisions. 
    The following statutory provisions shall be effective in the City of Buena Vista: 
902.01  No person shall subdivide land without making a plat of such subdivision, recording it in the office of the circuit court of Buena Vista and without fully complying with the provisions of this article. 
902.02  No such plat of any subdivision shall be recorded unless and until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the local commission or by the governing body or its duly authorized agent of the City of Buena Vista wherein the land to be subdivided is located; or by the commissions, governing bodies, or agents, as the case may be, of each county or municipality having a subdivision ordinance, in which any part of the land lies. 
902.03  No person shall sell or transfer any land of a subdivision before such plat has been duly recorded as provided herein, unless such subdivision was lawfully created prior to the adoption of a subdivision ordinance applicable thereto or bona fide divisions in accordance with the authority referenced in article 1, section 102.10. 
902.04  Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars for each lot or parcel of land so subdivided or transferred or sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. 
902.05  No clerk of any court shall file or record a plat of a subdivision required by this article to be recorded until such plat has been approved as required herein; and the penalties provided by Code of Virginia, § 17-59 shall apply to any failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection. 
State Law reference- Mandatory provisions for subdivision ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2241. 
Sec. 903.00. - Platting required. 
    Whenever the owner or proprietor of any tract of land within the City of Buena Vista desires to subdivide the same, he shall submit a plat of the proposed subdivision to Buena Vista through the designated administrator. The administrative processes for the "Subdivision Regulations-City of Buena Vista" are found in article 8, section 810. No such plat of a subdivision shall be recorded unless and until it shall have been submitted, approved and certified by the administrator in accordance with the regulations set forth in this ordinance. No lot shall be sold in any such subdivision before the plat shall have been recorded in the office of the clerk of court of Buena Vista, Virginia. 
903.01  No one exempt. No person shall subdivide any tract of land that is located within the City of Buena Vista, except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and the applicable provisions of the Code of Virginia, 1950 as amended. 
903.02  Mutual responsibility. There is a mutual responsibility between the subdivider and the City of Buena Vista to divide the land so as to improve the general use patterns of the land being subdivided. 
903.03  Land must be suitable. The city council shall not approve the subdivision of land if from adequate investigation conducted by the public agencies concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of, the public the site is not suitable for platting and development purposes of the kind proposed. 
903.04  Improvements. All required improvements shall be installed by the subdivider at his cost. Specifications and requirements set forth in this regulation shall be followed. The subdivider's performance bond shall not be released until construction has been inspected and approved by the appropriate official. 
903.04-1  The subdivider or developer shall pay a pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary sewerage and drainage facilities, located outside the property limits of the land owned or controlled by him but necessitated or required, at least in part, by the construction or improvement of his subdivision or development; provided, however, that no such payment shall be required until such time as the governing body or a designated department or agency thereof shall have established a general sewer and drainage improvement program for an area having related and common sewer and drainage conditions and within which the land owned or controlled by the subdivider or developer is located. Each such payment received shall be expended only for the construction of those facilities for which the payment was required, and until so expended shall be held in an interest bearing account for the benefit of the subdivider or developer; in lien of such payment other methods of performance guarantee satisfactory to the governing body shall be posted conditioned on payment at the commencement of such construction. 
903.05  Necessary changes. No change, erasure or revision shall be made on an, nor on accompanying data sheets after approval by the city council has been endorsed in writing on the plat or sheets, unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing on behalf of the [city] council. 
903.06  Private contracts. This regulation bears no relation to any private easement covenant, agreement, or restriction, nor is the responsibility of enforcing such private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction implied herein to any public official. When this ordinance calls for more restrictive standards than are required by private contract, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
Sec. 904.00. - General requirements. 
    The general specifications and requirements get forth in this section shall be followed: 
904.01  Lot size. Residential lot size shall be in accordance with the lot requirement for the zoning district in which the subdivision is to be located as prescribed in article 7 of the Land Development Regulations. 
904.02  Lot shape. The lot arrangement, design, and shape shall be such that lots will provide satisfactory and desirable sites for buildings, and be properly related to the topography, and conform to the requirements of these regulations. Lots shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations solely to provide necessary square footage by adding area which would be unusable for normal purposes. 
904.03  Lot side lines. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right a radial to the street line. 
904.04  Lot shall abut on a street. Each lot shall abut on a street dedicated by the subdivision plat, or on an existing publicly dedicated street, or on a street which has become public by right of use. If the existing streets are not 50 feet in width, the subdivider shall make provisions in the deeds to the lots for all buildings to be so constructed as to permit the widening by dedication of said roads or streets to a width of 50 feet. 
904.05  Remnants. Land subject to flooding, land deemed to be topographically unsuitable for residential occupancy and all remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing a tract must be added to adjacent lots, or become the property of a homeowners association rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. 
904.06  Block length. The maximum length of blocks shall be 1,200 feet, and the minimum length of blocks upon which lots have frontage shall be 500 feet, unless topography or other conditions warrants otherwise or other lengths of blocks as approved by city council. 
904.07  Block width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets, unless prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property in which case the agent may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
904.08  Block orientation. Where a proposed subdivision adjoins a major road, the city may require that the greater dimension of the block shall front or back upon such major thoroughfare to avoid unnecessary ingress or egress. 
904.09  Street design and standards. 
904.09-1  For all subdivisions, all streets shall have, as a minimum, a right-of-way width of 50 feet and a pavement width of 20 feet. These minimums may be increased in accordance with specifications directed by city council; 
904.09-2  All streets and alleys shall be graded to their full width to the cross section and grade approved by the city council with embankment slopes lying outside the right-of-way. 
904.09-3  The subgrade shall be stabilized in accordance with the latest applicable Virginia Department of Transportation specifications to meet the requirements to qualify for admission to the state highway system of Virginia and urban highway maintenance revenues. 
904.09-4  Base material shall meet the requirements of the latest Virginia Department of Transportation specifications to qualify for admission to the state highway system of Virginia and urban maintenance revenues. The base material shall be installed to a minimum width of 30 feet for streets and 12 feet for alleys. 
904.09-5  Concrete curbs and gutters shall be installed on both sides of all streets shown on the subdivision plat in accordance with the Virginia Department of Transportation specifications for curb and gutter. In the case of newly platted streets in a subdivision in which each lot contains one acre or more, curb and gutter is not required but the development plan shall provide storm drainage provisions satisfactory to the latest Virginia Department of Transportation Specifications. 
904.09-6  Streets shall be surfaced to a minimum width of 20 feet with a two-inch-final surface treated overlay and follow all specifications as required by VDOT to meet the minimum standards as necessary to qualify the road for urban highway maintenance revenues. The final compaction of any trenched ditch in the public right of way shall follow the latest Virginia Department of Transportation requirements for compaction. The two-inch-final surface treatment shall not be applied until 6 months have expired from the day the final compaction of the last trenched ditch in the right of way occurred. The developer shall contact the zoning office on the day of final compaction of the last trenched ditch. 
904.09-7  Concrete sidewalks or other dust free walkways shall be provided on both sides of all streets if required by city council. 
904.09-8  Privately owned and maintained streets allowed in townhouse developments, including curbs, gutters and sidewalks or dust free walkways shall be developed according to the latest Virginia Department of Transportation requirements to qualify for admission to the state highway system of Virginia and urban highway maintenance revenues. 
904.09-9  The subdivider shall construct and surface all platted streets. Curbs and gutters shall be provided for each street. Sidewalks, where required, shall also be constructed at the subdivider's expense. 
904.09-10  Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, dust-free walkways shall be constructed such that there will be a driveway entrance for each lot and such entrance be constructed according to the latest Virginia Department of Transportation requirements to qualify for admission to the state highway system of Virginia and urban highway maintenance revenues shall be constructed such that there will be a driveway entrance for each lot. 
904.10  Street alignment and layout. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas. The street arrangement must be such as to cause no unnecessary hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. Where, in the opinion of the city, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, propose, streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary line of such property. Half streets along the boundary of land proposed for subdivision may not be permitted. Wherever possible, streets should intersect at right angles. In all hillside areas, streets running with contours shall be required to intersect at angles of not less than 60 degrees, unless approved by the administrator. 
904.11  Alleys. Alleys should be avoided whenever possible, if permitted the right-of-way, will be not less than 20 feet. 
904.12  Cul-de-sacs. Streets designed to have one end permanently closed must be terminated by a turn-around of not less than 100 feet in diameter. 
904.13  Reserve strips. 
904.13-1  There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to public streets. 
904.14  Street names. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with other already existing and named streets, shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street names shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plats, and shall be approved by the city. Names of existing streets shall not be changed except by specific approval. 
904.15  Street identification signs. Street identification signs of an approved design shall be installed at all intersections. 
904.16  Monuments. Upon completion of subdivision streets, sewers and other improvements, the subdivider shall make certain that all monuments required by this regulation are clearly visible for inspection and use. Such monuments shall be inspected and approved by the administrator before any improvements are accepted: 
904.16-1  Location of concrete. Concrete monuments four inches in diameter or square, with a flat top, shall be set at all street corners, at the points where the street line intersects the exterior boundaries of the subdivision and at right angle points, and points of curve in each street. The top of the monument shall be set flush with the finished grade. 
904.16-2  Location of iron pipe. All other lot corners shall be marked with iron pipe not less than three-fourths inch in diameter and 24 inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. When rock is encountered, a hole shall be drilled four inches deep in the rock into which shall be cemented a steel rod one-half inch in diameter, the top of which shall be flush with the finished grade line. 
904.17  Reservation of land for public purposes. The city may require subdividers of residential subdivision, to set aside land for parks, playgrounds, schools, libraries, municipal buildings, and similar public and semipublic uses, subject to the following regulations: 
904.17-1  Subdividers shall not be required to dedicate land for parks or playgrounds, exclusive of street and drainage reservations, without reimbursement by the governing body. Where land is required in excess of this amount, the reimbursement by the governing body shall be based on a proportionate share of the: 
(1)  Cost of raw land; 
(2)  Cost of improvements, including interests or investments; 
(3)  Development costs; plus [and] 
(4)  Not more than ten percent profit on the total of such costs. 
Subdividers shall not be required to reserve land for public purposes other than streets, parks and playgrounds, except on a reimbursement basis. They shall be reimbursed by the jurisdiction or agency requiring the land. The amount of reimbursement shall be determined as in 904.17-1. They shall not be required to hold the land longer than 18 months following the recording of the plat for such purchase. If the land is not purchased within the said 18 months, it may be sold as lots for the same purposes for which the subdivision was platted. To facilitate such possible eventual sale of reserved land as separate lots, the subdivider shall show on his final plat, by dotted lines and dotted numbers, the area and dimensions of lots to be created within the boundaries of any such reserve land, and may sell such lots, after the expiration date of the reservation, by lot number, without filing an amended plat. 
904.17-2  The commission shall make certain that lands so reserved are divisible in the same manner as the remainder of the subdivision so that the subdivider will not be required to reserve an unusable portion of his subdivision. 
904.17-3  Nothing herein shall be consulted to mean that land may be set aside for commercial purposes in a residential district, without the land so required for commercial use being zoned appropriately in accordance with the Land Development Regulations. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2009) 
Sec. 905.00. - Utility requirements. 
905.01  Plans and specifications for utility fixtures and systems to be submitted for approval. If the owners of any such subdivision desire to construct in, on, or under any streets or alleys located in such subdivision any gas, water, sewer, or electric light or power works, pipes, wires, fixtures, or systems, they shall present plans or specifications therefor to the governing body of the City of Buena Vista or its authorized agent for approval. The governing body shall have 60 days in which to approve or disapprove the same. In event of the failure of the governing body, or its agent, to act within such period, such plans and specifications may be submitted, after ten days notice to the city, to the judge of the circuit court having jurisdiction within the city for approval or disapproval, and approval thereof shall, for all purposes of this article, be treated and considered as the approval of the city. 
905.02  Septic tanks. The governing body shall not approve any subdivision where sanitary sewers are not provided unless it shall receive in writing from the health department, a statement to the effect that the area contained in the subdivision is generally satisfactory for the installation of septic tanks, and that they will not, so far as can be determined, create hazards to public health, and that approval by the governing body is only with the understanding that where septic tanks are to be installed, they must be approved on an individual basis by the health department. 
905.03  Public water and/or sewer. Where public water and/or sewer is available, the service shall be extended to all lots within a subdivision by the developer. 
905.04  Private water and/or sewer. Where public water and/or sewer is not available, nothing in this regulation shall prevent the installation of privately owned water distribution systems or sewage collection and treatment facilities, provided, however, that any such installations must meet all of the requirements of the state water control board, the state health department, and any other state or local regulations having authority over such installations. 
905.05  Fire protection. The installation of adequate fire hydrants in a subdivision at approved locations are required, provided that the necessary water supply is available. 
905.06  Flood control and drainage. If any portion of the proposed subdivision is determined by the agent to be in the 100 year floodplain, the subdivider shall provide the necessary information to demonstrate that the presence of the 100 year floodplain was considered in the layout of the subdivision. The subdivider shall also provide the plans for meeting the statewide stormwater management criteria, or alternate criteria adopted by the Buena Vista City Council. The flood control and drainage information shall include a properly certified engineer's statement that such improvements, when properly installed will be adequate to meet the criteria as applied to the proposed development. 
905.07  Utility easements. The city may require easements for drainage through adjoining property be provided by the subdivider. Easements of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided for water, sewer, power lines, and other utilities to serve the subdivision when required 
905.08  City not obligated to pay for grading, paving, etc. Nothing herein shall be construed as creating an obligation upon the City of Buena Vista to pay for grading or paving, or for sidewalks, sewers, water systems curb and gutter improvements, or other construction. 
Sec. 906.00. - Relation to erosion and sediment control laws. 
    The general assembly has determined that the lands and waters comprising the watersheds of the state are great natural resources which are being adversely affected by the rapid shift in land use from agricultural to nonagricultural uses. The general assembly found it necessary to establish and implement the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control law to control erosion and sedimentation from land-disturbing activities. 
906.01  Subdivision development included as land-disturbing activity. The Code of Virginia includes the term subdivision development along with activities disturbing 10,000 or more square feet of land for commercial or noncommercial uses. 
906.02  Erosion and sedimentation plan. At the time of filing the preliminary plat, erosion and sedimentation control plan will also be filed (see [section] 907.02-9) in accordance with the City of Buena Vista Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance and the provisions of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook. 
State Law reference- Erosion and sediment control, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq. 
Sec. 907.00. - Plat required approval before sale. 
    Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, and before any permit for the erection of a structure shall be granted, the subdivider or his agent shall apply in writing to the administrator for the approval of the subdivision by submitting four copies of a preliminary plat including the lot, street, and utilities layout. No lot shall be sold until a final plat for the subdivision shall have been approved and recorded. 
907.01  Preliminary sketch. The subdivider may, if lie so chooses; submit to the administrator a preliminary sketch of the proposed subdivision prior to his preparing detailed preliminary and final plats. The purpose of such preliminary sketch is to permit the agent to advise the subdivider whether his plans, in general, are in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. Upon submission of any such preliminary sketch, it shall be studied and the subdivider advised where it appears that changes would be necessary. The agent may mark the preliminary sketch indicating necessary changes and any such marked sketch shall be returned to the commission with the preliminary plat. The preliminary sketch shall be as follows: 
907.01-1  It shall be drawn on white paper, or on a print of a topographic map of the property. It shall be drawn to an appropriate scale i.e., 200 feet to the inch. It shall show the name, location, and dimensions of all streets entering the property, adjacent to the property, or terminating at the boundary of the property to be subdivided. It shall show the location of all proposed streets, lots, parks, playgrounds and other proposed uses of the land to be subdivided and shall include the approximate dimensions. 
907.02  Preliminary plat. The subdivider shall, present to the administrator four copies of a preliminary layout at an appropriate scale. The preliminary plat shall include the following information: 
907.02-1  Name of subdivision, owner, subdivider, surveyor, or engineer, date of drawing, number of sheets, north point and scale; 
907.02-2  Location of proposed subdivision by an inset map at a scale of not less than one inch equal to 2000 feet showing adjoining roads, their names and number, towns, subdivisions, and other landmarks; 
907.02-3  The boundary survey or existing survey of record provided such survey shows a closure with an accuracy of not less than one in twenty-five hundred; total acreage, acreage of subdivided area, number and approximate area and frontage of all building sites, existing buildings within the boundaries of the tract, names of owners and their property lines within the boundaries of the tract, and adjoining such boundaries; 
907.02-4  All existing, platted, and proposed streets, their names, numbers, and widths; existing utility or other easements, public areas, and parking spaces; culverts, drains, and watercourses, their names and other pertinent data; 
907.02-5  All parcels of land to be dedicated for public use and the conditions of such dedication; 
907.02-6  Topography at an appropriate interval; 
907.02-7  Elevations of existing and proposed ground surface at all street intersections and at points of major grade change along the centerline of streets together with proposed grade lines connecting therewith; 
907.02-8  Proposed connections with existing sanitary sewers and existing water supply or alternate means of sewage disposal and water supply; 
907.02-9  Provisions for collecting and discharging surface drainage and preliminary designs of any structure that may be required, (see 906.02); 
907.02-10  Procedure. The planning commission and agent shall discuss the preliminary plat with the subdivider in order to determine whether or not his preliminary plat generally conforms to the requirements of the Land Development Regulations. The subdivider shall then be advised in writing within forty five (45) days, which may be by formal letter or by legible markings on his copy of the preliminary plat, concerning any additional data that may be required, the character and extent of public improvements that will have to be made, and the amount of the performance bond which will be required as a prerequisite to approval of the final subdivision plat. In determining the cost of required improvements and the amount of the performance bond, the administrator shall require a bona fide estimate of the cost of improvements to be furnished by the subdivider; 
907.02-11  No guarantee. Approval by the planning commission and administrator of the preliminary plat does not constitute a guarantee of approval of the final plat; 
907.02-12  Six-month limit. The subdivider shall have not more than six months after receiving official notification concerning the preliminary plat to file with the administrator a final subdivision plat in accordance with this section. Failure to do so shall make preliminary approval null and void. The administrator may, on written request by the subdivider, grant an extension of this time limit. 
Sec. 908.00. - Final plat. 
    Four copies of the final plat shall be submitted to the administrator. The subdivision plats submitted for final approval by the governing body and subsequent recording shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink upon tracing cloth at an appropriate scale, i.e., 100 feet to the inch on sheets not exceeding 17 inches by 22 inches in size. When a subdivision cannot be platted on sheets of this size, it is suggested that it be platted in sections, numbering the sections numerically, as section 1, 2, etc., of subdivision. 
908.01  Plat should contain at least the following information: 
908.01-1  Name of subdivision, ward, city, state, owner, north point, scale of drawing, and number of sheets. If shown on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. A space containing the certificate of approval, (see appendix A), shall be provided for the use of the approving authority; 
908.01-2  Location of proposed subdivision by an insert map, at a scale of not less than 1 inch equals 2000 feet, indicating adjoining roads, their names and numbers, town;, subdivisions, and other landmarks; 
908.01-3  A boundary survey with an error of closure within the limit of one in 5,000 related to the true meridian and showing the location of all monuments and their type of material. The survey may be related to the state plane coordinate grid, if the coordinates of two adjacent corners of the subdivision are shown; 
908.01-4  A statement to the effect that the subdivision as it appears on this plat is with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any, which shall be signed by the owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgements of deeds on the form shown in appendix A; 
908.01-5  When the subdivision consists of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the various tracts shall be indicated by dashed lines, and indication of the respective tracts shall be placed on the plat; 
908.01-6  The accurate location and dimensions by bearings and distances with all curve data on all lots, and street lines and centerlines of streets; boundaries of all proposed or existing easements, parks, school sites, or other public areas; the number and area of all building sites; all existing public and private streets, their names, numbers, and widths; existing utilities, and those to be provided such as sanitary sewers, storm drains, water mains, manholes, and underground conduits including their size and type; watercourses and their names, names of owners and their property lines, both within the boundary of the subdivision and adjoining said boundaries; 
908.01-7  All dimensions shown shall meet the standards published by the state board of licensing. 
908.01-8  The data of all curves along the street frontages shall be shown in detail at the curve or in a curve data table containing the following: Delta, radius, arc, tangent, chord and chord bearings. 
908.01-9  A professional engineer or surveyor shall certify that all required facilities are designed and built to the requisite standards (see appendix A). 
Sec. 909.00. - Consideration of final plats. 
909.01  The city council shall act on proposed final plats within 60 days after it has been officially submitted for approval by either approving or disapproving such plat in writing, and giving with the latter specific reasons therefor. The specific reasons for disapproval may be contained in a separate document or may be written on the plat itself, and shall relate in general terms such modifications or corrections as will permit approval of the plat. 
909.01-1  If the city council fails to act on the proposed plat within 60 days after it has been officially submitted for approval, the subdivider, after ten days' written notice to the city council may petition the circuit court of the city to decide whether the plat should or should not be approved. The court shall hear the matter and make and enter such order with respect thereto as it deems proper; 
909.01-2  If the city council disapproves a plat and the subdivider contends that such disapproval was not properly based an the ordinance applicable thereto, or was arbitrary or capricious, lie may appeal to the circuit court having jurisdiction of such land, and the court shall hear and determine the case as soon as possible, provided that his appeal is filed with the circuit court within 60 days of the written disapproval by the city council; 
909.01-3  The subdivider shall have not more than six months after receiving final approval to file the subdivision plat for recordation. If a plat is not filed for recordation within the time limit such approval shall be withdrawn and the plat marked void and returned; 
909.01-4  Before the acceptance of dedication for public use of any right-of-way located within any subdivision which has been constructed or proposed to be constructed within the subdivision, any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, bicycle trail, drainage or sewerage system, waterline as part of a public system, or other improvement financed or to be financed in whole or in part by private funds the owner or developer must: 
(1)  Certify to the governing body that the construction costs have been paid to the person constructing such facilities; or 
(2)  Furnish to the governing body a certified check, letter of credit, cash escrow or contract for construction in the amount of the estimated costs of construction or a personal, corporate or property bond, with surety satisfactory to the governing body, in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of such facilities; 
909.01-5  Should the city have accepted the dedication of a road for public use and such road is not acceptable into the state highway system due to factors other than its quality of construction, the city may require the, subdivider or developer to furnish a maintenance and indemnifying bond or letter of credit with surety satisfactory to the governing body, in an amount sufficient for, and conditioned upon, the maintenance of such road until such time as it is accepted into the state highway system; 
909.01-6  Recordation. The recordation of such plat shall operate to transfer, in fee simple, to the City of Buena Vista such portion of the premises platted as is on such plat set apart for streets, alleys, or other public use and to transfer to the city any easement indicated on such plat to create public right of passage over the same; 
909.01-7  Conditions. The plat shall not be approved until the subdivider has complied with the general requirements and minimum standards of design in accordance with this ordinance, and has made satisfactory arrangements for performance bonds, the satisfaction of the agent. Approval of final plat shall be written by the agent on the face thereof. 
Sec. 910.00. - Lot line revisions. 
    A lot line on an existing parcel may be revised as long as the revision will not be in conflict with any provisions of the City of Buena Vista Land Development Regulations. 
910.01  Procedure. The property owner or proprietor of a tract of land in Buena Vista shall file a plat meeting the requirements of 908.00. The planning commission shall review the proposed revision and make recommendations to city council. Council consideration will follow the process outlined in 909.00. 
Sec. 911.00. - Vacation of plat. 
    A plat may be vacated by ordinance of the governing body of the City of Buena Vista in which the land shown on the plat or part thereof to be vacated lies, on motion of one of its members, or on application of any interested person. Such ordinance shall not be adopted until after notice has been given as required by [Code of Virginia, §] 15.2-2204. Said notice shall clearly describe the plat or portion thereof to be vacated and state the time and place of the meeting of the governing body at which the adoption of the ordinance is to be considered. An appeal from the adoption of the ordinance may be filed within 30 days with the circuit court having jurisdiction of the land shown on the plat or part thereof to be vacated. Upon such appeal, the court may nullify the ordinance if it finds that the owner of any lot shown on the plat will be irreparably damaged. If no appeal from the adoption of the ordinance is filed within the time provided or if the ordinance is upheld on appeal, a certified copy of the ordinance of vacation shall be recorded in the clerk's office of the court in which the plat is recorded. 
911.01  In cases where any lot has been sold, the plat or part thereof may be vacated according to either of the following methods: 
(a)  By instrument in writing agreeing to said vacation signed by all the owners of lots shown on said plat and also signed on behalf of the governing body of the city in which the land shown on the plat or part thereof to be vacated lies for the purpose of showing the approval of such vacation by the governing body. The term "owners" shall not include lien creditors except those whose debts are secured by a recorded deed of trust or mortgage and shall not include any consort of an owner. The instrument of vacation shall be acknowledged in the manner of a deed and filed for record in the clerk's office of any court in which said plat is recorded; 
(b)  By ordinance of the City Council of Buena Vista on motion of one of its members or on application of any interested person. Such ordinance shall not be adopted until after notice has been given as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204. Said notice shall clearly describe the plat or portion thereof to be vacated and state the time and place of the meeting of the governing body at which the adoption of the ordinance will be voted upon. Any person may appear at said meeting for the purpose of objecting to the adoption of the ordinance. An appeal from the adoption of the ordinance may be filed within 30 days with the circuit court having jurisdiction over the land shown on the plat or part thereof to be vacated. Upon such appeal the court may nullify the ordinance if it finds that the owner of any lot shown on the plat will be irreparably damaged. If no appeal from the adoption of the ordinance is filed within the time provided or if the ordinance is upheld on appeal, a certified copy of the ordinance of vacation shall be recorded in the clerk's office of any court in which the plat is recorded. 
State Law reference- Vacation of plats, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2271-15.2-2278. 
Sec. 912.00. - Advertising standards. 
    A subdivider, when advertising a subdivided tract of land for sale, shall be specific as to whether or not officially approved water and sewage facilities are available. 
Sec. 913.00. - Exceptions. 
    Where the subdivider can show that a provision of these standards would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the city a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the administrator may authorize an exception. Any exception thus authorized is to be stated in writing in the report of the administrator with the reasoning, on which the departure was justified, set forth. No exception to this ordinance may be granted which is opposed in writing by the city or VDOT highway engineer or health official. 
Article 10. - SCHEDULE OF FEES 
    Fees are hereby established in order to help defray the expenses of administration, processing applications, publicizing and conducting public hearings, and performing necessary inspections. 
    City council may from time to time adopt a schedule of fees for applications, permits, and other actions and deliverables related to planning, zoning, and subdivision. Such fees shall conform to any and all applicable state law. 

Secs. 1001.00-1003.00. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-03, adopted Jan. 18, 2018, repealed §§ 1001.00-1003.00, which pertained to fees related to zoning, amendments, and subdivisions, and derived from Ord. of 5-10-2008. 
Sec. 1004.00. - Return of fees. 
    No portion of any fee payment shall be returned to any applicant, except that where an application requiring a public hearing is withdrawn prior to notification of public hearing, that portion of any fee payment relating to notice and conduct of public hearing shall be returned. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2008) 
Article 11. - VIOLATION AND PENALTY 

Sec. 1101.00. - Authority. 
    All departments, officials, and public employees of the City of Buena Vista which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance. They shall issue permits for uses, buildings, or purposes only when they are in harmony with the provisions of these regulations. Any such permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of these regulations shall be null and void. 
Sec. 1102.00. - Complaints regarding violations. 
    Whenever a violation of these regulations occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may, file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the administrator. He shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon provided by these regulations. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2008) 
State Law reference- Violations and penalties, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2208, 15.2-2209. 
Sec. 1103.00. - Penalties. 
    Any violation, by any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal agent, employee, or otherwise, of the provisions of these regulations shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 or more than $1,000.00. If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with the zoning ordinance, within a time period established by the courts. Failure to remove or abate a zoning violations, within the specified period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and any failure to remove or abate a zoning violation during the succeeding 10-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each 10-day period, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,500.00. 
(Ord. of 1-13-2008) 
State Law reference- Violations and penalties, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2208, 15.2-2209 
Article 12. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1201.00. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Wherever the requirements of these regulations are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted statutes, rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. 
Sec. 1202.00. - Validity. 
    Each phrase, sentence, paragraph, section, or other provision of these regulations is severable from all other such phrases, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and provisions. Should any phrase, sentence, paragraph, section or provision of these regulations be declared by, the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect any other portion or provision of these regulations. 
Sec. 1203.00. - Repealed resolutions and ordinances. 
    These regulations are a comprehensive enactment of all of the resolutions and ordinances of the Buena Vista City Council relating to zoning and subdivision regulations. All prior ordinances affecting zoning and subdivision regulations are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 1204.00. - Effective date. 
    These regulations shall take effect and be in force from and after 12:01 a.m., July 26, 1985. A certified copy of the foregoing Land Development Regulations of the City of Buena Vista shall be filed in the office of the administrator and in the office of the clerk of the City of Buena Vista, Virginia. 
Article 13. - STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNAS AND TOWERS 

Sec. 1301.00. - Definitions. 
    When used in this ordinance the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section: 
1301.01  Alternative tower or telecommunications structure [means] manmade trees, towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
1301.02  Antenna [means] any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through sending and/or receiving electromagnetic waves. 
1301.03  FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
1301.04  FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
1301.05  Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including antenna. 
1301.06  Telecommunication facility means any structure used for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas or microwave dishes, including self-supporting towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, alternative antenna support structures such as rooftops, and other existing support structures. 
1302.07  Base means the base of a telecommunications tower shall be considered the concrete foundation of the structure. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1302.00. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to establish general guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this ordinance are to: 
(1)  Encourage the location of telecommunication facilities in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of facilities and sites throughout the city; 
(2)  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing telecommunication facilities; 
(3)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(4)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and 
(5)  Provide adequate sites for the provision of telecommunication services with the minimal negative impact on the resources of the area. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1303.00. - Applicability. 
1303.01  District height limitations. The requirements set forth in this ordinance shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at greater than 50 feet in height. 
1303.02  Amateur radio and receive-only antennas. This ordinance shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is: 
(1)  Under 50 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator; or 
(2)  Used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
1303.03  Existing structures and towers. The placement of an antenna on an existing structure such as a building, sign, light pole, water tank, or other freestanding nonresidential structure or existing municipal, utility or commercially owned tower or pole shall be permitted so long as the addition of said antenna shall not add more than 20 feet in height to said structure or tower; and provided, however, that such permitted use shall include the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna so long as such building or equipment is placed within the existing structure or property and is necessary for such use. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1304.00. - General guidelines and requirements. 
1304.01  Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses when considering area requirements on a given parcel of land. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or towers on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are constructed and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
1304.02  Inventory of existing structures. Each applicant for an antenna and or tower shall provide to the city an inventory of its existing facilities that are either within the jurisdiction of the governing authority or within five miles of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The city may share such information with other applicants applying for approvals or special use permits under this ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction, provided, however that the city is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
1304.03  Aesthetics; lighting. The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the location of all towers and the installation of all antennas governed by this ordinance; provided, however, that the governing authority may waive any of these requirements if it determines that the goals of this ordinance are better served thereby. 
1304.03-1  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. Dish antennas will be of a neutral, nonreflective color with no logos. 
1304.03-2  At a facility site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and the built environment. 
304.03-3  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
1304.03-4  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
1304.03-5  No advertising of any type may be placed on the tower or accompanying facility unless as part of retrofitting an existing sign structure. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1305.00. - Federal requirements. 
    All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards as required. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1306.00. - Building codes. 
    To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable federal, state and local building codes and regulations. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1307.00. - Information required. 
    Each applicant requesting a special use permit under this ordinance shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the governing authority to be necessary to assess compliance with this ordinance. Additionally, applicant shall provide actual photographs of the site from designated relevant views that include a simulated photographic image of the proposed tower. The photograph with the simulated image shall include the foreground, the midground and the background of the site. 
1307.01  An engineering report, certifying that the proposed tower is compatible for collocation with a minimum of three similar users including the primary user, must be submitted by the applicant. 
1307.02  The applicant shall notify adjoining property owners and other nearby residents by certified letter concerning the project prior to public hearings before the planning commission and the city council. 
1307.03  The applicant shall provide copies of their co-location policy. 
1307.04  The applicant shall provide copies of propagation maps demonstrating that antennas and sites for possible co-locator antennas are no higher in elevation than necessary. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1308.00. - Factors considered in granting permits. 
    The governing authority shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit, although the governing authority may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the governing authority, concludes that the goals of this ordinance are better served thereby. 
1308.01  Height of the proposed tower or pole; 
1308.02  Proximity of the tower or pole to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
1308.03  Nature of the uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
1308.04  Surrounding topography; 
1308.05  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
1308.06  Design of the tower or pole, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
1308.07  Proposed ingress and egress; 
1308.08  Collocation policy; 
1308.09  Language of the lease agreement; 
1308.10  Consistency with the comprehensive plan and the purposes to be served by zoning; and 
1308.11  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed below. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1309.00. - Availability of existing towers or structures. 
    No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the governing authority that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
1309.01  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
1309.02  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
1309.03  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
1309.04  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
1309.05  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
1309.06  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1310.00. - Setback requirements. 
    The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a conditional use permit is required; provided, however, that the governing authority may reduce the standard setback requirements if the goals of this ordinance would be better served thereby. 
1310.01  The base of a tower must be set back a distance equal to 200 percent of the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. 
1310.02  Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements for primary structures. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1311.00. - Security. 
    Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that the governing authority may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1312.00. - Landscaping. 
    The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the governing authority may waive such requirements if the goals of this ordinance would be better served thereby. 
1312.01  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the support buildings from adjacent property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. 
1312.02  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether. 
1312.03  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer. 
Sec. 1313.00. - Local government access. 
    Owners of towers shall provide the city collocation opportunities without compensation as a community benefit to improve radio communication for city departments and emergency services provided it does not conflict with the collocation requirement of [section] 1308.08. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1314.00. - Abandoned antennas and towers. 
    Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 24 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of such removal requirement. Removal includes the removal of the tower, all tower and fence rooters, underground cables and support buildings. The buildings may remain with owner's approval. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. If the tower is not removed per this section, the city may require the landowner to have it removed. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1315.00. - Review fees. 
    Any costs associated with review by a licensed engineer of any of the above required information shall be billed to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Article 14. - BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 1401.00. - Definitions. 
    When used in this ordinance the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section: 
1401.01  Bed and breakfast homestay [means] a single-family dwelling unit occupied by the owner which is used and regulated primarily as a private residence, but which provides up to two bedroom accommodation and breakfast to transients. 
1401.02  Bed and breakfast inn [means] a single-family dwelling occupied by the owner which provides more than two, but no more than five bedroom accommodations and breakfast to transients. 
1401.03  Bed and breakfast establishment [means] a bed and breakfast homestay or inn. 
1401.04  Transient [means] a paying guest staying for no more than 14 days at a time in any bed-and-breakfast homestay or inn, hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1402.00. - Purpose. 
    The intent of this section is to permit and regulate the operation of bed and breakfast homestays and inns in appropriate locations throughout the city in an effort to stimulate tourism. In addition to applicable restrictions in each district and requirements that may be imposed by conditional use permit, the standards listed below shall apply. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1403.00. - Generally. 
1403.01  Licensure. The operator shall hold a valid business license from the city and, where applicable, a permit from the city, state or federal department of health. 
1403.02  Registration book. A registration book must be maintained for one year and be made available for review by the city upon request. 
1403.03  Building appearance. Bed and breakfast establishments are to be integrated into the residential fabric of the neighborhood in which they are located. A proposed bed and breakfast establishment should not affect the integrity or character of the single family residential neighborhood for which it is proposed. 
1403.04  Bed and breakfast establishments. Bed and breakfast establishments shall only be permitted in existing structures and may not increase the size of the structure, including accessory structures, by more than twenty-five percent of the original square footage. Any additions or modifications shall be residential in appearance, compatible with the original structure and surrounding structures and the overall footprint of the structure and parking shall not be excessive for the size and shape of the lot. 
1403.04-1  No changes shall be made to the building exterior that would detract from its appearance as a family dwelling. 
1403.04-2  The physical and aesthetic impact of required off street parking shall not be detrimental to the existing character of the house and lot or to the surrounding neighborhood. 
1403.04-3  Existing structures and landscaping determined to contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall not be removed. 
1403.04-4  Off-street parking shall be screened from surrounding family residences by landscaping or fencing which is compatible with the neighborhood. 
1403.05  Landscaping. Landscaping, buffers and/or fences may be required as a permit condition in order to mitigate potentially negative impacts on adjoining properties and to maintain the appearance of the district. 
1403.06  Licensure. The operator shall hold a valid business license from the city and, where applicable, a permit from the department of health. 
1403.07  Cooking facilities. Guestrooms shall not have cooking facilities. 
1403.08  Maximum duration of stay. The maximum stay for a guest shall be 14 days. 
1403.09  Limitations of use. Bed and breakfast establishments are permitted solely to provide lodging and breakfast accommodations. Additional activities including receptions, parties and other events are not permitted unless specifically authorized by the conditional use permit. Authorization for additional activities will be based on the suitability of the house and property for hosting such events. Specific consideration will be given to the floor plan of the house, the proximity of the house to neighboring houses, the size of the lot, provisions to buffer the effects of such activities from adjacent property and the ability to provide parking for such events. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1404.00. - Bed and breakfast homestays. 
1404.01  Signage. No signs will be placed on the property advertising its use as a bed and breakfast homestay. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Sec. 1405.00. - Bed and breakfast inns. 
1405.01  Code compliance. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes shall comply with the latest minimum requirements of the International Building Code, and/or International Residential Code and/or the International Property Maintenance Code. 
1405.02  Signage. 
1405.02-1  A single sign with a maximum area of four square feet is permitted. 
1405.02-2  Illumination, if used, shall consist of white and not colored light, and shall not be blinking, fluctuating or moving. Light rays shall shine only upon the sign or upon the property within the premises and shall not spill over the property line in any direction, expect by indirect reflection. 
1405.03  Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one space for each sleeping room in addition to parking spaces required for permanent residents of the building. 
1405.04  Length of conditional use permit. Conditional use permits for bed and breakfast inns shall normally be issued for a ten-year period. 
(Ord. of 11-13-1997) 
Article 15. - SITE PLANS 

Sec. 1501.00. - Required: exceptions. 
    Site plans are required and shall be submitted for all new structures, all renovated structures and all additions to existing structures, with the following exceptions: 
1501.01  Single-family dwellings. 
1501.02  Two-family dwellings. 
1501.03  For relatively minor developments, requirements of this section may be waived upon recommendation of the city manager or his authorized agent; provided that the intent of this article may not be circumvented. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000; Ord. of 4-13-2008; Ord. of 4-13-2009; Ord. of 1-18-2009) 
Sec. 1502.00. - Site plan contents. 
    Every site plan prepared as hereinafter provided and submitted in accordance with this article, shall contain the following information: 
1502.01  A boundary survey of the tract which conforms to the professional rules and regulations that apply to the certifying surveyor ten years or less from the time the plan is submitted. 
1502.02  A certificate signed by the surveyor setting forth the source of description of the property. 
1502.03  All existing and proposed streets and easements, their names, numbers and widths, existing and proposed utilities, owners, zoning and present use of adjoining property; as evidenced by an on sight inspection and provided by city officials or the developers legal counsel. 
1502.04  Location, type and size of vehicular entrance to the site. 
1502.05  Locations, types, sizes and heights of fencing, retaining walls and screen planting where required. 
1502.06  All off-street parking, loading spaces and walkways, indicating type of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles and a specific schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided and the number required in accordance with section 703. 
1502.07  Number of floors, floor area, height and location of each building and proposed general use for each building. If a multifamily residential building, the number, size and type of dwelling units. 
1502.08  All existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities, indicating all pipe sizes, types and grades and where connection is to be made as provided. 
1502.09  Provisions for the adequate disposition of natural and stormwater, indicating locations, sizes, types and grades of ditches, catchbasins and pipes and connections to existing drainage system. 
1502.10  Existing topography, with a maximum of two-foot contour intervals where appropriate. Where existing ground is on a slope of less than two percent, either one-foot contours or spot elevations where necessary, but not more than 50 feet apart. 
1502.11  Proposed finished grading by contours supplemented where necessary by spot elevations. 
1502.12  A landscape plan. 
1502.13  An engineered erosion and sediment control plan submitted if land disturbance is over 10,000 square feet. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000; Ord. of 4-13-2008) 
Sec. 1503.00. - Preparation and submission. 
1503.01  Site plans, or any portion thereof, involving engineering, architecture, landscape architecture or land surveying shall be prepared and certified respectively by an engineer, architect, landscape architect or land surveyor duly authorized by the state to practice as such. 
1503.02  Site plans should be prepared on a scale of one-inch equals 50 feet or larger. 
1503.03  A clear, legible, blue or black line copy of the site plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for checking the site plan for general completeness and compliance with such administrative requirements as may be established prior to routing copies thereof for review. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000) 
Sec. 1504.00. - Approval; issuance of permit. 
1504.01  All site plans which are appropriately submitted and which conform to the standards and requirements set forth in this article shall be approved by the zoning administrator and planning commission after having been reviewed and recommended for approval by the city manager or his agents, relative to: 
1504.01-1  Locations and design of vehicular entrances and exits in relation to streets giving access to the site and in relation to pedestrian traffic. 
1504.01-2  Locations and adequacy of automobile parking areas. 
1504-01-3  Adequate provisions for traffic circulation and control within the site and provision for access to adjoining property. 
1504.01-4  Compliance with the requirements for setback and screening. 
1504.01-5  Adequacy of drainage, water supply, fire protection and sanitary sewer facilities. 
1504.01-6  Compliance with applicable established design criteria, construction standards and specifications for all improvements. 
1504.01-7  Approval by the city health officer or his agents, if septic tank and other sewage disposal facilities other than public sanitary sewers are involved. 
1504.01-8  Adequacy of proposed landscaping for softening the harsh visual effects of parking lots and for providing screening between development and the street and surrounding lots. 
1504.02  Approval of a site plan submitted under the provisions of this article shall expire one year after the date of such approval unless building permits have been obtained for construction in accordance therewith. 
1504.03  No permit shall be issued for any structure in any area covered by the site plan that is required under the provisions of this article, except in conformity with such site plan which has been duly approved. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000; Ord. of 4-13-2008; Ord. of 1-18-2009) 
Sec. 1505.00. - Required improvements. 
    In furtherance of the purposes of this article and to ensure the public safety and general welfare, the city departments, divisions and agencies charged with the responsibility for the review and approval of site plans shall require such of the following improvements as fall within their respective assignments: 
1505.01  Screening, fences, walls, curbs and gutters as required. 
1505.02  Easements of rights-of-way for all facilities to be publicly maintained. Such easements shall be clearly defined for the purpose intended. 
1505.03  Curbs and gutters for travel lanes or driveways that provide vehicular travel to and from adjacent parking areas or adjacent property for the purpose of separating such areas or property from parking areas and walkways. 
1505.04  Adequate traffic control measures. 
1505.05  An adequate drainage system for the disposition of storm[water] and natural water. 
1505.06  Landscaping sufficient to soften the visual effect of parking lots and to provide screening between development, the street and surrounding lots. 
1505.07  The installation of improvements, as required in this section, shall in no case serve to bind the city to accept such improvements for the maintenance, repair or operation thereof; but such acceptance shall be subject to the existing regulations concerning the acceptance of each type of improvement. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000) 
Sec. 1506.00. - Revision. 
    Any site plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved; and any requirement of this article may be waived by the city council in specific cases where such requirement is found to be unreasonable in such cases. Such waiver will not be adverse to the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000) 
Sec. 1507.00. - Violations of article. 
    Any person, whether as owner, lessee, principal, agent, employee or other, who violates any of the provisions of this article or permits any such violation or fails to comply with any of the requirements hereof or who erects any building or uses any building or any land prior to the approval of an as-built site plan by the zoning administrator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to punishment as provided by the Code of the City of Buena Vista. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Any building erected or improvement constructed contrary to any of the provisions of this article, or any use of any building or land which is constructed, operated or maintained contrary to any provision of this article shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful. The city manager may initiate an injunction, mandamus or any other appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such erection or use in violation of any provision of this article. Such action may also be instituted by any property owner who may be particularly damaged by any violation of any provision of this article. Upon his becoming aware of any violation of this article, the city manager shall serve notice of such violation on the person committing or permitting such violation; and if such violation has not ceased within such reasonable time as the city engineer has specified, he shall institute such action as may be necessary to terminate the violation. The remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000) 
Sec. 1508.0. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city manager may, within ten days of such decision, appeal to and have a determination made by the City planning commission. Any applicant or adjoining property owner who is aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission may, within ten days of the mailing of written notice to the applicant and adjoining property owners of such decision, appeal to and have a determination made by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2000) 
Article 16. - SEMINARY HILL NEIGHBORHOOD HISTORIC DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Preservation of historical sites. Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2306. 

Sec. 1601.00. - Overlay district established. 
    The Buena Vista City Council having found that buildings and landmarks within the Seminary Hill Neighborhood include buildings listed on the National/Virginia Registry of Historic Landmarks, that the neighborhood forms a key entry to the city's historic downtown as well as the primary entrance to a college campus and surrounding neighborhoods, and that the protection of this neighborhood through the adoption of appropriate design standards is essential to the continuing vitality of the neighborhood and the city, hereby establishes the Seminary Hill Design Overlay District pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2306 so as to provide that that buildings and structures shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or restored only after appropriate review and approval for compatibility with the landmarks, buildings or structures within the district. 
Sec. 1602.00. - Background. 
    The Seminary Hill Neighborhood is dominated by a large ridge that rises abruptly from the surrounding lowlands. Located on the western edge of the ridge is Southern Virginia University (SVU), presently occupying six blocks north of, and overlooking the Central Business District of Buena Vista, and containing a core of historically significant buildings listed on the National/Virginia Registry of Historic Landmarks. To the west and southwest of Southern Virginia University is a commercial district composed of several original buildings and newer strip development. To the south of the University is a mixture of residences, churches, and small businesses. To the east of the University is a well-established residential neighborhood and beyond that the large wooded track of the "Dinky." Finally, to the north is a somewhat newer residential neighborhood composed of modest homes and limited commercial business uses adjacent to Route 60. Seminary Hill has historically been a diverse neighborhood with a mix of uses, structures, and physical environment. Current uses have continued that trend. The area now includes a college campus, single and multifamily homes, modern automobile oriented and historic pedestrian commercial structures, public spaces, government facilities, libraries, and athletic facilities. The overriding characteristic of this mixed residential neighborhood is the interrelation and interconnected nature of its design, architecture and physical layout. Especially noteworthy are the tree lined streets laid out in a grid pattern which make it a particularly pedestrian friendly neighborhood. This neighborhood is a key entrance point to the city's historic downtown, its industrial district, as well as the primary entrance to a college campus and surrounding residential neighborhoods. Because the perception of the entire city is profoundly influenced by this neighborhood the manner in which this neighborhood continues to develop is of prime concern. In order to assure the orderly and harmonious development of the neighborhood and the city, the Seminary Hill Historic District regulations have been developed. 
Sec. 1603.00. - Purpose. 
    The Seminary Hill Neighborhood District regulations have been developed to facilitate the efficient production and delivery of public services and to sustain and enhance this economically viable and livable neighborhood within Buena Vista. These regulations are designed to: 
(1)  Protect and enhance the historic nature of the district; 
(2)  Continue to encourage mixed use within the neighborhood and within structures; 
(3)  Establish strong design standards to maintain the unique nature of the neighborhood and provide a measure of protection to current and future residents and property owners; 
(4)  To create balance between the natural environment and the neighborhood. 
Sec. 1604.00. - General district regulations. 
1604.01  Site plans required. Construction of any building except single- and two-family homes requires the submission of a site plan that must be reviewed by the planning commission. Site plans must be submitted in accordance with the provisions of article 15 of the Buena Vista Land Development Regulations. The construction of single- and two-family homes requires the submission of a site sketch. 
1604.02  Parking. Parking space requirements for any use may be provided for off-site. All parking lots and structures shall conform to section 703 and appendix E of the Buena Vista Land Development Regulations, except; all lots fronting on the west side of Beech Avenue from the intersection of Beech Avenue and 25th Street to the intersection of Beech Avenue and Ivy Avenue shall conform to 703:00 of the Buena Vista Land Development Regulations. 
1604.03  Signs. Signs shall conform to section 706 of the Buena Vista Land Development Regulations. 
1604.04  Building height and design. New buildings must comply with appendix B of the Buena Vista Land Development Regulations. Additionally, in the mixed business district new buildings may not be taller than one story greater than the adjacent structures, with a maximum of 3 stories allowed. In the institutional district new buildings located to the east of Beech Avenue to the West side of Chestnut Avenue and to the North Side of Park and 25th Streets to the south side of 28th Street buildings may be not greater in height than six stories if the base of the building is located at the foot of the ridge and the height of the building does not exceed 1000 feet above mean sea level (48 feet above the base elevation of Main Hall) without a conditional use permit granted by the city council. In no event shall any building or structure be built that would materially obstruct the view of Main Hall from the south looking northward. Buildings and structures built in the area lying to the south of 29th Street and to the east of Birch Avenue in the area designated as "the Dinky" also known as "Mineral Ridge" on the "Buena Vista Quadrangle" of the USGS topographic map may be no taller than three stories in height. New buildings should be designed to blend in with the character of the neighborhood. Drive-through facilities are prohibited in this district. No building, structure or facility will be built that will obstruct the view of Main Hall as viewed from the south. Building Design must conform to the Buena Vista building design standards. 
1604.05  Lot size. The minimum area for new construction in the mixed business district is 6,250 square feet. There is no minimum lot size in the institutional district. 
1604.06  Landscaping. All new construction except single- and two-family homes are required to submit a landscaping plan. 
1604.07  Roads, streets and sidewalks. All new streets or roads must be built according to appendices C and D of the Buena Vista Land Development Regulations and the Buena Vista street construction policy. 
1604.08  Lighting. Outside lighting appendix F of the Buena Vista Land Development Regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-10-2008) 
Sec. 1605.00. - Boundaries of overlay district. 
    The limits of the Seminary Hill Design Overlay District are as depicted on the map adopted by the [city] council herewith. 
Sec. 1606.00. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of the design district regulations is to protect the Seminary Hill Neighborhood to preserve the unique historical, architectural, cultural and archaeological resources in this portion of the city and their settings, in order to protect the quality of life of the city's residents, to strengthen the city's economy by promoting and enhancing business and tourism, and to protect property values. 
Sec. 1607.00. - Certificate of appropriateness required for certain construction. 
    In order to promote the general welfare through the preservation and protection of properties within the overlay district, except as provided herein, no architectural features of any buildings or structures within the district which are subject to public view from a public street shall be altered, nor shall any building or structure, including signs, hereafter be erected, reconstructed, altered, relocated or restored within such district, unless and until an application for a certificate of appropriateness shall have been approved by the Historic District Review Committee, or, on appeal, by the city council. 
Sec. 1608.00. - Application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Optional preapplication review procedure. Prior to the preparation of working drawings and specifications or calling for proposals or bids from contractors, prospective property developers, owners or agents are encouraged to prepare preliminary scale drawings and outline specifications, for review and informal discussion with the zoning administrator. The purpose of this review shall be to acquaint the developer, owner or agent with standards of appropriateness of design that are required of the proposed development and to determine the review process applicable to the application. 
(b)  Procedure for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  Application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made to the zoning administrator by the owner of the building, structure, or land. Such application shall indicate the proposed use of the building, structure, or land and shall be accompanied by one-quarter inch minimum scale plans and specifications (herein "plans") as may be required by the committee. The plans shall depict the part or parts of the building, structure or land that are, or will be, subject to view from a public street, public way, or other public place. The plans shall show the proposed exterior architectural and features of such building, structure or land, which shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the general design, arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used in the project, and the type of windows, exterior appurtenances and accessory structures which will be subject to public view from a public street, public way or other public place. 
(2)  The administrator shall place the matter on the agenda for consideration at the next regularly scheduled committee meeting after receipt of the application, provided that it is a complete application and was filed with the administrator at least seven days prior to the meeting date. Otherwise, the application shall be placed on the agenda for consideration at the next following regularly scheduled committee meeting. 
(3)  The committee shall either approve a certificate of appropriateness, with or without conditions, or with such modifications of the plans as the committee deems necessary to achieve the intent of this ordinance, or the committee shall disapprove the certificate after consideration of the criteria set forth in section 1607.06. Failure of the committee to approve or disapprove a certificate within 30 days from the date of the committee meeting at which an application was first considered shall be deemed approval of the application as submitted. 
(4)  The time for decision on a certificate of appropriateness may be extended by mutual agreement between the applicant and town. 
(5)  If the committee disapproves the erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition, razing or moving of a building or structure, the committee shall state its reasons in writing and may make recommendations to the applicant about the appropriateness of design, arrangement, texture, materials, color, and location of the building or structure involved. In the case of disapproval with recommendations, the applicant may file an amended application for a certificate of appropriateness with the committee within 90 days. 
(6)  No application which has been denied shall be heard by the committee for one year except in cases where the applicant amends the application within 90 days as provided in subsection [1608.01(b)](5) [of this section]. 
Sec. 1609.00. - Demolition, razing or moving of buildings or structures. 
(a)  Certificate of appropriateness required. In order to promote the general welfare through the preservation and protection of properties within the overlay district, except as provided herein, no building or structure may be demolished in whole or in part, or moved from one location to another, unless and until an application for a certificate of appropriateness shall have been approved by the Historic District Review Committee, or, on appeal, by the city council. Except as modified by the provisions of this section 1607.05, the provisions of part four [three of this Code], sections 1607.00 through 1607.10 shall apply to applications under this section mutatis mutandis. 
(b)  Public hearing. The committee shall hold a public hearing within 30 days or such shorter time as council may direct after notification by the administrator of the filing of an application for a permit to raze, demolish or move any building in whole or in part. At least seven days notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by the administrator as follows: 
(i)  In writing to the applicant; 
(ii)  In writing to adjacent property owners; and 
(iii)  By publication in the form of an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the town. 
(c)  Additional requirements regarding proposed demolition, etc. Applications involving any building or structure which is to be demolished, razed or moved under the provisions of this ordinance shall be subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2306, 1950, as amended. 
    The committee may consult with civic groups, public agencies and interested citizens, recommend the acquisition of the property by public or private bodies or agencies, and explore the possibility of moving one or more structures or other features to preserve the buildings or structures concerned in accordance with the purposes of this ordinance during the demolition delay period set forth in the applicable provisions of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2306, as amended. 
Sec. 1610.00. - Matters to be considered in acting on application. 
    In reviewing applications, the committee shall base its decision on whether the proposals therein are compatible with the existing building or structure, if any, and with the surrounding design district. Interior arrangement or features not subject to any public view shall not be considered. The following shall be considered by the committee in acting on the appropriateness of the proposed erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or demolition of buildings or structures: 
(a)  Exterior architectural features, which are subject to public view from a public street, way or place. 
(b)  Design, arrangement and relative size or mass. 
(c)  The relation of the proposed construction to buildings and structures in the immediate surroundings. 
(d)  The extent to which the building or structure would be harmonious with or obviously incongruous to the historic aspect of the surroundings. 
(e)  In the case of a building to be razed or moved, a primary consideration shall be the extent to which its continued existence would tend to protect irreplaceable historic places and preserve the general historic atmosphere of the city. 
(f)  The extent to which the proposed construction or demolition will promote the general welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values, generating business, creating new positions, attracting tourists, and making the city a more attractive and desirable place in which to live. 
(g)  The extent to which the proposal adheres to the design district guidelines for the City of Buena Vista adopted by the city council and incorporated herein by reference. 
Sec. 1611.00. - Time limit. 
    A certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. If the demolition, erection, reconstruction, alteration, relocation or restoration for which the certificate was issued is not commenced within one year and thereafter diligently pursued, a new certificate shall be obtained prior thereto. 
Sec. 1612.00. - Exclusions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance excluded. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior elements of any building or structure within the overlay district. 
(b)  Minor construction excluded. Minor construction or reconstruction projects shall be excluded from the provisions of this part four [three of this Code]. Projects shall be deemed minor unless they shall result in: 
(1)  New construction greater than 25 percent of the square footage of the existing structure or 250 square feet, whichever is less; 
(2)  The addition of one or more stories to a building or a resulting height increase of ten or more feet, whichever is less; 
(3)  Construction of a new principal structure; or 
(4)  Demolition of an existing principal structure. 
(c)  Public safety exclusion. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of a structure or the exterior elements of any structure which the authorized municipal officers shall certify as required by public safety; provided, however, that in appropriate cases measures required protect the public safety may be approved for a period not to exceed 12 months. 
Sec. 1613.00. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals to the [city] council. Appeals to the council from any final decision of the committee may be made by any person by filing a petition with the clerk of Council, setting forth the basis for the appeal, within one week of the committee's decision. The appeal shall be placed on the next regularly scheduled council meeting following receipt of the appeal. The filing of the appeal shall stay the decision of the committee pending the outcome of the appeal to the council, except that the filing of such petition shall not stay the committee's decision if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish historic structure or building. The council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the committee. 
(b)  Judicial review. The owner of any building, structure or land within the district that is the subject of a final decision of the council may appeal such decision within 30 days of the date the final decision is rendered by the council by filing a petition at law with the circuit court of the City of Buena Vista setting forth the alleged illegality of the action of the council. The filing of a petition for review shall stay the decision of the council pending the outcome of the appeal to the circuit court of the City of Buena Vista, except that the filing of a petition shall not stay the decision of the council if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish a building or structure. 
Sec. 1613.00 [1614.00]. - Appointment of historic district review committee. 
    The Buena Vista City Council hereby designates the members of the city planning commission to serve as the Historic District Review Committee. 
Article 17. - MIXED BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 1700.00. - Mixed business district. 
1701.00  The mixed business district is primarily a business district that incorporates and promotes a wide variety and intensity of uses. This district is designed to have a high level of human and business activity and vibrancy where business people can live and work in the same building, where residents and visitors can freely gather for shopping, entertainment and recreation. 
1702.0  Insofar as allowed by the building codes, single structures may have multiple principal by right uses. 
1703.00  Uses permitted by right. 
1703.01  Recreational uses. 
1703.01-1  Athletic/recreational facilities. 
1703.01-2  Public, nonprofit or institutional athletic facilities that offer a variety of programs such as karate, aerobic, dance, weight training, gymnasiums, etc. Public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings and grounds, tennis courts, swimming pools and outdoor recreational activities. 
1703.03  Commercial uses. 
1703.03-1  Retail shops, department stores, variety stores, specialty shops, discount shops, and appliance stores. 
1703.03-2  Banks and loan and finance offices, excluding drive through types. 
1703.03-3  Automobile service stations and public garages, (with major repair under cover). 
1703.03-4  Automobile sales. 
1703.03-5  Department stores, variety stores, specialty shops, discount shops and appliance stores. 
1703.03-6  Carpentry shops. 
1703.03-7  Electrical, plumbing, heating, appliance, bicycle, watch and shoe repair. 
1703.03-8  Gunsmith or similar shops. 
1703.03-9  Laundries and dry cleaning shops, and clothes dyeing establishments. 
1703.03-10  Lumber and building supply (with storage under cover). 
1703.03-11  Picture frame manufacturing and assembling. 
1703.03-12  Plumbing and electrical supply (with storage under cover). 
1703.03-13  Publishing, printing and lithographing. 
1703.03-14  Upholstering shops provided that the first 100 square feet of space in the building facing a street that is the primary entrance to the building must be devoted exclusively to retail operations. 
1703.04  Civic/institutional. 
1703.04-1  Business, private, public and vocational schools and classrooms, academic facilities, administrative offices and associated support structures. 
1703.04-2  Churches and other places of worship, and church school buildings. 
1703.04-3  Clubs and lodges, fraternities, and meeting places of other organizations. 
1703.04-4  Hospitals as defined in 302.82. 
1703.04-5  Funeral home and/or mortuary. 
1703.04-6  Libraries. 
1703.04-7  Museums. 
1703.04-8  Newspaper offices and printing shops. 
1703.04-9  Police, fire, and rescue squad stations. 
1703.04-10  Post offices. 
1703.04-11  Public buildings and properties of a cultural, administrative or service type. 
1703.04-12  Public service and storage buildings. 
1703.05  Professional services. 
1703.05-1  Business and professional offices; including but not limited to medical offices, tax preparation real estate, engineers, architects. 
1703.06  Residential/lodging. 
1703.06-1  Bed and breakfast homestays and inns in accordance with article 14. 
1703.06-2  Boardinghouses. 
1703.06-3  Child care centers and family day care homes. 
1703.06-4  Dormitories. 
1703.06-5  Family care homes, foster homes or group homes serving the mentally retarded, developmentally disabled or others, rest homes, homes for adults or nursing homes, provided that licensing requirements are met. 
1703.06-8  Hotels/motels. 
1703.06-9  Multifamily homes/apartments. 
1703.06-10  Single-family dwellings. 
1703.06-11  Townhouses. 
1703.06-12  Tourist homes. 
1703.06-13  Two-family homes. 
1703.07  Restaurant/food/entertainment. 
1703.07-1  Bakeries. 
1703.07-2  Restaurants including dairy product stores and soda fountains, and drive-in restaurants. 
1703.07-3  Theaters, assembly halls, playhouses and dinner theaters. 
1703.08  Miscellaneous. 
1703.08-1  Bus stations and taxistands. 
1703.08-2  Greenhouses. 
1703.08-3  Parking garages and parking lots. 
1703.08-4  Off-street parking as required by this ordinance. 
1703.08-5  Signs as provided in article 7. 
Sec. 1704.00. - Conditional uses. 
    When after review of an application and hearing hereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the Buena Vista City Council finds as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses, is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista, the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
1704-1  Athletic fields, stadiums and arenas. 
1704-2  Commercial radio, television and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
1704-3  Kennels and animal hospitals. 
1704-4  Public billiard parlors and pool rooms, bowling alleys, dance halls and similar forms of public amusement. 
1704-5  Public or commercial swimming pools, skating rinks, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, or similar recreational use or facility. 
1704-6  Public utilities limited to public service structures such as power plants or substations, water lines or pumping stations, or such similar operations publicly or privately owned furnishing electricity, gas, rail transport, communications or related services to the general public. 
1704-7  Radio and television broadcasting studios. 
1704-8  Wholesale business. 
Sec. 1705. - Accessory uses. 
    Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following rules are applicable: 
1705-1  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
1705-2  Home occupations provided the requirements of article 7, section 705 are met. 
1705-3  Manufacture of goods to be sold as retail on site. 
1705-4  Private parking garage. 
1705-5  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
1705-6  Travel trailers, which may be stored within the minimum yard requirements and shall be prohibited from occupancy. 
1705-7  Accessory uses and garages must be located behind the main building on a lot. 
Sec. 1706. - Setbacks. 
1706-1  Repealed. (Repealed 1-13-2008) 
(Ord. of 1-13-2008) 
Sec. 1707. - Maximum lot coverage. 
1707-1  Buildings may at a maximum take up 80 percent of lot area. Except for buildings located on Beech Avenue that may take up the entire lot area. 
Sec. 1708. - Multiple buildings on a single lot. 
1708-1  A lot may have multiple buildings on a single lot as long as the aggregate of the areas of the buildings do not exceed 80 percent of the lot area. Except for buildings located on Beech Avenue where there is no area limitation. 
Sec. 1709. - Building height. 
1709-1  Buildings shall be limited to three stories in height or one story greater than contiguous buildings, up to a maximum height of 40 feet, unless a conditional use for additional height is granted. 
Sec. 1710. - Yards. 
1710-1  On in-fill lots in the district located on Beech Avenue and on 29th Street west of Ridge Avenue, new commercial and multifamily buildings shall be located at the front lot line maintaining the traditional downtown pattern of adjacency to the pedestrian way. New business buildings are required to abut adjacent structures. However, buildings requiring access to rear or side parking areas will be allowed a one travel lane width a maximum width of 18 feet. 
Sec. 1711.00. - Residential use yard requirements. 
(a)  Side yards. Minimum of five feet. However, driveways may extend to the property line. 
(b)  Rear yard. Minimum of ten feet. However, parking lots may extend to the property line. 
Article 18. - ENVIRONMENT 

Sec. 1801.00. - Stormwater management. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:27, this ordinance is adopted as part of an initiative to integrate the City of Buena Vista stormwater management requirements with the City of Buena Vista's Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance, flood insurance, floodplain management, and Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act requirements into a unified stormwater program and to enact this as part of a new article to the Land Development Regulations for the City of Buena Vista entitled "Environment." 
1801.01  Purpose and authority. (Section 9VAC25-870-20, 9VAC25-870-40) 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Stormwater Management Ordinance." The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City of Buena Vista and protect the quality and quantity of state waters from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater, including protection from a land-disturbing activity causing unreasonable degradation of properties, water quality, stream channels, and other natural resources, and to establish procedures whereby stormwater requirements related to water quality and quantity shall be administered and enforced. 
(b)  This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Article 2.3 of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended ("Code of Virginia"). 
(c)  This ordinance is also adopted to integrate the City of Buena Vista's stormwater management, erosion and sediment control, and any stormwater discharge regulations into unified stormwater program. The unified stormwater program is intended to facilitate the submission and approval of plans, issuance of permits, payment of fees, and coordination of inspection and enforcement activities into a more convenient and efficient manner for both the City of Buena Vista and those responsible for compliance with these programs. The City of Buena Vista has an Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance under Chapter 18, 1800.00. 
(d)  This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall apply. 
1801.02  Definitions. (9VAC25-870-10) 
    In addition to the definitions set forth in 9VAC25-870-10 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations, as amended, which are expressly adopted and incorporated herein by reference, the following words and terms used in this ordinance have the following meanings unless otherwise specified herein. Where definitions differ, those incorporated herein shall have precedence. 
    "Administrator" means the VSMP authority including the City of Buena Vista Program Administrator, who is the Director of Water Quality, responsible for administering the VSMP on behalf of the City of Buena Vista. The administrator shall have the necessary authority to administer and enforce this chapter, including ordering in writing the remedying of any condition found in violation of this article. The administrator may report any noncompliance with this chapter to the city attorney, or the commonwealth attorney, as appropriate, with the request for appropriate action at law to ensure or obtain compliance with this chapter. 
    "Agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan" means a contract between the VSMP authority and the owner or permittee that specifies methods that shall be implemented to comply with the requirements of a VSMP for the construction of a single-family residence; such contract may be executed by the VSMP authority in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
    "Applicant" means any person submitting an application for a permit or requesting issuance of a permit under this ordinance. 
    "Best management practice" or "BMP" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. 
    "City" means the City of Buena Vista, Virginia. 
    "Common plan of development or sale" means a contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on difference schedules. 
    "Comprehensive stormwater management plan" means a plan or document which may be integrated with other land use plans or regulations that specifies how the water quality components, quantity components, or both of stormwater are to be managed on the basis of an entire watershed or portion thereof. The plan may also provide for the remediation of erosion, flooding, and water quality and quantity problems caused by prior development. 
    "Control measure" means any best management practice or stormwater facility, or other method used to minimize the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
    "Clean Water Act" or "CWA" means the federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
    "Department" or "DEQ" means the Department of Environmental Quality. 
    "Development" means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation or utility facilities or structures or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
    "Development agreement" means a comprehensive development plan agreement, land subdividers agreement, or an erosion and sediment control agreement. 
    "General permit" means the state permit titled General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities found in Part XIV (9VAC25-880-1 et seq.) of the regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the act within a geographical area of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    "Land disturbance" or "land-disturbing activity" means a manmade change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including clearing, grading, or excavation except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in Section 1801.03 of this ordinance. 
    "Layout" means a conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval. 
    "Linear development project" means a land-disturbing activity that is linear in nature such as, but not limited to: 
(a)  The construction of electric and telephone utility lines, and natural gas pipelines; 
(b)  Construction of tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures of a railroad company; or 
(c)  Highway construction projects; 
(d)  Construction of stormwater channels and stream restoration activities; and 
(e)  Water and sewer lines. 
    Private subdivision roads or streets constructed in association with residential, commercial, or industrial site development are not considered linear development projects. 
    "Minor modification" means an amendment to an existing general permit before its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited to, changes in EPA promulgated test protocols, increasing monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor general permit modification or amendment does not substantially alter general permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment. 
    "Off-site facility" means a stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land-disturbing activity. 
    "Operator" means the owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under this ordinance. 
    "Permit" or "VSMP authority permit" means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity, in accordance with this ordinance, and which may only be issued after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided where applicable. 
    "Permittee" means the person to whom the VSMP authority permit is issued, including any owner or operator whose construction site is covered under a state construction general permit. 
    "Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality, commission, or political subdivision of a state, governmental body, including federal, state, or local entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    "Regulations" means the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Permit Regulations, 9VAC25-870 et seq., as amended. 
    "Site" means the land or water area where any facility or land-disturbing activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land-disturbing activity. Areas channelward of mean low water in tidal Virginia shall not be considered part of a site. 
    "State" means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    "State board" means the Virginia State Water Control Board. 
    "State permit" means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the state board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the state board for stormwater discharges from a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). Under these state permits, the commonwealth imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations, the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and the regulations. 
    "State water control law" means Chapter 3.1 (§ 62.1-44.2 et seq.) of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    "State waters" means all water, on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
    "Stormwater" means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    "Stormwater management plan" means a document(s) containing material describing methods for complying with the requirements of Section 1801.06 of this ordinance. 
    "Stormwater facility maintenance agreement" means a legally binding agreement between the owner of a property and the city regarding long-term maintenance of stormwater management facilities. 
    "Stormwater management facility" means a device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
    "Stormwater management program manual" means a document with references/guidance on how stormwater management systems are to be designed and the policies and procedures that are to be followed. 
    "Stormwater pollution prevention plan" or "SWPPP" means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site, and otherwise meets the requirements of this ordinance. In addition the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to the inclusion of, or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan. 
    "Subdivision" means the same as defined in Article 9 of the city's land development regulations. 
    "Total maximum daily load" or "TMDL" means the sum of the individual wasteload allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point versus nonpoint source trade-offs. 
    "Virginia Stormwater Management Act" or "Act" means Article 2.3 of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    "Virginia stormwater BMP clearinghouse website" means a website that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
    "Virginia stormwater management program" or "VSMP" means a program approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article and associated regulations. 
    "Virginia stormwater management program authority" or "VSMP authority" means an authority approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
1801.03  Stormwater permit requirement; exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until a VSMP authority permit has been issued by the administrator in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)  This ordinance shall be applicable to land-disturbing activities including which are residential, commercial or industrial and meet the applicability criteria; approved stormwater management plans for these developments govern individual parcels in that plan throughout the development life even if ownership changes. 
(c)  All stormwater management plans submitted for consideration under the terms of this chapter must be reviewed by the city to ensure that established water quality standards will be maintained during and after development of the site and that post construction runoff levels are consistent with any city watershed plan, both current and future. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, the following activities are exempt, unless otherwise required by federal law: 
(1)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(2)  Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management, tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, livestock feedlot operations, or as additionally set forth by the state board in regulations, including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.) of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in subsection B of § 10.1-1163 of Article 9 of Chapter 11 of Title 10.1 of the Code of Virginia; 
(3)  Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than one acre and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale, including additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures; 
(4)  Land-disturbing activities that disturb less than one acre of land area are exempt unless these activities are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one acre or greater of disturbance; 
(5)  Discharges to a sanitary sewer or a combined sewer system; 
(6)  Activities under a state or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use; 
(7)  Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this subsection; and 
(8)  Conducting land-disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the Administrator shall be advised of the disturbance within seven days of commencing the land-disturbing activity and compliance with the administrative requirements of subsection (a) is required within 30 days of commencing the land-disturbing activity. 
1801.04  Stormwater management program established; submission and approval of plans; prohibitions. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:27, the city hereby establishes a Virginia stormwater management program for land-disturbing activities and adopts sections 9VAC25-870 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations that specify standards and specifications for VSMPs promulgated by the state water control board for the purposes set out in Section 1801.01 of this ordinance. The City of Buena Vista hereby designates the Director of Water Quality as the Administrator of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
(b)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any landowner or operator desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. Permit applications shall comply with the requirements contained within the Stormwater Management Program Manual. 
(c)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued by the administrator, until the following items have been submitted to and approved by the administrator as prescribed herein: 
(1)  A permit application that includes a general permit registration statement; 
(2)  A stormwater management plan that meets the requirements of Section 1801.06 of this ordinance; 
(3)  Evidence that general permit coverage is obtained; 
(4)  A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) that meets the requirements of Section 1801.05; 
(5)  Maintenance agreements in accordance with section 1801.13; 
(6)  Performance bonds in accordance with section 1801.23; 
(7)  Permit application and plan review fee in accordance with Section 1801.22. 
(d)  No VSMP authority permit shall be issued unless and until the permit application and attendant materials and supporting documentation demonstrate that all land clearing, construction, disturbance, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved permit. 
(e)  No grading, building or other local permit shall be issued for a property unless an approved VSMP authority permit has been issued by the administrator. 
(f)  Should a land-disturbing activity associated with an approved plan in accordance with this section not begin during the 180-day period following approval or cease for more than 180 days, the city may evaluate the existing approved stormwater management plan to determine whether the plan still satisfies local program requirements and to verify that all design factors are still valid. If the city finds the previously filed plan to be inadequate, a modified plan shall be submitted and approved prior to the initiation or resumption of land-disturbing activities. 
(g)  No land development permit or other land-disturbing activity shall be granted or extended for more than a total five consecutive years from the date of the original permit issuance without reevaluation of the stormwater management requirements of this chapter. This does not change the grandfathering requirements as stated in Section 1801.10. 
(h)  In general, the requirements of (a) through (g) above shall be waived for individual lot single family home construction, within or outside of a common plan of development, disturbing less than five acres of land. Applicants for such projects shall execute with the city an "Agreement in Lieu of a Stormwater Management Plan," and shall pay the applicable fees prior to receiving a building permit. Applications for a building permit on such projects on lots that contain an established stormwater best management practice (including centralized bmps) shall include a detailed grading plan sufficient to show continued function of such practice(s) per its (their) original design. 
1801.05  Stormwater pollution prevention plan; contents of plans. 
(a)  The Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) shall include the content specified by Section 9VAC25-870-54 and must also comply with the requirements and general information set forth in Section 9VAC25-880-70 Section II of the general permit. Minimum content requirements of the SWPPP include: 
(1)  An erosion and sediment control plan approved in accordance with the City of Buena Vista's Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance Sections 14-46 through 14-80; 
(2)  An approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  An approved pollution prevention plan; and 
(4)  Any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
(b)  The SWPPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance. 
(c)  The SWPPP must be maintained by the operator at a central location onsite. If an onsite location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public review in accordance with Section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard copy. 
1801.06  Stormwater management plan; contents of plan. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan, required in Section 1801.04 of this ordinance for a land-disturbing activity, shall apply the stormwater management technical criteria set forth in Section 1801.10 of this ordinance to the entire land-disturbing activity, consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater flows converted to surface runoff. Individual lots in new residential, commercial, or industrial developments shall not be considered separate land-disturbing activities. 
(b)  The stormwater management plan shall include all of the information required in the final stormwater management plan checklist found in the Stormwater Management Program Manual and includes: 
(1)  Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges; information on features to which stormwater is being discharged, including surface waters or karst features if present, and predevelopment and postdevelopment drainage areas; 
(2)  Contact information including the name, address, and telephone number of the owner and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected; 
(3)  A narrative that includes a description of current site conditions and final site conditions; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete; 
(5)  Information on the proposed stormwater management facilities, including: 
(i)  The type of facilities; 
(ii)  Location, including geographic coordinates; 
(iii)  Acres treated; and 
(iv)  The surface waters or karst features, if present, into which the facility will discharge. 
(6)  Hydrologic and hydraulic computations, including runoff characteristics; 
(7)  Documentation and calculations verifying compliance with the water quality and quantity requirements of Section 1801.10 of this ordinance; 
(8)  A map or maps of the site that depicts the topography of the site and includes: 
(i)  All contributing drainage areas; 
(ii)  Existing streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, other water bodies, and floodplains; 
(iii)  Soil types, geologic formations if karst features are present in the area, forest cover, and other vegetative areas; 
(iv)  Current land use including existing structures, roads, and locations of known utilities and easements; 
(v)  Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess the impacts of stormwater from the site on these parcels; 
(vi)  The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns on the site; 
(vii)  Proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, and stormwater management facilities; and 
(viii)  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, including but not limited to planned locations of utilities, roads, and easements. 
(c)  If an operator intends to meet the water quality and/or quantity requirements set forth in Section 1801.10 of this ordinance through the use of off-site compliance options, where applicable, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included. Approved off-site options must achieve the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the applicant's land-disturbing activity except as otherwise allowed by Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:35. 
(d)  Elements of the stormwater management plans that include activities regulated under Chapter 4 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(e)  A construction record drawing both paper and electronic copies for permanent stormwater management facilities shall be submitted to the administrator and approved. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities, including, but not limited to, storm drain pipes, culverts, BMPs, and any other facility used to control or treat stormwater have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. The administrator may elect not to require construction record drawings for stormwater management facilities for which maintenance agreements are not required pursuant to Section 9VAC25-870-112. See Section 1801.15, As-builts. 
(f)  In addition, an operations and maintenance manual in the form of a hard copy and an electronic format for the short term and long term maintenance of BMPs and stormwater detention facilities shall be submitted to the administrator and approved. These may include manufacturers' recommendations as appropriate. The registered professional shall certify that the owner, including home owners associations, industrial/business park/property owners or residential property owners, of the facility or facilities has received a copy of the operations and maintenance manual. 
1801.07  Pollution prevention plan; contents of plans. 
(a)  Pollution prevention plan, required by 9VAC25-870-56, shall be developed, implemented, and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented, and maintained to: 
(b)  The pollution prevention plan shall include all of the information required as specified in the stormwater management manual and includes: 
(1)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and 
(3)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures. 
(c)  The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges: 
(1)  Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control; 
(2)  Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials; 
(3)  Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and 
(4)  Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing. 
(d)  Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls. 
(e)  The pollution prevention plan must be updated as necessary in order to minimize the discharge of pollutants. 
1801.08  Review of stormwater management plan. 
(a)  The administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator shall review stormwater management plans and shall approve or disapprove a stormwater management plan. All applications will be processed in accordance with procedures and time frames as set forth in the Stormwater Management Program Manual and includes: 
(1)  The administrator shall determine the completeness of a plan in accordance with Section 1801.06 of this ordinance, and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such determination, within 15 calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed to be incomplete, the above written notification shall contain the reasons the plan is deemed incomplete. 
(2)  The administrator shall have an additional 60 calendar days from the date of the communication of completeness to review the plan, except that if a determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in subdivision (1), then plan shall be deemed complete and the administrator shall have 60 calendar days from the date of submission to review the plan. 
(3)  The administrator shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved, within 45 calendar days of the date of resubmission. 
(4)  During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the decision communicated in writing to the person responsible for the land-disturbing activity or his designated agent. If the plan is not approved, the reasons for not approving the plan shall be provided in writing. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(5)  If a plan meeting all requirements of this ordinance is submitted and no action is taken within the time provided above in subdivision (2) for review, the plan shall be deemed approved. 
(b)  Approved stormwater plans may be modified as follows: 
(1)  Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be submitted in writing and allowed only after review and written approval by the administrator. The administrator shall have 60 calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request. All requests for modifications shall be in writing. 
(2)  The administrator may require that an approved stormwater management plan be amended, within a time prescribed by the administrator, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection. 
1801.09  Comprehensive stormwater management plans. 
(a)  Applicants shall communicate with the administrator prior to submitting an application for stormwater management plan to determine if a comprehensive stormwater management plan has been developed for the applicable watershed. 
(b)  If such a comprehensive stormwater management plan exists, the applicant must provide stormwater management water quality treatment on-site in accordance with the provisions of the comprehensive plan and other management provisions as specified by the city. 
(c)  A comprehensive stormwater management plan, which accompanies and application, shall, at a minimum, address the following: 
(1)  The specific stormwater management issues within the targeted watersheds; 
(2)  The technical criteria in this article, the Stormwater Management Program Manual and the Virginia Stormwater Management Program (VSMP) Permit Regulations (9VAC25-870-92), as needed; 
(3)  The goals and requirements of the city's comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, and other planning documents; 
(4)  Opportunities for financing a watershed plan through cost sharing with neighboring agencies or localities, implementation of comprehensive stormwater utility fees, etc.; 
(5)  Maintenance of the selected stormwater management facilities; and 
(6)  Future expansion of the selected stormwater management facilities in the event that development exceeds the anticipated level. 
1801.10  Technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities. 
(a)  To protect the quality and quantity of state water from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities, the city hereby adopts the technical criteria for regulated land-disturbing activities set forth in: 
(1)  Part II B of the regulations, as amended, expressly to include 9VAC25-870-63 [water quality design criteria requirements]; 9VAC25-870-65 [water quality compliance]; 9VAC25-870-66 [water quantity]; 9VAC25-870-69 [offsite compliance options]; 9VAC25-870-72 [design storms and hydrologic methods]; 9VAC25-870-74 [stormwater harvesting]; 9VAC25-870-76[linear development project]; and, 9VAC25-870-85 [stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities], which shall apply to all land-disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this ordinance, except as expressly set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Part II C of the regulations, as amended, expressly to include 9VAC25-870-93 [definitions]; 9VAC25-870-94 [applicability]; 9VAC25-870-95 [general]; 9VAC25-870-96 [water quality]; 9VAC25-870-97 [stream channel erosion]; 9VAC25-870-98 [flooding]; 9VAC25-870-99 [regional (watershed-wide) stormwater management plan], which shall apply to all land-disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this ordinance, as expressly set forth in subsection (b) of this section and applies to grandfathered projects and projects subject to the provisions of 9VAC25-870-47 B. 
(3)  Land-disturbing activities that obtain an initial state permit or commence land disturbance prior to July 1, 2014 shall be conducted in accordance with Part II C technical criteria. Such projects shall remain subject to Part II C technical criteria for two additional state permit cycles. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the board. 
(4)  Land-disturbing activities that obtain an initial state permit on or after July 1, 2014 shall be conducted in accordance with the Part II B technical criteria, except as provided in 9VAC25-870-48 (grandfathering). Land-disturbing activities conducted in accordance with Part II B technical criteria shall remain subject to Part II B technical criteria for two additional permit cycles. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the board. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at his discretion. 
(b)  As set forth in 9VAC25-870-48 (grandfathering) subsection A, until June 30, 2019, the end of the second additional state general permit cycle, any land-disturbing activity for which a currently valid proffered or development plan, preliminary or final subdivision plat, comprehensive development plan or planned unit development plan, preliminary or final site plan or zoning with a plan of development, or any document determined by the city as being equivalent thereto, and was approved by the city prior to July 1, 2012, and for which no coverage under the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities has been issued nor land disturbance begun prior to July 1, 2014, shall be considered grandfathered by the administrator and shall not be subject to the technical criteria of Part II B [of the regulations], but shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C [of the regulations] for those areas that were included in the approval, provided that the administrator finds that such proffered development plan, comprehensive development plan or planned unit development plan, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan or zoning with a plan of development, or any document determined by the city as being equivalent thereto, (i) provides for a layout and (ii) the resulting land-disturbing activity will be compliant with the requirements of Part II C. Verification of such compliance must have occurred at the time of city approval of such plat or plan, and have been based upon a plat or plan that (i) identified specific stormwater practices needed to ensure compliance and (ii) included calculations confirming such practices will provide adequate pollutant removal to ensure compliance. In the event that the city-approved document is subsequently modified or amended in a manner such that there is no increase over the previously approved plat or plan in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge of the land-disturbing activity through stormwater runoff, and such that there is no increase over the previously approved plat or plan in the volume or rate of runoff, the grandfathering shall continue as before. 
(1)  Until June 30, 2019, for local, state, and federal projects for which there has been an obligation of local, state, or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or for which the department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012, such projects shall be considered grandfathered by the city and shall not be subject to the technical requirements of Part II B of the regulations, but shall be subject to the technical requirements of Part II C of the regulations for those areas that were included in the approval. 
(2)  For land-disturbing activities grandfathered under this subsection, construction must be completed by June 30, 2019, or portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to the technical requirements of subsection (1)(a) above. 
(c)  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued (subsection D, 9VAC25-870-48) for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical requirements Part IIC of the regulations, as adopted by the city in subsection (b) of this section. 
1801.11  Exceptions . 
(a)  The administrator may grant exceptions to the technical requirements of Part II B or Part II C of the regulations, provided that (i) the exception is the minimum necessary to afford relief, (ii) reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so that the intent of the act, the regulations, and this ordinance are preserved, (iii) granting the exception will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances, and (iv) exception requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created. Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of this ordinance. 
(b)  Exceptions to the requirement that the land-disturbing activity obtain required VSMP authority permit shall not be given by the administrator, nor shall the administrator approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website, or any other control measure duly approved by the state water control board. 
(c)  Exceptions to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall not be allowed unless offsite options otherwise permitted pursuant to 9VAC25-870-69 have been considered and found not available. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at their discretion. 
(e)  A request for an exception from the stormwater management program technical requirements shall be submitted in writing to the administrator for approval. 
(f)  If a comprehensive stormwater management facility, designed to control stormwater quantity or quality, currently operates or is the subject of a VSMP authority permit issued by the city is to be constructed downstream of the proposed development, the city has the option to require the developer to pay a fee for its share of the responsibility of the comprehensive stormwater management facility. Paying a fee in lieu of stormwater management practices does not relieve the developer of meeting any requirements of this stormwater ordinance other than the negotiated relief. The developer is responsible for ensuring that downstream properties are not negatively impacted by stormwater flow, velocity, or quality leaving the developed site. 
1801.12  Stormwater management program manual. 
(a)  The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information of the stormwater management program manual for the proper implementation of the requirements of this ordinance. 
(b)  The city manager or designee may update or revise the stormwater management program manual from time to time, without approval by city council, provided that those updates pertain to changes in policy or standard engineering practices and do not conflict with VSMP regulations. 
1801.13  Long-term maintenance of permanent stormwater facilities. 
(a)  The administrator shall require the provision of long-term responsibility for and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and other techniques specified to manage the quality and quantity of runoff. Such requirements shall be set forth in an instrument recorded in the local land records prior to general permit termination or earlier as required by the administrator and shall at a minimum: 
(1)  Be submitted to the administrator for review, approval and recordation prior to the approval of the stormwater management plan; 
(2)  Be stated to run with the land; 
(3)  Provide for all necessary access to the property for purposes of maintenance and regulatory inspections; 
(4)  Provide for inspections and maintenance and the submission of inspection and maintenance reports to the administrator; and 
(5)  Be enforceable by all appropriate governmental parties. 
(b)  The maintenance agreement shall provide for access to stormwater management facilities at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the city, or its contractor or agent or other designee, and for regular assessments of landowners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this ordinance. 
(c)  When any new stormwater management facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public storm drainage system, duly authorized employees, agents, or representatives of the city shall be authorized to enter such public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspection. Entry onto the property includes the right to enter when there is a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this ordinance. 
(d)  Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the maintenance agreement recorded with the city clerk of circuit court prior to final plan approval. The agreement shall identify the responsible party for carrying out the maintenance, including the owner, governmental agency or other legally established entity to be permanently responsible for maintenance. 
(e)  The operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the responsible party and shall pass to any successor in title. Any changes to the maintenance agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the city prior to plan approval. 
(f)  As part of the maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for the frequency of inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities to ensure proper function and performance. The agreement shall also include "failure to maintain" provisions and provisions for submission of inspection and maintenance reports to the administrator. The terms of the maintenance agreement shall incorporate and be consistent with the requirements of the operation and maintenance portion of the stormwater management plan as described in the stormwater management program manual. 
1801.14  Monitoring and inspections. 
(a)  The permittee must notify the administrator before the commencement of construction and before construction of critical components of a stormwater management facility. 
(b)  The administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator shall inspect the land-disturbing activity during construction for: 
(1)  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(2)  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Compliance with the approved pollution prevention plan as well as updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; and 
(4)  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
(c)  The administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the administrator may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
(e)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city. Stormwater management construction inspection shall utilize the approved stormwater management plans and specifications in reviewing compliance with the requirements of this ordinance chapter. The city shall perform inspections that can be confirmed by visual means only. 
(f)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:40, the administrator may require every VSMP authority permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to VSMP authority permit requirements under this ordinance, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this ordinance. 
(g)  Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the provisions of this ordinance shall be conducted by the administrator or any duly authorized agent of the administrator pursuant to the city's adopted and state water control board approved inspection program, and shall occur, at minimum, at least once every five years. 
(h)  Upon completion, the permittee is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and shall conduct regular inspections during construction sufficient to adequately document compliance. All permittee inspections, conducted by the permittee, shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the permittee inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; 
(4)  Corrective actions that have been taken to correct previous violations; 
(5)  Any violations that exist; and 
(6)  The name and signature of the person who performed the inspection. 
(i)  If the inspections, conducted by the city, find any violations, the permittee shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No additional construction or land-disturbing activity in the area of the violation shall proceed until violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the administrator. 
(j)  The permittee shall provide inspection monitoring and reports to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan provide effective stormwater management. 
(k)  If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan in accordance with Section 1801.18 of this article. 
(l)  The permittee shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of stormwater management facilities during construction. Following the completion and acceptance of construction, a responsible party shall be designated for the maintenance and repair of stormwater management facilities. Persons responsible for the maintenance and repair of stormwater management facilities shall perform periodic inspection, maintenance, and repair, in conformance with the applicable maintenance agreement in accordance with Section 1801.13(f). All inspection, maintenance, and repair activities shall be documented. 
(m)  All stormwater structures and management facilities shall be properly maintained repaired, and inspected as required to meet the performance requirements as specified in the approved stormwater facility maintenance agreement, including any stormwater structure or stormwater management facility existing as of the effective date of this article. 
(n)  In addition to the inspections performed by the permittee or landowner, the city shall periodically inspect all stormwater management facilities. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety, public health, or the environment, the city shall notify the landowner by registered or certified mail. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the city, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition, and recover the costs from the landowner. In the event that maintenance or repair is neglected, or the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public health, safety, or the environment, the city reserves the authority to perform the work and to recover the costs from the landowner. 
(o)  Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all inspections, maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five years. 
(p)  Records of inspection and maintenance by the responsible party shall be submitted to the city annually. 
(q)  The city will conduct post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities at least once every five years. 
1801.15  As-builts. 
(a)  The permittee shall submit as-built plans, acceptable to the city, and supporting documentation, acceptable to the administrator, for any stormwater management facility and storm drainage system associated with the project after final construction is completed, prior to the city's final inspection. The plan and documentation must show that the installed stormwater management facility and applicable storm drainage system components conform to the requirements contained within the approved stormwater management plan. 
(b)  As-built and certification documentation shall comply with all applicable requirements in the stormwater management program manual. See Section 1801.06(e). 
1801.16  Hearings. 
(a)  Any permit applicant or permitted, or person subject to ordinance requirements, aggrieved by any action of the City of Buena Vista taken without a formal hearing, or by inaction of the City of Buena Vista, may request in writing a formal hearing by the city's board of zoning appeals provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the administrator within 30 days after notice of such action is given by the administrator. Hearings shall be held in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:44, as amended. 
(b)  A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearings shall be taken and filed with the city council's clerk. Depositions may be taken and read as in actions at law. 
(c)  The board of zoning appeals or its designated member, as the case may be, shall have power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, and at the request of any party shall issue such subpoenas. The failure of a witness without legal excuse to appear or to testify or to produce documents shall be acted upon by the local governing body, or its designated member, whose action may include the procurement of an order of enforcement from the circuit court. Witnesses who are subpoenaed shall receive the same fees and reimbursement for mileage as in civil actions. 
1801.17  Appeals . 
    Appeals by a permittee aggrieved by any final decision of city's board of zoning appeals after the hearing required in Section 1801.16, above, shall be subject to review by the Circuit Court of the City of Buena Vista, Virginia, provided an appeal is filed within 30 days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land-disturbing activities. 
1801.18  Enforcement . 
(a)  If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the VSMP authority permit conditions or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the permit conditions by any of the following: verbal warnings and inspection reports, notices of corrective action, consent special orders, and notices to comply. Written notices shall be served by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or by delivery at the site of the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. 
(1)  The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued in accordance with subsection (b) or the permit may be revoked by the administrator. 
(2)  The notice shall specify a statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed, as well as a statement that the determination of violation may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(3)  If a permittee fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with this Section within the time specified, the administrator may issue an order requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person conducting the land-disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit to cease all land-disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has ceased, or an approved plan and required permits are obtained, and specified corrective measures have been completed. 
Such orders shall be issued in accordance with the city's approved procedures. Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to his address specified in the land records of the locality, or by personal delivery by an agent of the administrator. However, if the administrator finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth or otherwise substantially impacting water quality, it may issue, without advance notice or hearing, an emergency order directing such person to cease immediately all land-disturbing activities on the site and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is not complying with the terms thereof, the administrator may institute a proceeding for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy in accordance with subsection 1801.18(c). 
(b)  The stop work order shall be in effect until the city confirms that the land-disturbing activity is in compliance with the requirements of this Article and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the permit may be revoked and the applicant shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties provided by this article. In addition to any other remedy provided by this Ordinance, if the administrator or his designee determines that there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance, they may initiate such informal and/or formal administrative enforcement procedures in a manner that is consistent with the city's erosion and sediment control policy which is included in the Stormwater Management Program Manual. 
(c)  Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any rule, regulation, ordinance, order, approved standard or specification, or any permit condition issued by the administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the Circuit Court of the City of Buena Vista to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or who fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any order of the administrator, shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $32,500.00 for each violation within the discretion of the court. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1)  Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this subsection shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(i)  No state permit registration; 
(ii)  No SWPPP; 
(iii)  Incomplete SWPPP; 
(iv)  SWPPP not available for review; 
(v)  No approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(vi)  Failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls; 
(vii)  Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed or maintained; 
(viii)  Operational deficiencies; 
(ix)  Failure to conduct required inspections; 
(x)  Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and 
(xi)  Discharges not in compliance with the requirements of 9VAC25-880-70. 
1801.19  Civil and criminal penalties. 
(a)  The administrator may issue a summons for collection of the civil penalty and the action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court. The action may seek the imposition of a civil penalty of not more than $32,500.00 against the person for each violation. 
(b)  In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection, the court may consider the degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to the violator from noncompliance. 
(c)  Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by the City of Buena Vista shall be paid into the treasury of the City of Buena Vista to be used for the purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters of the locality and abating environmental pollution therein in such manner as the court may, by order, direct. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other civil or equitable remedy provided by this section or by law, any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this ordinance, any order of the administrator, any condition of a permit, or any order of a court shall, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months or a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $32,500.00, or both. 
1801.20  Restoration of lands. 
(a)  Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition or in accordance with a notice of violation, stop work order, or permit requirements. 
(b)  In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall be covered by the performance bond, or become a lien upon the property until paid, or both. 
1801.21  Holds on certificate of occupancy. 
    Certificates of occupancy (temporary or permanent) shall not be granted until the stormwater management features, including but not limited to all storm drains, culverts, conveyances, and BMPs, have been installed per the approved plans, inspected, as-built and accepted by the city. 
1801.22  Fees . 
(a)  Fees to cover costs associated with implementation of a VSMP related to land-disturbing activities and issuance of general permit coverage and VSMP authority permits shall be imposed in accordance with the city's adopted fee schedule. When a site or sites has been purchased for development within a previously permitted common plan of development or sale, the applicant shall be subject to fees in accordance with the disturbed acreage of their site or sites according to the city's adopted fee schedule. 
(b)  The fee for review of the stormwater management plan shall accompany such plan when it is submitted for review and shall be in an amount as set forth in the city's adopted fee schedule. 
(c)  Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements from the general permit issued by the state water control board shall be imposed in accordance with the city's adopted fee schedule. If the general permit modifications result in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the City of Buena Vista, such reviews shall be subject to the fees set out in the city's adopted fee schedule The fee assessed shall be based on the total disturbed acreage of the site. In addition to the general permit modification fee, modifications resulting in an increase in total disturbed acreage shall pay the difference in the initial permit fee paid and the permit fee that would have applied for the total disturbed acreage in Table 1 of the fee schedule. 
(d)  Annual permit maintenance shall be imposed in accordance with the city's adopted fee schedule, including fees imposed on expired permits that have been administratively continued. With respect to the general permit, these fees shall apply until the permit coverage is terminated. 
(e)  General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be paid annually to the City of Buena Vista, by the anniversary date of general permit coverage. No permit will be reissued or automatically continued without payment of the required fee. General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be applied until a notice of termination is effective. 
(f)  The fees set forth in subsections (a) through (d) above, shall apply to: 
(1)  All persons seeking coverage under the general permit. 
(2)  All permittees who request modifications to or transfers of their existing registration statement for coverage under a general permit. 
(3)  Persons whose coverage under the general permit has been revoked shall apply to the department for an individual permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities. 
(4)  Permit and permit coverage maintenance fees outlined under Section 1801.22(d) may apply to each general permit holder. 
(g)  No general permit application fees will be assessed to: 
(1)  Permittees who request minor modifications to general permits as defined in Section 1801.02 of this ordinance. Permit modifications at the request of the permittee resulting in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the administrator shall not be exempt pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Permittees whose general permits are modified or amended at the initiative of the department, excluding errors in the registration statement identified by the administrator or errors related to the acreage of the site. 
(h)  All incomplete payments will be deemed as nonpayments, and the applicant shall be notified of any incomplete payments. Interest may be charged for late payments at the underpayment rate set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-15 and is calculated on a monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A ten percent late payment fee shall be charged to any delinquent (over 90 days past due) account. The city shall be entitled to all remedies available under the Code of Virginia in collecting any past due amount. 
1801.23  Performance bond. (4VAC50-60-104.D and Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:34 A) 
(a)  Prior to issuance of any permit, the applicant may be required, at the city's discretion, to submit a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement acceptable to the city's attorney, to ensure that measures could be taken by the city at the applicant's expense should he fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate actions which may be required of him by the permit conditions as a result of his land-disturbing activity. If the city takes such action upon such failure by the applicant, the city may collect from the applicant for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the security held, if any. Within 60 days of the completion of the requirements of the permit conditions, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
(b)  The project surety shall be approved by the city prior to plan approval. The applicant shall be notified of project surety requirements during the plan review process. 
(c)  The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the storm drainage systems and stormwater management facilities approved under the permit, plus ten percent as an allowance for administrative costs, inflation and damage to existing facilities. 
(d)  The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure, after proper notice, to complete work within the time specified, or to initiate or maintain appropriate actions which may be required of the permittee in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(e)  These requirements are in addition to all other provisions of city requirements relating to the issuance of such plans and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements for such plans. 
(Ord. No. 14-07, 6-5-2014) 
Article 19. - INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 1901.00. - Institutional district. 
    The primary land uses of the institutional district are civic and institutional in nature. The regulations are designed to provide for a high level of human interaction with relatively compact, cohesive development of public and private space. 
Sec. 1902.00. - Multiple principal by-right uses. 
    Insofar as allowed by the building codes, single structures may have multiple uses by right. 
Sec. 1903.00. - Permitted by right. 
1903.01  Commercial uses. 
1903.01-1  Bookstore. 
1903.01-2  Publishing, printing and lithographing, for institutional private uses such as student newspapers, institutional promotions, institutional printing etc. 
1903.02  Civic/institutional. 
1903.02-1  Assembly halls. 
1903.02-2  Business, private, public and vocational schools and classrooms, academic facilities, administrative offices and associated support structures. 
1903.02-3  Churches and other places of worship, and church school buildings. 
1903.02-4  Clubs and lodges, fraternities, and meeting places of other organizations. 
1903.02-5  Dining halls/cafeteria. 
1903.02-6  Hospitals as defined in 302.82 and clinics. 
1903.02-7  Laboratories and research facilities 
1903.02-8  Libraries. 
1903.02-9  Museums. 
1903.02-10  Police, fire and rescue squad stations. 
1903.02-11  Post offices. 
1903.02-12  Public and institutional buildings and properties of a cultural, administrative, or service type. 
1903.02-13  Public service and storage buildings. 
1903.02-14  Public utilities. 
1903.02-15  Repair facilities for institutional equipment and property only. 
1903.02-16  Theaters. 
1903.03  Residential/lodging. 
1903.03-1  Childcare centers and family day care homes. 
1903.03-2  Condominiums. 
1903.03-3  Dormitories. 
1903.03-4  Duplexes. 
1903.03-5  Family care homes, foster homes or group homes serving the mentally, retarded, developmentally disabled or others, rest homes, homes for adults, or nursing homes, provided that licensing requirements are met. 
1903.03-6  Multifamily homes/apartments. 
1903.03-7  Single-family dwellings. 
1903.03-8  Townhouses. 
1903.03-9  Tourist homes. 
1903.03-10  Two-family homes. 
1903.04  Miscellaneous. 
1903.04-1  Greenhouses. 
1903.04-2  Parking garages and parking lots. 
1903.04-3  Off-street parking as required by this ordinance. 
1903.04-4  Signs as provided in article 7. 
Sec. 1904. - Conditional uses. 
    When after review of an application and hearing hereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the Buena Vista City Council finds as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses, is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista, the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
1904-1  Bakeries. 
1904-2  Banks and loan and finance offices, excluding drive-in types. 
1904-3  Business and professional offices including but not limited to medical offices, tax preparation, real estate, engineers, architects. 
1904-4  Bus and taxi stands. 
1904-5  Coffee/beverage shops. 
1904-6  Commercial radio, television, and communication towers along with related buildings and equipment provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
1904-7  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met. 
1904-8  Laundries and dry cleaning shops, and clothes dyeing establishments for institutional and student use only. 
1904-9  Manufacture of goods to be sold as retail on site. 
1904-10  Radio and television broadcasting studios. 
1904-11  Recreational use or facility athletic fields, stadiums, and arenas, public, nonprofit or institutional athletic facilities that offer a variety of programs such as karate, aerobic, dance, weight training, gymnasiums, public parks, playgrounds, recreational buildings and grounds, tennis courts, Public, or commercial or institutional swimming pools and outdoor, skating rinks, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, or similar recreational use or facility. 
1904-12  Restaurants. 
1904-13  Small-scale retail/neighborhood stores. A general retail operation that typically sells groceries and other perishable and nonperishable household goods, but may not include petroleum (gasoline/diesel etc.) pumps The maximum amount of floor area devoted to retail sales is 2,500 square feet and may included additional uses including a café, deli, a contract post office, an automatic bank teller, and a newsstand. 
1904-14  Theaters, assembly halls, playhouses and dinner theaters. 
Sec. 1905. - Accessory uses and garages. 
1905-1  Home occupations provided the requirements of article 7, section 705 are met. 
1905-2  Private parking garage. 
1905-3  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
1905-4  Travel trailers, which may be stored within the minimum yard requirements and shall be prohibited from occupancy. 
Sec. 1906. - Setbacks. 
1906-1  No minimum. 
Sec. 1907. - Building area. 
1907-1  No area limitation. 
Sec. 1908. - Yards. 
1908-1  No yard requirement. 

(Ord. of 4-10-2003) 
[Article 20. - HILL TOP-GLEN MAURY PARK DISTRICT] 

Sec. 2000.00. - Purpose and intent. 

    The purpose of this district is to enact regulations that implement the vision and goals of the Hill Top-Glen Maury Park Master Plan as incorporated into the City of Buena Vista Comprehensive Plan on January 9, 2003. 
    These regulations are intended to create a pedestrian-scaled neighborhood that promotes the health, safety or general welfare of the public and fulfills one or more of the goals as enumerated in Virginia Code, § 15.2-2283. 
    The regulations in this article are intended to attach the same or greater level of importance to the overall building design as is placed on the use contained within to facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community as well as to reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets through the construction of a safe and interesting pedestrian realm. 
    Buildings are expected to be added to the City of Buena Vista as long-term additions to the architectural vibrancy of the community for the purpose of encouraging economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base. 
    Because these Land Development Regulations encourage the placement of buildings closer to each other as well as closer to the street where pedestrian activity is expected to occur, it is necessary to mitigate against any negative effects with a minimum set of standards beyond typical setback and buffer requirements. This written set of standards also avoids the need for proffered conditions through a conditional use process. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003) 
Sec. 2002.00. - Applicability. 
    All development located within the Hill Top District shall be subject to the provisions of this article. Where requirements found elsewhere in this ordinance conflict, the provisions of this article shall apply. Exceptions to the provisions of this article (except for permitted uses and accessory uses) may be approved as a conditional use permit in accordance with article 8 herein. In granting a conditional use permit as an exception to these provisions, the city council shall first determine that: 
a.  No practical design alternatives exist; and 
b.  The variations/exceptions requested are generally consistent with the purpose and intent of this district as well as section 1704.00 general building design guidelines; and 
c.  The proposed development is consistent with the Hill Top-Glen Maury Park Master Plan as incorporated into the City of Buena Vista comprehensive plan on January 9, 2003. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003) 
Sec. 2003.00. - Subdistricts established. 
    The subdistricts are hereby established in the sections of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003) 
Sec. 2003.01. - Planned Unit Development-Residential-Hill Top (PUD-RES-HT). 
2003.01-1  The primary land uses in this subdistrict are residential in scale and character, though some low intensity commercial are permitted. 
2003.01-2  The area in the Planned Unit Development-Residential-Hill Top District for development shall utilize design characteristics to fully benefit the location of lots for the maximum picturesque views of the area and to preserve the natural amenities. These regulations are intended to create a pedestrian oriented neighborhood that promotes the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.01) 
Sec. 2003.02. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in the PUD-RES-HT: 
2003.02-1  Single-family dwellings; 
2003.02-2  Two-family dwellings; 
2003.02-3  Multifamily dwellings; 
2003.02-4  Townhouses. See special regulations for townhouses in the land development regulations; 
2003.02-5  Civic/institutional facilities; 
2003.02-6  Recreation facilities; 
2003.02-7  Private schools and studios (including but not limited to the teaching of music, art, dance, theater, and educational tutoring); 
2003.02-8  Public utilities; 
2003.02-9  Municipal service or storage buildings; 
2003.02-10  Streets, curb and gutter, sidewalks (Americans With Disabilities Act requirements), stormwater facilities, walking/bike paths, street lighting, utilities; 
2003.02-11  Restaurants; 
2003.02-12  Hotel/motel and their accessory uses. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.02; Ord. No. 13-02, Att. A, 2-22-2013) 
Sec. 2003.03. - Accessory uses. 
    Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following uses are also applicable: 
2003.03-1  Home occupations. See land development regulations under home occupations; 
2003.03-2  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work; such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work; 
2003.03-3  Garages, attached or detached, carports shall not be allowed. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.03) 
Sec. 2003.04. - Lot restrictions. 
2003.04-1  The development authorized within this district is regulated by a comprehensive development and management plan proposed by the developer and where conventional zoning lot restrictions are waived in favor of the detailed site plan. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.04) 
Sec. 2003.05. - Qualifying requirements. 
2003.05.1  The project area shall be located where public water and sewer systems are available or where a community water and sewer system can be developed as part of the project. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.05) 
Sec. 2003.06. - Lot design. 
2003.06-1  The lot design, arrangement, and shape shall be such that lots will provide satisfactory and desirable sites for building, and be properly related to topography, and provide convenient and safe access. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.06) 
Sec. 2003.07. - Street design. 
2003.07-1  The street system within the project area shall be designed according to functional street purposes and traffic flow: 
2003.07-1.1  To discourage through traffic; 
2003.07-1.2  To assure safe and convenient sight distance; 
2003.07-1.3  To complement the natural topography; 
2003.07-1.4  In coordination with existing streets; and 
2003.07-1.5  All roads to be built to VDOT specifications with a minimum two inches surface treated finish, the surface treated finish shall only be applied six months after the final trenched ditch compaction has been compacted at 95 percent; 
2003.07-1.6  Road shall have a minimum of 50-foot right-of-way; 
2003.07-1.7  Road shall have a minimum pavement width of 20 feet; 
2003.07-1.8  All additional right-of-way may be used for utilities, walking paths, sidewalks, bike paths, golf cart paths if proper markings for walkways, sidewalks and bike and/or golf cart paths meet VDOT specifications and the American Disabilities Act; 
2003.07-1.9  Provisions shall be made for sidewalks and/or pedestrian walkways, bike and golf cart paths, which will enable residents, visitors and/or patrons to walk or bike ride safely and conveniently between the various functional areas of the project and adjacent circulation systems; 
2003.07-1.10  Curb and gutter shall meet and be built to VDOT specifications and can be environmentally friendly. 
2003.07-1.11  All entrance permits shall meet and be built to VDOT specifications. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.07) 
Sec. 2003.08. - Erosion and sediment control. 
2003.08-1  Any land disturbance of more than 10,000 square feet shall require an engineered erosions and sediment control plan submitted to the plan approving authority of Buena Vista for their approval and the issuance of a permit. 
2003.08-2  No land disturbance shall happen until all permits and approvals are obtained. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.08) 
Sec. 2003.09. - Street names and signs. 
2003.09-1  The name of proposed streets shall not duplicate existing street names irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, driveway, place, lane or court. Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with other already existing and named streets, shall bear the names of the existing streets. Street names shall be indicated on the preliminary plan and final subdivision plat. Street signs shall be provided at all intersections and meet VDOT specifications. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.09) 
Sec. 2003.10. - Street lighting. 
2003.10-1  Street lighting shall be provided on all streets in the development and meet public works specifications. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.10) 
Sec. 2003.11. - Parking. 
2003.11-1  For each use, please reference article 7, section 703.03, parking space requirements for all districts. All natural amenities should be preserved and soften the effects of parking by avoiding excessive pavement with scattered landscaping and tree planting. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.11) 
Sec. 2003.12. - Water and sewer. 
2003.12-1  All lots shall be served by water and sewer and whenever possible all water and sewer lines shall be connected to existing public facilities. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.12) 
Sec. 2003.13. - Fire hydrants. 
    Fire hydrants shall be placed according to the specifications of the fire marshal. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.13) 
Sec. 2003.14. - Drainage. 
2003.14-1  All drainage shall meet and be built to VDOT specifications and can be environmentally friendly. 
2003.14-2  The site development plan shall include a plan for adequate drainage. The street and lot plan shall be designed to avoid drainage problems. Where storm drains or drainage ditches are required, or where an existing waterway or drainage way traverses the project area, an easement or right-of-way shall be provided with adequate improvements to contain the drainage flows from the tributary area upstream of the watershed. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.14) 
Sec. 2003.15. - Floodways. 
2003.15-1  Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase the danger of health, life, or property, or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Such land within the project area shall be used as common open space or other uses which would not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce conditions contrary to public welfare. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.15) 
Sec. 2003.16. - Waterways. 
2003.16-1  All waterways shall be preserved in their natural state unless such waterway(s) can be moved without disturbing the balance of nature through an engineered study of the area affected by the waterway and obtaining all necessary federal, state and local permits. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to obtain all necessary permits. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.16) 
Sec. 2003.17. - Easements. 
2003.17-1  If necessary, easements shall be provided by the owner though out the project area and shall be proved for water, sewer, gas, telephone, power and other utilities as required by the respective utility departments, agencies or companies. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.17) 
Sec. 2003.18. - Grading. 
2003.18-1  The site development plan shall be designed to minimize the amount of grading required for the development. To the extent feasible, the natural lay of the land shall be maintained except where grading is required for public health or safety. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.18) 
Sec. 2003.19. - Natural amenities. 
2003.19-1  The developer shall make every reasonable effort to protect and preserve the natural amenities of the site such as tree cover, waterways, scenic overlooks, etc. The site development plan shall be designed to maximize the use and enjoyment of natural amenities by project residents. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.19) 
Sec. 2003.20. - Landscaping and screening. 
2003.20-1  Landscaping and screening may be provided to improve the project appearance or to provide a buffer between potentially conflicting uses. Site distances at all intersections shall follow VDOT specifications. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.20) 
Sec. 2003.21. - Data to accompany application. 
2003.21-1  With the planned unit district there shall be submitted tentative, overall development plans which shall include: 
2003.21-1.1  Scale accurate proposed development plan mapping of the project to include: 
2003.21-1.1-1  Proposed land uses including dimensions and including residential types, commercial types, recreation and any other proposed use; 
2003.21-1.1-2  Proposed street system including public and private right-of-way and their dimensions; 
2003.21-1.1-3  Proposed parking areas and parking space delineations including handicap and their dimensions; 
2003.21-1.1-4  Proposed plat showing subdivision lot lines and their dimensions; 
2003.21-1.1-5  Proposed utility rights-of-way or easements including water, sewer, gas, power, and telephone and their dimensions; 
2003.21-1.1-6  Proposed drainage plan; 
2003.21-1.1-7  Proposed location of buildings, structures, and improvements and setback dimensions; 
2003.21-1.1-8  Property lines of proposed common property; 
2003.21-1.1-9  Proposed pedestrian circulation system; 
2003.21-1.1-10  Proposed landscaping plan; 
2003.21-1.1-11  Proposed treatment of the project perimeter such as screening or landscaping; 
2003.21-1.1-12  Relationships and tie-ins to adjacent property. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.21) 
Sec. 2003.22. - Supporting documentation. 
    A copy of supporting documentation to include the following minimum data: 
2003.22-1  A legal description of the project boundaries including tax map numbers of all properties present and proposed; 
2003.22-2  A statement of existing and proposed property owners; 
2003.22-3  Names and addresses of all adjacent property owners; 
2003.22-4  A statement of project development objectives and character to be achieved; 
2003.22-5  An approximate development schedule including dates of proposed construction beginning and completion and staging plan, if appropriate; 
2003.22-6  A statement of intent regarding future selling or leasing of land areas, dwelling units, commercial area, etc. 
2003.22-7  Quantitative data including the number and type of dwelling units; parcel sizes, gross and net residential densities, total amount and percentage of open space, residential, commercial, and other land use types; 
2003.22-8  Proposed building types including architectural style, height, and floor area; 
2003.22-9  Approvals from the Virginia Department of Highways and the county health officer, if necessary; 
2003.22-10  Proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants which govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of property to be held in common ownership; 
2003.22-11  A statement of proposed temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures to be taken; 
2003.22-12  All covenants, restrictions and other regulations governing the structures. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.23) 
Sec. 2003.23. - Preapplication meeting. 
2003.23-1  To avoid unnecessary costs, the developer/owner shall meet with the zoning office and ask for a tentative date for a preconstruction meeting to discuss all phases of the development process. 
2003.23-2  The developer/owner shall submit a minimum of three copies of a conceptual plan to the zoning office previous to the preconstruction meeting for review by various departments (minimum of one week for department review), if the zoning office sees need for more conceptual copies, the zoning office shall notify the developer/owner of the need for additional copies of the conceptual plan. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.24) 
Sec. 2003.24. - Application. 
2003-24-1  Application for a planned unit development, the foregoing requirements shall be filed with the zoning administrator. Ten copies of the original application and preliminary plans are required to be filed with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall forward the application and preliminary plan to the department officials and the planning commission for their review and recommendation. The planning commission shall consider the general plan for the community, the location, arrangement and size of lots, parks, school sites and other reservations of open space; the location, width and grade of streets; the location and arrangement of parking spaces; the location, arrangement and height of buildings; the location, arrangement and design of neighborhood business areas and accessory parking spaces; the gross densities proposed for the area; and such other features as will contribute to the orderly and harmonious development of the area, with due regard to the type and the character of adjoining neighborhoods and the peculiar suitability of the proposed uses. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.4) 
Sec. 2003.25. - Processing fee. 
2003.25-1  At the time of filing the preliminary plan application, the applicant shall deposit with the zoning administrator a check payable to the treasurer in the amount of $100.00, plus $1.00 for each dwelling unit proposed on the development plan. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.25) 
Sec. 2003.26. - Appearance of developer. 
2003.26-1  The planning commission and/or the city council may require the developer to appear to discuss the planned development. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.27) 
Sec. 2003.27. - Preliminary plan approval. 
2003.27-1  Within 60 days after the filing of the preliminary plan, the planning commission shall report to city council one of the following: 
2003.27-1.1  Recommend approval of the preliminary plan as presented, 
2003.27-1.2  Recommend approval of the preliminary plan as revised by concurrence of the planning commission and the developer, or 
2003.27-1.3  Recommend disapproval; 
2003.27-2  The city council shall give notice under Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204 of a public hearing to be held not more than 30 days after the receipt of the planning commission's report. After the hearing, the city council disapproves or approves the preliminary plan, or approves the preliminary plan with modifications; 
2003.27-3  If the preliminary plan is approved, or approved with modifications by the city council, the zoning map shall be amended to show the Planned Unit Development-Residential-Hill Top. If the preliminary plan is approved with modifications, the city council shall not amend the zoning map until the applicant has filed with the zoning administrator written consent to the plan as modified. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.27) 
Sec. 2003.28. - Status of approval. 
2003.28-1  No building permits shall be issued within the project area until the final development plan has been approved by the city under the procedures in the following sections. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.28) 
Sec. 2003.29. - Provisions for variations or exceptions. 
2003.29-1  Provisions for variations in or exceptions to the general regulations of the subdivision ordinance in Cases of unusual situations or when strict adherence to the general regulations would result in Substantial injustice or hardship shall be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.29) 
Sec. 2003.30. - Final plan application. 
2003.30-1  Within six months following the approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant shall file with the zoning administrator ten copies of a final development plan containing in final form, the information required in the preliminary plan, including but not limited to, the final maps and documents specified above. In its discretion and for good cause, the city council may, upon receipt of a written application, extend for six months the period for filing of the final development plan; 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.30) 
Sec. 2003.31. - Phasing plan. 
2003.31-1  If the project area is to be developed in stages, a phasing plan shall be submitted with the final development plan. The phasing plan shall delineate the areas to be developed in each phase and the approximate development schedule of each phase. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.31) 
Sec. 2003.32. - Compliance with preliminary plan. 
2003.32-1  The final development plan shall be in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan. The final development plan shall be deemed in substantial compliance providing modification does not involve any of the following and provided further that such modification does not exceed the limitations of this district's regulations: 
2003.32-1.1  Variation of the proposed residential density or intensity of use by more than ten percent; 
2003.32-1.2  Reduction of more than ten percent of the area reserved for common open space; 
2003.32-1.3  Increase of the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more than ten percent; and 
2003.32-1.4  Increase of the total ground area covered by buildings by more than five percent. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.32) 
Sec. 2003.33. - Final plan approval. 
2003.33-1  The City Council shall review the final development plan, and shall approve the final development plan if it is in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan. The clerk of the court in whose office deeds are conveyed will record the final development plan in the manner provided for recording plats or subdivisions. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.33) 
Sec. 2003.34. - Subdivision plat requirements. 
2003.34-1  Final subdivision plats shall be submitted and recorded before the granting of building permits or before the sale of any lots. Subdivision plats may be submitted for portions of the project area in accordance with the phasing plan. Subdivision plats shall be drawn according to the following specifications: 
2003.34-1.1  Subdivision plats shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink upon Mylar at a suitable scale. A blank oblong space 3 inches × 5 inches shall be reserved on the cover sheet and a 1 inches × 5 inches space shall be reserved on subsequent sheets for use of the approving authority; 
2003.34-1.2  Subdivision plats shall show the accurate location and dimensions by bearing said distances with all curve data on all lots and street lines and centerlines of streets; boundaries of all proposed or existing easements, parks, school sites or other public areas; the number and area of all buildings sites; all existing public and private streets, their names, numbers and widths; existing and proposed easements for water, sewer, gas, power, telephone and other utilities; watercourses and their names; names of owners and their property lines, both within the boundary of the subdivision and adjoining said boundaries; 
2003.34-1.3  Distances and bearings must balance and close with an accuracy of not less than one in ten thousand; 
2003.34-1.4  The data of all curves along the street frontages shall be shown in detail at the curve or in a curve data table containing the following: delta, radius, arc, tangent, chord and chord bearings. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.34) 
Sec. 2003.35. - Surveyor's certificate. 
2003.35-1  Every subdivision plat shall be prepared by a surveyor duly licensed by the State of Virginia, who shall endorse upon each plat a certificate signed by him setting forth the source of the title of the land subdivided, and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the plat is of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated upon such tract, within an insert block or by means of a dotted boundary line upon the plat. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.35) 
Sec. 2003.36. - Owner's statement. 
2003.36-1  Every such plat, or the deed of dedication to which plat is attached, shall contain a statement to the effect that "the above and foregoing subdivision of (here insert the correct description of the land subdivided) as appears in this plat is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any," which shall be signed by the owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgements of deeds, and when thus executed and approved as herein specified shall be filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of the appropriate court, and indexed under the names of the landowners signing such statement and under the name of the subdivision. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.36) 
Sec. 2003.37. - Recording of plat. 
2003.37-1  The subdivider shall record the approved plat in the office of the clerk within 60 days after final approval; otherwise the agent shall mark the plat "void" and return the same to the subdivider. No lot shall be sold and the building permit shall not be issued until the plat has been approved and properly recorded. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.37) 
Sec. 2003.38. - Required improvements. 
2003.38-1  All improvements shown on the final development plan shall be installed by the developer at his cost. In cases where specifications have been established by state departments or local ordinances, such specifications shall be followed. The developer's performance bond shall not be released until construction has been inspected and approved by the appropriate official. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.38) 
Sec. 2003.39. - Monuments. 
2003.39-1  Monuments shall be provided to permanently identify lot and right-of-way lines. The monuments shall be installed as follows: 
2003.39-1.1  Concrete monuments four inches in diameter or square two feet long, with a flat top, shall be put at all street corners, at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the project area, and at right angle points, and points of a curve in each street. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify property the location and shall be set flush with the finished grade; 
2003.39-1.2  All other lot and parcel corners shall be marked with concrete monuments as above. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.39) 
Sec. 2003.40. - Plans and specifications. 
2003.40-1  Two blue or black line prints of the plans and specifications of all required physical improvements installed shall be prepared by a licensed engineer as certified by the State of Virginia and shall be submitted to the agent for review. Once approved, one copy bearing certification of such approval shall be returned to the developer. If disapproved, all papers shall be returned to the developer with the reason for disapproval stated in writing. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.40) 
Sec. 2003.41. - Maintenance of common property. 
2003.41-1  The developer shall create a property owners group to be responsible for maintaining all common property. The cost of maintaining common property shall be paid by property owner assessments and such assessments shall constitute a lien upon the individual properties. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.41) 
Sec. 2003.42. - Advertising and sale. 
2003.42-1  The developer shall not advertise for sale or sell any tract or lot within the project area until an approved plat has been properly recorded. Prospective property owners shall be informed of the homeowner's responsibility, the entire project area development plan by the developer/agent/owner. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.42) 
Sec. 2003.43. - Changes in final development. 
2003.43-1  Changes may be made in the approved final plan during the construction of the planned development except upon application to the appropriate agency provided below: 
2003.43-1.1  Minor changes in the location, setting, and character of buildings and structures may be authorized by the planning commission if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. No changes authorized by this section may increase the cubic volume of any building or structure by more than ten percent; 
2003.43-1.2  All other changes in use and rearrangement of lots, blocks, and buildings tracts, any changes in the provisions of common open spaces, and all other changes in the approved final plan by the developer or any succeeding owner, or agent shall be made under the procedure authorized by this ordinance. No amendments may be made in the approved final plans unless they are shown to be required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the final plan was approved or by changes in the development policy of the community. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.43) 
Sec. 2003.44. - Development schedule and review. 
2003.44-1  The construction and provision of all facilities and improvements on common property, which are shown on the final development plan, must proceed at the same rate as the construction of dwelling units. At least once every six months following the approval of the final development plan the zoning administrator shall review all of the building permits issued for the planned development and examine the construction which has taken place on the site. 
2003.44-2  If he shall find that the rate at which facilities and improvements on common property have been constructed and provided, is not in accordance with the original development schedule, he shall forward this information to the building official who shall not issue any additional building permits until the scheduled facilities and improvements on common property have been provided. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.44) 
Sec. 2003.45. - Failure to begin development. 
2003.45-1  If no construction has begun or no use established in the planned development within one year from the approval of the final development plan, the final development plan shall lapse and be of no further effect. In its discretion, and for good cause, the city council may, upon receipt of written application, extend for one additional year the period for the beginning of construction or the establishment of a use. If a final development plan lapses under the provisions of this section, the clerk shall file a notice of revocation with the recorded subdivision plat. The zoning regulations applicable before the final development plan was approved shall then be in effect. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.45) 
Sec. 2003.46. - Effectual clauses. 
2003.46-1  Authority. This ordinance has been enacted under the authority granted under chapter 22 of the Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280 et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.46) 
Sec. 2003.47. - Validity. 
2003.47-1  Should any article, section, subsection, or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of this ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.47) 
Sec. 2003.48. - Private covenants. 
2003.48-1  This ordinance bears no relation to any private easement, covenant, agreement, or, restriction, nor is the responsibility of enforcing such private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction implied herein to any public official. When this ordinance calls for more restrictive standards than are required by private contract, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.48) 
Sec. 2003.49. - Penalties. 
2003.49-1  Any developer who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred ($100.00) for each dwelling unit proposed in the final development plan. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.49) 
Sec. 2003.50. - Performance guarantees. 
2003.50-1  Before the acceptance of dedication for public use of any right-of-way located within any subdivision which has been constructed or proposed to be constructed within the subdivision, any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, bicycle trail, drainage or sewerage system, waterline as part of a public system, or other improvement financed or to be financed in whole or in part by private funds the owner or developer must: 
2003.50-1.1  Certify to the governing body that the construction costs have been paid to the person constructing such facilities; or 
2003.50-1.2  Furnish to the governing body a certified check, letter of credit, cash escrow, or contract for construction in the amount of the estimated costs of construction or a personal, corporate or property bond, with surety satisfactory to the governing body, in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of such facilities. 
2003.50-2  The applicant shall furnish two estimates of the public improvement costs for the project on the letterheads of the contractors and these estimates shall include all labor and materials needed to finish the project according to the approved plans and these estimates shall be furnished to the zoning office. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.50) 
Sec. 2003.51. - Provisions for periodic partial and final release of certain performance guarantees. 
2003.51-1  A subdivision ordinance shall provide for the periodic partial and final complete release of any bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee required by the governing body under this article within 30 days after receipt of written notice by the subdivider or developer of completion of part or all of any public facilities required to be constructed hereunder unless the governing body or its designated administrative agency notifies the subdivider or developer in writing of nonreceipt of approval by an applicable state agency, or of any specified defects or deficiencies in construction and suggested corrective measures prior to the expiration of the 30-day period. Any inspection of such public facilities shall be based solely upon conformance with the terms and conditions of the performance agreement and the approved design plan and specifications for the facilities for which the performance guarantee is applicable, and shall not include the approval of any person other than an employee of the governing body, its administrative agency, the Virginia Department of Transportation or other political subdivision or a person who has contracted with the governing body, its administrative agency, the Virginia Department of Transportation or other political subdivision. 
2003.51-2  If no such action is taken by the governing body or administrative agency within the time specified above, the request shall be deemed approved, and a partial release granted to the subdivider or developer. No final release shall be granted until after expiration of such 30-day period and there is an additional request in writing sent by certified mail return receipt to the chief administrative officer of such governing body. The governing body or its designated administrative agency shall act within ten working days of receipt of the request; then if no action is taken the request shall be deemed approved and final release granted to the subdivider or developer. 
2003.51-3  After receipt of the written notices required above, if the governing body or administrative agency takes no action within the times specified above and the subdivider or developer files suit in the local circuit court to obtain partial or final release of a bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee, as the case may be, the circuit court, upon finding the governing body or its administrative agency was without good cause in failing to act, shall award such subdivider or developer his reasonable costs and attorneys' fees. 
2003.51-4  No governing body or administrative agency shall refuse to make a periodic partial or final release of a bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee for any reason not directly related to the specified defects or deficiencies in construction of the public facilities covered by said bond, escrow, letter of credit or other performance guarantee. 
2003.51-5  Upon written request by the subdivider or developer, the governing body or its designated administrative agency shall be required to make periodic partial releases of such bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee in a cumulative amount equal to no less than ninety percent of the original amount for which the bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee was taken, and may make partial releases to such lower amounts as may be authorized by the governing body or its designated administrative agency based upon the percentage of public facilities completed and approved by the governing body, local administrative agency, or state agency having jurisdiction. Periodic partial releases may not occur before the completion of at least 30 percent of the public facilities covered by any bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee. The governing body or administrative agency shall not be required to execute more than three periodic partial releases in any twelve-month period. Upon final completion and acceptance of the public facilities, the governing body or administrative agency shall release any remaining bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee to the subdivider or developer. For the purpose of final release, the term "acceptance" means: when the public facility is accepted by and taken over for operation and maintenance by the state agency, local government department or agency, or other public authority which is responsible for maintaining and operating such public facility upon acceptance. 
2003.51-6  For the purposes of this section, a certificate of partial or final completion of such public facilities from either a duly licensed professional engineer or land surveyor, as defined in and limited to § 54.1-400, or from a department or agency designated by the locality may be accepted without requiring further inspection of such public facilities. 
(Ord. of 4-10-2003; Ord. of 9-6-2009, § 2003.51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2245. 
Sec. 2004.00. - Mixed Use Business (MXB-HT). 
    The primary land uses in this subdistrict are commercial in scale and character, including many auto-oriented uses that typically found along high-volume thoroughfares including retail, restaurant and office uses. 
2004.01.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted: 
2004.01-1  Single-family dwellings; 
2004.01-2  Two-family dwellings provided that each living unit shall contain a minimum of 1,200 square feet; 
2004.01-3  Multifamily dwellings; 
2004.01-4  Townhouse (as regulated in section 709 of this ordinance) 
2004.01-5  Civic/institutional facilities; 
2004.01-6  Recreation facilities; 
2004.01-7  Bed and breakfast inns in accordance with article 14; 
2004.01-8  Live-work units; 
2004.01-9  Private schools and studios (including but not limited to the teaching of music, art, dance theater, and educational tutoring); 
2004.01-10  Public utilities; 
2004.01-11  Municipal service or storage buildings; 
2004.01-12  Public water and sewage facilities; 
2004.01-13  Retail shops and stores; 
2004.01-14  Business offices; 
2004.01-15  Department stores, variety stores, specialty shops, discount shops and appliance stores; 
2004.01-16  Bakeries; 
2004.01-17  Laundries, dry cleaning shops and clothes dyeing establishments; 
2004.01-18  Theaters, assembly halls, playhouses and dinner theaters; 
2004.01-19  Hotels; 
2004.01-20  Banks and loan and finance offices, including drive-in types; 
2004.01-21  Funeral home and/or mortuary; 
2004.01-22  Automobile service stations and public garages (with major repair under cover); 
2004.01-23  Restaurants; 
2004.01-24  Drive-through facilities with frontage along Highway 60. 
2004.02  Conditional uses. When, after review of an application and hearing hereon, in accordance with article 8 herein, the Buena Vista City Council finds as a fact that the proposed use is compatible with surrounding uses, is consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan, is in the public interest, and will comply with all other provisions of law and ordinances of Buena Vista, the following uses may be permitted with appropriate conditions: 
a.  Kennels and animal hospitals provided that any structure or premises used for such purposes shall be located at least 200 feet from any residential lot; 
b.  Public billiard parlors and pool rooms, bowling alleys, dance halls, and similar forms of public amusement only after a public hearing shall have been held by the governing body on an application submitted to the body for such use; 
c.  Circuses, carnivals, fairs, and sideshows; 
d.  Wholesale business, storage or warehouse provided that any such use shall be distant at least 50 feet from any residential district; 
e.  Light manufacturing. 
2004.03  Accessory uses. Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized. The following uses are also applicable: 
a.  Home occupations provided that the requirements of article 7, section 705 are met; 
b.  Living quarters in the main structure of persons employed on the premises; 
c.  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work; such buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work; 
d.  Existing structures to include towers, power towers, water tanks, telephone poles, commercial buildings and rooftops, may be used to affix commercial radio, television, and communication antennas provided the requirements of article 13 are met; 
e.  Manufacture of goods to be sold as retail on site; 
f.  Garage/workshops; 
g.  Rental cottages. 
2004.04  Permitted building types. The following building types detailed in section 2004 are hereby permitted: 
a.  Detached house; 
b.  Townhouse; 
c.  Civic building; 
d.  Commercial. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2009) 
Sec. 2005.00. - General building design requirements. 
    The rich, architectural vocabulary of the City of Buena Vista presents a wide variety of development opportunities using traditional forms while avoiding any perception of monotony. Buildings that are stylized in an attempt to use the building itself as advertising shall be discouraged, particularly where the proposed architecture is the result of a corporate or franchise style. Unless otherwise noted, all buildings shall meet the following: 
1.  All buildings shall share a frontage line with a street or public open space. 
2.  All buildings, except accessory structures, shall have a main, useable entrance opening onto a street or square from the front facade. On a corner lot, the principal entrance in both design and function should be from the primary pedestrian street. (Exception: Commercial buildings may be accessed from entries located in the front half of the building.) 
3.  Important street vistas should terminate in a focal point, such as a building or other architectural or natural feature. Buildings at corner locations should provide adequate architectural treatment to create a sense of place and ensure pedestrian-friendly design. 
4.  Important mountain vistas should be protected and accentuated. 
5.  Adjacent buildings should relate in similarity of scale, height, architectural style, and configuration. Transitions to dissimilar building types (i.e. detached house to commercial buildings) should generally occur at the rear lane/alley, rear property line, or in the next block. 
6.  Architectural elements like openings, sill details, bulkheads, posts, and other architectural features shall be used to establish human scale at the street level. 
7.  Buildings shall avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls or roof planes on their visible facades. Building wall offsets, including projections, recesses, and changes in floor level shall be used in order to: add architectural interest and variety; relieve the visual effect of a single, long wall; and subdivide the wall into human size proportions. Similarly, roofline offsets shall be provided to lend architectural interest and variety to the massing of a building and to relieve the effect of a single, long roof. For larger scale developments, the building façade shall create repetitive bays, or the façades shall be divided into a balanced, yet asymmetrical, composition. 
8.  Windows, doors, columns, eaves, parapets, and other building components shall be proportional to the overall scale of the building. Windows shall be vertically proportioned wherever possible. Also, to the extent possible, upper story windows shall be vertically aligned with the location of windows and doors on the ground level, including storefront or display windows. 
9.  Exposed metal buildings are prohibited. 
10.  All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view. 
2005.01  Detached house. 
    Description. The detached house is the predominant building type in the City of Buena Vista. It is flexible in use (where permitted), accommodating single family uses, multifamily uses up to four units, home occupations, professional offices, and limited retail uses. When other building types are integrated with detached houses, the scale of the detached house shall control (exception: civic buildings). The use permitted within the building is determined by the base zoning district in which it is located. 
2005.01-1  Lot requirements. 
2005.01-1.1  Type A: Lot requirements for alley lot. The alley lot is a lot with an average width less than 50 feet. Primary vehicular access is provided using a rear lane or alley only. No curb cuts or driveways are permitted along the frontage except on previously platted lots. 

a.  Setbacks: 
1.  Front build-to line: 10-25 feet. 
2.  Side: six feet each side, however the total of both side yards may be allocated to one side in new development. 
3.  Rear: 15 feet from centerline of alley. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 25 feet. 
c.  Maximum height: 21/2 stories. 
d.  Accessory structure side/rear setback: one foot. 
e.  Encroachments: Balconies, stoops, stairs, chimneys, open porches, bay windows and raised doorways are permitted to encroach into the front setback a maximum of eight feet. 
f.  Vehicular access to lot: For lots less than 50 feet wide, alley access is required. For all others the use of an alley is permitted. 


2005.01-2  Type B: street lot. The street lot is a medium or large sized lot (50 feet or greater in width) that provides primary vehicular access from the street. 

a.  Setbacks: 
1.  Front: 15 feet. 
2.  Sides: 20 percent of the lot width (in new developments, the entire setback may be allocated to one side). 
3.  Rear: 25 feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
c.  Maximum height: 21/2 stories. 
d.  Accessory structure side/rear setback: five feet. 
e.  Encroachments: balconies, stoops, stairs, chimneys, open porches, bay windows and raised doorways are permitted to encroach into the front setback a maximum of eight feet. 






2005.01-2  Architectural requirements. 
1.  Useable porches and stoops should form a predominate motif of the building design and be located on the front and/or side of the building. Useable front porches are at least six feet deep and extend more than 50 percent of the facade. 
2.  Garage doors are not permitted on the front elevation of any townhouse building. 
3.  Rear yard fences or walls (as measured from back wall of primary building) shall be no greater than eight feet in height. Other fences shall be no greater than four feet in height and walls no greater than three feet in height in the front yard setback. 
4.  All building elevations visible from the street shall provide doors, porches, balconies, and/or windows. A minimum of 60 percent of front elevations, and a minimum of 30 percent of side and rear building elevations, as applicable, shall meet this standard. Percent of elevation is measured as the horizontal plane (lineal feet) containing doors, porches, balconies, terraces and/or windows. This standard applies to each full and partial building story. 
5.  To provide privacy, all front entrances shall be raised from the curb grade a minimum of 11/2 feet. 
6.  All townhouse buildings shall provide detailed design along all elevations. Detailed design shall be provided by using at least three of the following architectural features on all elevations as appropriate for the proposed building type and style (may vary features on rear/side/front elevations): 
a.  Dormers. 
b.  Gables. 
c.  Recessed entries. 
d.  Covered porch entries. 
e.  Cupolas or towers. 
f.  Pillars or posts. 
g.  Eaves (minimum six-inch projection). 
h.  Offsets in building face or roof (minimum 16 inches) window trim (minimum four inches wide). 
i.  Bay windows. 
j.  Balconies. 
k.  Decorative patterns on exterior finish (e.g., scales/shingles, wainscoting, ornamentation and similar features). 
l.  Decorative cornices and roof lines (for flat roofs). 
2005.01-3  Materials. 
1.  Residential building walls shall be wood clapboard, wood shingle, wood drop siding, wood board and batten, cementitious fiber board, brick, stone, stucco, vinyl siding or materials similar in appearance and durability. Accessory buildings with a floor area greater than 150 square feet shall be clad in materials similar in appearance to the principal structure. 
2.  Garden walls may be of brick, stone or stucco matching the principal building. Front yard fences shall be wood picket, wrought iron or materials similar in appearance and durability. Side and rear yard fences may be wood, wrought iron, or similar material. All side and rear yard fences over four feet in height shall be wood or similar material. 
3.  Residential roofs shall be clad in wood shingles, standing seam metal, terne, slate, dimensional asphalt shingles or similar material. 
2005.01-4  Configurations. 
1.  Main roofs on residential buildings shall be symmetrical gables or hips with a pitch no less than 5:12. Monopitch (shed) roofs are allowed only if they are attached to the wall of the main building. No monopitch roof shall be less then 5:12. 
2.  Two wall materials may be combined horizontally on one facade. The heavier material should be below. 
3.  The crawlspace of buildings shall be enclosed. 
2005.01-5  Techniques. 
1.  Overhanging eaves may expose rafters. 
2.  Flush eaves shall be finished by profiled molding or gutters. 

2005.02  Townhouse. 
    Description. The townhouse is a building with two or more residential units that are located side-by-side. When an entrance is provided at-grade, the townhouse may be used as a live-work unit. The use permitted within the building is determined by the base zoning district in which it is located. 
2005.02-1  Lot requirements. 

a.  Setbacks: 
1.  Front (maximum): 0-15 feet. 
2.  Sides: zero feet (corner-6 feet). 
3.  Rear: 15 feet from centerline of alley. 
b.  Parking and vehicular access: Primary vehicular access is provided using a rear lane or alley only. Off-street parking shall be located in the rear yard only. No curb cuts or driveways are permitted along the frontage. 
c.  Minimum lot width: 16 feet. 
d.  Maximum height. three stories (42 feet). 
e.  Encroachments. Balconies, stoops, stairs, chimneys, open porches, bay windows, and raised doorways are permitted to encroach into the front setback. Upper story balconies may encroach into the right-of-way up to five feet with permission from the city council. 
2005.02-2  Accessory structures: 
1.  Side/rear setback: zero feet. 
2.  Maximum footprint: 650 square feet. 
3.  Maximum number of structures: zero. 

18-ft wide townhomes

24-ft wide townhomes 

Live-work units 
2005.02-3  Architectural requirements. 
1.  Useable porches and stoops should form a predominate motif of the building design and be located on the front and/or side of the building. Useable front porches are at least six feet deep and extend more than 50 percent of the facade. 
2.  Garage doors are not permitted on the front elevation of any townhouse building. 
3.  Rear yard fences or walls (as measured from back wall of primary building) shall be no greater than eight feet in height. Other fences shall be no greater than four feet in height and walls no greater than three feet in height in the front yard setback. 
4.  All building elevations visible from the street shall provide doors, porches, balconies, and/or windows. A minimum of 60 percent of front elevations, and a minimum of 30 percent of side and rear building elevations, as applicable, shall meet this standard. Percent of elevation is measured as the horizontal plane (lineal feet) containing doors, porches, balconies, terraces and/or windows. This standard applies to each full and partial building story. To provide privacy, all front entrances shall be raised from the curb grade a minimum of 11/2 feet. All townhouse buildings shall provide detailed design along all elevations. Detailed design shall be provided by using at least three of the following architectural features on all elevations as appropriate for the proposed building type and style (may vary features on rear/side/front elevations): 
a.  Dormers. 
b.  Gables. 
c.  Recessed entries. 
d.  Covered porch entries. 
e.  Cupolas or towers. 
f.  Pillars or posts. 
g.  Eaves (minimum six-inch projection). 
h.  Off-sets in building face or roof (minimum 16 inches) Window trim (minimum four inches wide). 
i.  Bay windows. 
j.  Balconies. 
k.  Wainscoting, ornamentation, and similar features). 
l.  Decorative cornices and roof lines (for flat roofs). 
7.  Decorative patterns on exterior finish (e.g. scales/shingles. 
2005.02-4  Materials. 
1.  Residential building walls shall be wood clapboard, wood shingle, wood drop siding, wood board and batten, cementitious fiber board, brick, stone, stucco, vinyl siding, or materials similar in appearance and durability. Accessory buildings with a floor area greater than 150 square feet shall be clad in materials similar in appearance to the principal structure. 
2.  Garden walls may be of brick, stone or stucco matching the principal building. Front yard fences shall be. 
3.  wood picket, wrought iron or materials similar in appearance and durability. Side and rear yard fences may be wood, wrought iron, or similar material. All side and rear yard fences over 4 ft in height shall be wood or similar material. 
4.  Residential roofs shall be clad in wood shingles, standing seam metal, terne, slate, dimensional asphalt shingles or similar material. 
2005.02-5  Configurations. 
1.  Main roofs on residential buildings shall be symmetrical gables or hips with a pitch no less than 5:12. Monopitch (shed) roofs are allowed only if they are attached to the wall of the main building. No monopitch roof shall be less then 5:12. 
a.  Two wall materials may be combined horizontally on one facade. The heavier material should be below. 
b.  The crawlspace of buildings shall be enclosed. 
2005.02-6  Techniques. 
1.  Overhanging eaves may expose rafters. 
2.  Flush eaves shall be finished by profiled molding or gutters. 
2005.03  Commercial building. 
    Description. A structure which can accommodate a variety of uses mixed either horizontally (shopping center) or vertically (apartment over a store). Office buildings, hotels and inns can be placed in commercial buildings. The use permitted within the building is determined by the base zoning district in which it is located. 
2005.03-1  Lot requirements. 

1.  Minimum height: 16 feet. 
2.  Maximum height: three stories (42 feet). 
3.  Setbacks: 
a.  Front: zero feet. 
b.  Sides: zero feet. 
c.  Rear: 20 feet. 
4.  Parking and vehicular access: Primary vehicular access is provided using a rear lane or alley only. Off-street parking shall be located in the rear yard only. 
5.  Minimum lot width: 32 feet. 
6.  Encroachments: Upper story balconies may encroach into the right-of-way up to three feet with permission from the city. 
2005.03-2  Accessory structures: side/rear setback: zero feet. 
2005.04  Commercial building. 
2005.04-1  Architectural requirements. 
2005.04-1.1  General requirements. 

Mixed Use 

Retail 
1.  At least 50 percent of the width of street level frontages shall be in windows or doorways. Street level windows shall be visually permeable. Mirrorized glass is not permitted in any location. Faux or display casements are not permitted in lieu of exterior window treatments for the frontage elevation. 
2.  No frontage wall shall remain unpierced by a window or functional general access doorway for more than 16 feet. 
3.  The principal, functional doorway for public or direct-entry access into a building shall be from the fronting street. Corner entrances shall be provided on corner lot buildings. 
4.  Decorative cornices shall be provided for buildings with a flat roof. Alternatively, eaves shall be provided with a pitched roof. 
5.  A building canopy, awning, or similar weather protection may be provided and should project three to five feet from the facade. 
2005.04-2  Materials. 
1.  Commercial building walls shall be brick, stucco, stone, marble, or other materials similar in appearance and durability. Regular concrete block may be used on building walls not visible from a public street. Decorative concrete block, siding, EIFS, and other minority elements may be used as an accent material only. All accessory buildings shall be clad in materials similar in appearance to the principal structure. 
2.  Pitched roofs shall be clad in wood shingles, standing seam metal, corrugated metal, slate, dimensional asphalt shingles or similar material. 
3.  Signs on the inside of glazed openings may be neon. 
2005.04-3  Configurations. 
1.  All visibly exposed facades shall have a recognizable base course, which shall align with the sill level of the first story consisting of, but not limited to: thicker walls, ledges or sills; integrally textured materials such as stone or other masonry; integrally colored and patterned materials such as smooth finished stone or tile; lighter or darker colored materials, mullions, or panels; and/or planters. 
2.  All visibly exposed facades shall have a recognizable top consisting of, but not limited to: cornice treatments, other than just colored stripes or bands, with integrally textured materials such as stone or other masonry or differently colored materials; sloping roof with overhangs and brackets; stepped parapets; and/or a cornice which shall terminate or cap the top of a building wall. 
Two wall materials may be combined horizontally on one facade. The heavier material should be below. 
3.  Skylights shall be flat (nonbubble). 
2005.04-4  Techniques. 
1.  Stucco shall be float finish. 
2.  Windows shall be set to the inside of the building face wall. 
3.  All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view. 

Mixed use 

Mixed use 

Grocery store 
2005.05  Civic building. 
    Description. Specialized public or semipublic buildings intended to serve as public gathering places. Such uses include governmental offices, churches or other places of worship, schools, hospitals, post offices and nonprofit or charitable clubs and organizations. 
2005.05-1  Lot requirements. 

a.  Setbacks (minimum): 
1.  Front: ten feet. 
2.  Sides: 15 feet. 
3.  Rear: 25 feet. 
b.  Accessory structure side/rear setback: five feet. 
c.  Minimum lot width: 70 feet. 
d.  Minimum lot size: none. 
e.  Maximum height: 42 feet (church spires, belfries, cupolas and other nonoccupied appurtenances are exempt up to a height of 60 feet). 
f.  Encroachments: Balconies, stoops, stairs, open porches, bay windows, and raised doorways are permitted to encroach into the front setback a maximum of ten feet. 

Governmental building 

Church 

School 
2005.05-2  Architectural requirements. 
a.  General requirements. 
1.  Schools, churches, and government buildings should be built so that they terminate a street vista whenever possible, and shall be of sufficient design to create visual anchors for the community. 
2.  Off-street parking shall be provided in the side or rear yards only unless shared parking is utilized. 
3.  Building(s) incidental to the principal structure shall be behind a line a minimum of 20 feet from the front facade of the structure, and if more than one, shall be arranged to create secondary gathering spaces within the lot. 
4.  Parking shall be located towards the interior of the lot. On-street parking may be used to fulfill parking requirements. Parking may not occur within a front setback or corner side setback though a driveway may be provided across the frontage for circulation and pick-up/drop-off only. 
5.  Front setbacks may be altered to preserve views or significant trees. 
2005.05-3  Materials. 
1.  Civic building walls shall be clad in clapboard, stone, stucco, brick or marble. Decorative cast concrete and wood or vinyl siding may be used as a minority element on facades facing public streets. 
2.  Civic roofs shall be clad in slate, sheet metal, corrugated metal, or dimensional asphalt shingles, or other material similar in appearance and durability. 
3.  Gutters and down spouts shall be made of copper or galvanized painted metal. or other material similar in appearance and durability. 
4.  The orders, if provided, shall be made of wood or cast concrete. 
5.  Stained glass or other decorative window treatments are encouraged. 
2005.05-4  Configurations. 
1.  Two wall materials may be combined horizontally on one facade. The heavier material should be below. 
2.  Flat roofs are allowed, but principal civic buildings adjacent to residential structures are encouraged to have pitched roofs or similar architectural features to ensure compatibility. 
2005.05-5  Techniques. 
1.  Windows shall be set to the inside of the building face wall. 
2.  All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view 
Sec. 2006.00. - Street types and standards. 
2006.01  Design standards. Street designs shall permit the comfortable use of the street by cars, bicyclists, and pedestrians. Pavement widths, design speeds, and the number of vehicle lanes should be minimized without compromising safety. The specific design of any given street must consider the building types which front on the street and the relationship of the street to the city's street network. New development with frontages on existing publicly maintained streets shall be required to upgrade all their frontages to meet the standards of this section. This Code encourages the development of a network of interconnecting streets that work to disperse traffic while connecting and integrating neighborhoods with the existing urban fabric of the city. Equally as important, the Code encourages the development of a network of sidewalks and bicycle lanes that provide an attractive and safe mode of travel for pedestrians and cyclists. Minor variations and exceptions to street cross sections may be permitted with approval of the planning director and the county engineer. Such exceptions include variations to the pavement width, size and location of on-street parking, tree planting areas, street grade, and centerline radii in accordance with principles below. Right-of-way widths should be preserved for continuity. All new streets shall be classified in accordance with the street hierarchy detailed in this chapter. 
1.  Streets shall interconnect within a development and with adjoining development. Cul-de-sacs are permitted only where topographic conditions and/or exterior lot line configurations offer no practical alternatives for connection or through traffic. Street stubs should be provided with development adjacent to open land to provide for future connections. Streets shall be planned with due regard to the designated corridors shown on the comprehensive plan. 
2.  Streets shall be designed as the main public space of the city and shall be scaled to the pedestrian. 
3.  Streets shall be bordered by sidewalks on both sides. 
4.  Streets shall be designed with street trees planted in a manner appropriate to their function. Commercial streets shall have trees which compliment the face of the buildings and which shade the sidewalk. Residential streets shall provide for an appropriate canopy, which shades both the street and sidewalk, and serves as a visual buffer between the street and the home. 
5.  Wherever possible, street locations should account for difficult topographical conditions, paralleling excessive contours to avoid excessive cuts and fills and the destruction of significant trees and vegetation outside of street-rights-of way on adjacent lands. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with the design and construction standards in this code and shall permit public access whether by easement or by public dedication. Closed or gated streets are strictly prohibited. 
6.  All on-street parking provided shall be parallel. Curb or angle parking is permitted when the fronting buildings are more than 26 feet in height to ensure a safe and usable pedestrian realm and where traffic speeds are very low (20 mph or less). 
7.  The use of traffic calming devices such as raised intersections, landscaping bulb-outs and traffic circles are encouraged as alternatives to conventional traffic control measures. 
2006.02  Design standards. The following specifications shall apply to street design and may vary from the standards set forth in section 904.09 of this ordinance: 
1.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of all streets except alleys and lanes. Cul-de-sacs and closes shall be reviewed on a site-by-site basis for this requirement. Residential sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in width. Sidewalks serving mixed use and commercial areas shall be a minimum of eight feet in width (ten-12 feet is preferable in front of commercial buildings). All sidewalks shall be constructed in brick pavers, concrete, or a similar material. Concrete sidewalks shall be a minimum of four inches in depth. 
2.  Street trees and planting strips. Canopy trees a minimum of 21/2-inch-caliper shall be planted in the planting strip or in tree wells spaced a minimum of 40 feet on-center. The minimum width of all planting strips, if required, shall be six feet. For large canopy trees such as willow oaks and red maples a minimum of eight-foot planting strip is required. 
3.  Cul-de-sacs. Where practical, a close should be used in place of a cul-de-sac. Cul-de-sacs, if permitted, shall not exceed 250 feet in length from the nearest intersection with a street providing through access (not a cul-de-sac). Cul-de-sacs shall be offset from the street centerline. 
4.  Curb return radii. Curb radii shall be designed to reduce pedestrian crossing times along all streets requiring sidewalks. In general, curb radii should not exceed 20 feet. 
5.  Utility location. Underground utilities (except water and sewer) should be located in alleys and lanes. If no alley or lane is provided, then a five-foot (minimum) utility easement shall be provided behind the sidewalk located within either the right-of-way or a public utility easement. 
6.  Curbs and drainage. Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with VDOT standards. Vertical face curbing is required along all streets with on-street parking and around all required landscaping areas and parking lots. Mountable curbing is permitted around center medians, roundabouts, and other features in order to facilitate the infrequent use by vehicles with larger turning radii. Valley curbing is permitted along streets which serve homes with front-loaded off-street parking or that have infrequent on-street parking. Streets with a grade exceeding two percent shall use standard curbs. Drainage shall be provided using curb and gutter piped systems along all streets except along parkways that may use open swales upon approval of the city engineer. All drainage grates must be safe for bicyclists. 
7.  Centerline radius. Centerline radii may be varied for low-speed streets in accordance with the following table (see also Institute for Transportation Engineers-Traditional Neighborhood Development Standards, p. 26): 
Design Speed Minimum Centerline Radius 10 mph 22 feet 15 mph 50 feet 20 mph 89 feet 25 mph 166 feet  
8.  Types of streets. 
a.  Commercial main streets. The main street serves as a small-scale, low-speed connector. main streets provide frontage for high-density buildings such as offices, shops, apartment buildings, urban mansions, and rowhouses. A main street is urban in character, with raised curbs, closed drainage, wide sidewalks, parallel parking, trees n individual planting areas and buildings aligned on short setbacks. 
1.  Right-of-way: 60-70 feet. 
2.  Design speed: 25 mph. 
3.  On-street parking: Marked. 

Commercial main street Residential street
b.  Residential streets. The street serves as a small-scale, low-speed connector. Local streets provide frontage for medium-to-low-density residential buildings such as detached homes and duplexes. A street is urban in character, with raised or rolled curbs, closed drainage, sidewalks, occasional parallel parking on one side, trees in continuous planting areas, and buildings aligned on medium setbacks. 
1.  Right-of-way: 50 feet. 
2.  Design speed: 15-25 mph. 
3.  On-street parking: Marked. 
c.  Minor street. The minor street is a small-scale, low-speed connector. It serves low-density residential buildings that accommodate all parking on-site. A minor street tends to be more rural in character with rolled curbs, open or closed drainage, narrow sidewalks, continuous plantings, and buildings set way back. On-street parking is not permitted except when the minor street is designed for one-way traffic. 
1.  Right-of-way: 40-50 feet. 
2.  Design speed: 20 mph. 

Minor street Rear alley
d.  Rear alley. The rear alley is a narrow access route behind neighborhood streets. Rear alleys generally have a narrow strip of paving in the center, concrete edging, and serve as areas for underground utilities. 
1.  Right-of-way: 24 feet. 
Sec. 2007.00. - Parking standards. 
2007.01  General principles. 
2007.01-1  Parking lots should not dominate the frontage of pedestrian-oriented streets, interrupt pedestrian routes, or negatively impact surrounding neighborhoods. Lots should be located behind buildings or in the interior of a block whenever possible. 
2007.01-2  Parking areas shall not abut pedestrian-oriented street intersections or civic buildings, be adjacent to squares or parks, or occupy lots which terminate a vista. 
2007.01-3  No off-street parking area shall be located within any front yard except for single-family residential uses not serviced by a rear alley. All off-street parking spaces for multifamily buildings shall be in the rear yard only. 
2007.01-4.1  Parking lots shall not occupy more than 1/3 of the frontage of the adjacent building or no more than 75 feet, whichever is less. 
2007.01-5.1  All parking areas visible from the right-of-way shall be screened from view. Parking structures shall be wrapped by buildings along the primary façade. 
2007.01-6  Off-street parking areas shall be designed to facilitate adequate movement and access by sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles without posing a danger to pedestrians or impeding the function of the parking area. 
2007.01-7  Off-street parking areas shall be designed so that parked vehicles do not encroach upon or extend onto public rights-of-way, sidewalks or strike against or damage any wall, vegetation, utility, or other structure. 
2007.01-8  Large surface parking lots should be visually and functionally segmented into several smaller lots. Alternative parking area designs incorporating planting islands and trees (such as a continuously planted 12-foot planting strip) shall create separate and distinct outdoor areas for no more than 36 cars per area. The size of any single surface parking lot shall be limited to three acres, unless divided by a street or building. 
2007.01-9  All parking areas shall be curbed using a standard curb with a minimum width of one foot six inches. Landscape islands shall be similarly curbed. 

2007.02  Parking space dimensions. 
1.  Parking space dimensions (other than those designed for the disabled) shall be a minimum of 18 feet long and nine feet wide. Parking spaces shall be dimensioned in relation to curbs or aisles, so long as their configuration, area, and dimensions satisfy the requirements of this section. 
2.  Parallel parking space dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 feet by eight feet. Parallel parking spaces along higher traffic streets should be at least 22 feet long. 
a.  Aisle widths and angle space dimensions shall be in accordance with the Manual of Architectural Graphic Standards, 10th edition. 
2007.03  Minimum parking ratios. All square footage is in leasable square feet. Parking requirements may be satisfied using on-street parking in front of buildings or public lots within 300 feet of primary building entrances. 
Single-family home 1 per bedroom (2 minimum) Duplex or multifamily home 1 per bedroom (2 minimum) Office uses 3 per 1000 square feet Retail uses 1 per 250 square feet Restaurants 1 per bedroom Bed and breakfast inns and hotels 1 per bedroom Churches One space for each ten seats in the main auditorium or sanctuary  
2007.04  Shared parking standards. The joint use of shared off-street parking between two uses may be made by contract between two or more adjacent property owners. Adjacent lots shall be interconnected where practical. Developments that operate at different times may jointly use or share the same parking spaces with a maximum of one-half of the parking spaces credited to both uses if one use is a church, theater, assembly hall or other use whose peak hours of attendance will be at night or on Sundays, and the other use or uses are ones that will be closed at night or on Sundays or upon the normal hours of operation. 
Sec. 2008.00. - Landscaping. 
    The three types of landscaping are defined as follows, and shall meet the following performance requirements. All new development, changes in principal use, and building expansions shall comply with these provisions. The responsibility for the installation shall rest solely with the proposed development and shall be located on the development's site or in a landscaping easement granted by an adjacent landowner. 
2008.01  Types of landscaping. 
A.  Type A (opaque screen/buffer). Location and required usage: 
1.  Rear and/or side transition yards between residential and nonresidential lots (minimum width: ten feet). 
2.  This type functions as an opaque screen from the ground to a height of at least eight feet. This type excludes visual contact between uses and creates a strong impression of spatial separation. Composition of the type A landscaping may include a wall, landscaped earthen berm, planted vegetation, existing vegetation, or any appropriate combination of these elements. Intermittent planting of deciduous and evergreen trees shall obtain a height at maturity of no less than 20 feet and have no unobstructed openings wider than ten feet between tree canopies upon maturity. Shrub plantings shall have a minimum height of three feet at installation and have no unobstructed openings wider than four feet. At least 50 percent of the required trees, and at least 75 percent of the required shrubs, shall be evergreen species locally adapted to the area. The use of existing vegetation to satisfy this requirement is encouraged. Supplemental planting may be required in addition to native materials. 
B.  Type B (semi-opaque screen). Location and required usage: 
1.  Perimeter yard of all multifamily, mixed-use, and nonresidential parking areas visible from the street (minimum width: ten feet). 
2.  This type functions as a semi-opaque screen from the ground to at least a height of four feet for screening of car lights and glare. Composition of the type B landscaping may include a wall, fence, planted vegetation, existing vegetation, or any appropriate combination of the elements. Intermittent planting of deciduous and evergreen trees shall obtain a height at maturity of no less than 20 feet and have no unobstructed openings wider than 20 feet between canopies upon maturity. Shrub plantings shall have no unobstructed openings wider than four feet. At least 75 percent of the required shrubs shall be evergreen species locally adapted to the area. 
3.  All side yard parking areas shall be screened from the sidewalk by low walls, fences or constructed as a continuation of the building wall a minimum of three feet in height. Landscaping may be used in combination with walls or fences but shall not exceed 50 percent of the total required width. The use of existing vegetation to satisfy this requirement is encouraged. Supplemental plantings may be required in addition to native materials. The minimum height upon installation for effectively screening storage areas is six feet. This type of planting should be opaque to screen the off-site view of parking areas from neighboring properties and streets. 
C.  Type C (interior plantings). Location and required usage: 
1.  Interiors of all parking areas with more than 16 parking spaces (not applicable to structured parking facilities). 
2.  This type functions as a tree ceiling over a parking area providing shelter from sun and rain. Large maturing canopy trees shall be planted in a manner that provides shade for the entire parking area at maturity. To this end, no parking space shall be less than 60 feet from the base of a canopy tree. The use of differing species around the parking area is encouraged to promote diversity in the overall urban tree canopy. The use of existing vegetation to satisfy this requirement is encouraged. Supplemental plantings may be required in addition to native materials. 
Sec. 2009.00. - Open space requirements. 
1.  All residential development except garage apartments and residential units in mixed-use buildings shall be subject to these provisions. 
2.  Common open space is defined as all areas not covered by building or parking lots, dry detention structures, streets, and required setbacks. The intent of these requirements is to allow for the usage of centrally located unencumbered land as neighborhood open spaces and not to permit the use of leftover or otherwise unusable land to fulfill the requirements of this section. 
3.  Residential development shall provide common open space at a rate of 500 square feet per bedroom unit. For the purposes of this calculation, developers shall make a good faith estimate at the time of preliminary plat submission. In general, single-family homes are calculated at a rate of three bedrooms per unit, unless otherwise specified. Greenways are credited towards this requirement at a rate equal to the length of the path times 16 feet in width. 
4.  Common open space shall be planned and improved, accessible and usable by persons living nearby. Improved shall mean cleared of underbrush and debris and shall contain one or more of the following improvements: landscaping, walls, fences, walks, statues, fountains, ball fields, and/or playground equipment. 
5.  Significant stands of trees, streambed areas, and other valuable topographic features shall be preserved within the required open space areas where practical. Areas noted on the comprehensive plan as open space should be preserved and dedicated where practical and feasible and may be left unimproved in accordance with the plan. 
6.  Playground equipment, statues, and fountains should be located toward the interior of squares and parks. 
7.  Common open space should be fronted by streets and buildings to encourage their use and patrol their safety. 
8.  Required common open space shall be separately deeded to either a homeowners' association, a nonprofit land trust or conservancy, the City of Buena Vista, or otherwise permanently protected through deed restriction. 
Sec. 2010.00. - Signs. 
2010.01  General provisions. 
1.  Monument signs are permitted only for commercial buildings setback further than 25 feet from the right-of-way and civic buildings. 
2.  Home occupations located in business districts located in detached houses are permitted to use arm signs. 
3.  Signs should not obscure architectural features and should be integrated with the design of the building. 
4.  Buildings should provide signage that is pedestrian-oriented. 
5.  All buildings may provide wall-mounted incidental signage such as tenant directories, historical makers, or bulletin boards on any wall face provided they do not exceed six square feet in area. 
6.  Sandwich board signs may placed on sidewalks with a minimum clear zone on the sidewalk of five feet per Americans With Disabilities Act requirements. 
7.  Canopy signs may be combined with a wall sign. 
8.  Only monument signs may be internally illuminated. 
2010.02  Freestanding sign standards. 
A.  Monument sign. 

1.  Maximum height: six feet. 
2.  Maximum area: 36 square feet. 
B.  Arm sign. 

1.  Maximum height: six feet. 
2.  Maximum area: six square feet. 
2010.03  Commercial building sign standards. 


A.  Canopy sign standards. 
1.  Maximum area: 50 percent of canopy area. 
2.  Drip flap area shall be unlimited. 
B.  Under-canopy sign standards. Maximum dimensions: 
1.  Height: 16 inches. 
2.  Width: 36 inches. 
3.  Sign clearance: 71/2 feet. 
C.  Wall sign standards. 
1.  Maximum area: Two square feet for each lineal foot of wall facing a public street. 
2.  Location: Between first floor and window sill of second floor, or on sign frieze area of building if original to building. (Exception): Building identification which is an integral part of the building design and architectural character shall not be considered a sign for the purposes of this standard.) 
3.  Maximum area: (Walls not fronting on a public street): Five percent of wall area. 
4.  Windows: signs may be placed on or behind windows but at no such time shall exceed 20 percent of the window area. 
5.  Murals or wall art: Murals or similar art located on secondary building walls (not primary footages) are permitted, provided the total area of commercial copy does not exceed five percent of the total wall area. 
Sec. 2011.00. - Definitions. 
2011.01  Accessory building means a structure subordinate or incidental to the principal structure on a lot in square footage and primary use. Accessory structures and uses include detached garages (with or without rental cottages), storage buildings, pool houses, and material storage areas. See also Garage/workshop. 
2011.02  Garage/workshop means an accessory building used for the storage of vehicles, materials, or similar items incidental to the function and use of the principal structure. Such structures may also be used for the manufacturing and/or fabrication of goods such as carpentry, provided such use is otherwise compliant with all home occupation requirements and does not constitute a nuisance through the excessive noise or vibration. 
2011.03  Live-work unit means small commercial enterprises with the ground floor occupied by commercial uses and a residential unit above. Commercial space may be a home-based business or may be leased independently. 
2011.04  Manufacturing, heavy, means the assembly, fabrication, production or processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily have greater than average impacts on the environment, or that ordinarily have significant impacts on the use and enjoyment of other properties in terms of noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards, or that otherwise do not constitute "light manufacturing," or any use where the area occupied by outdoor storage of goods and materials used in the assembly, fabrication, production or processing exceeds 25 percent of the floor area of all buildings on the lot. [The term] "heavy manufacturing" shall include, but not be limited to, the following: enameling, lacquering, or the plating or galvanizing of metals; foundries or mills producing iron and steel products; industrial chemical manufacture; meat packing plants; mixing plants for concrete or paving materials, and manufacture of concrete products; oxygen manufacture and/or storage; pottery, porcelain, and vitreous china manufacture; poultry dressing for wholesale; pressure treating of wood; stonecutting; tire recapping and retreading; tobacco products manufacture; tobacco stemming and re-drying plants. This shall include resource extraction and recycling and salvage operations. 
2011.05  Manufacturing, light, means the assembly, fabrication, production or processing of goods and materials using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside of the building or lot where such assembly, fabrication, production or processing takes place, where such processes are housed entirely within a building, or where the area occupied by outdoor storage of goods and materials used in the assembly, fabrication, production or processing does not exceed 25 percent of the floor area of all buildings on the lot. This shall not include uses that constitute heavy manufacturing, resource extraction, or recycling and salvage operations. 
2011.06  Rental cottage means an apartment located in an accessory building, secondary in size to the principal building, sharing ownership, site and utilities. The principal building shall be owner-occupied. 
2011.07  Sandwich board sign means a portable a-frame sign constructed with two faces that rest at an angle less than 45 degrees to each other. Neither face shall exceed three feet in width or 12 square feet in area. 
2011.08  Story means that part of a building or structure above ground level between a floor and the floor or roof next above. A mezzanine shall be considered a story if it exceeds one-third of the area of the floor immediately below. A penthouse shall be considered a story if it exceeds one-third of the area of the roof. The under roof area with dormers does not count as a story. 
2011.09  Wall sign means any sign directly attached to an exterior wall of a building or dependent upon a building for its support with its exposed face parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of the building or structure on which it is placed. Signs directly painted on walls shall be considered wall signs. 
TABLE 1. CITY OF BUENA VISTA LOT REGULATIONS BY DISTRICT 
Zone Standards
District Minimum Structure Requirements Minimum Lot Size Setback Frontage Right Side Both sides Rear Max. Height Main building Side lot line Rear lot line Height Other
C-1 Conservation N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 
R-1 Low Density Residential Single-family residential 1,200 sf single-family 12,500 21,780 35 100 15 30 35 35 10 5 5 35 N/A 
R-2 Residential Single-, two-family residential 1,200 sf single-family 9,375 sf 20,000 30 75 15 30 25 35 10 5 5 35 N/A 2,400 sf two-family (1,200 each) 6,250 sf for each additional unit 
R-3 Residential Limited Single-, two-and four-family residential (960 sf per unit) 960 sf single-family 6,250 sf 20,000 30 50 5 15 25 35 5 1 1 35 N/A 960 sf per dwelling 2-4 family dwelling 3,125 sf for each additional unit 
R-4 Medium Density Residential Single-family, multifamily 960 sf single-family 6,250 sf 20,000 30 50' for single- and two-family 10 20 25 35 20 10 10 35 Maximum density 15 units per acre 1,920 sf two-family (960 sf per unit) 3,125 sf for each additional unit 75' for three-family and greater (see j below for efficiencies) R-5 Residential Mobile home parks and subdivision N/A See table 2 R-6 Planned Unit Development Residential N/A Detailed plan required (see f below) B-1 General BusinessTc>Commercial development N/A except for res. structures which are as shown for R-4 None g N/A N/A h h N/A 35' 20' 20' 15' 35' N/A B-2 Planned Business Commercial development See B-1 None g N/A N/A h h N/A 35' 20' 20' 15' 35' Detailed pan required (see f below) LM Light Manufacturing Light industrial N/A None g N/A N/A 25' 50' N/A 45' 40' 20' 20' 45' N/A GM General Manufacturing Industrial N/A None G N/A N/A 25' 50' N/A 45' 40' 20' 20' 45' N/A REC Recreational N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A  
a. The height limit for dwellings may be increased by up to 45 feet and up to three stories provided each side yard is 20 feet, plus one foot or more of side yard for each additional foot of building height over 35 feet. 
b. A public or semi-public building such as a school, church, or library may be erected to a height of 60 feet from grade provided that required front, side, and rear yards shall be increased one foot for each foot in height over 35 feet. 
c. Church spires, belfries, cupolas, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antenna and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four feet above height of the building on which the walls rest. 
d. Accessory buildings over one story in height shall be at least ten feet from any lot line. All accessory buildings shall not exceed the main building in height. 
e. For buildings over 45 feet in height, approval shall be obtained from the administration. Chimneys, flues, cooling towers, flagpoles, radio or communication towers, or their accessory facilities, not normally occupied by workmen are excluded from this limitation. Parapet walls are permitted up to four feet above the limited height of the building on which the walls rest. 
f. Densities and use variations are approvable based upon the plan submitted for the proposed development. 
g. For permitted uses utilizing individual sewage disposal systems, the required area for any such use shall be approved by the health official. The administrator shall require greater area as considered necessary by the health official. 
h. Property located in a business district, which adjoins any residential district, or is separated from any residential district only by a public street or way, shall have a ten-foot side yard on the side or sides adjoining or adjacent to the residential district. 
i. Add 15 feet for corner lots. Minimum setback requirements of this ordinance, for yards facing streets, shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on developed lots within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same street is less than the minimum. In such cases, the setback on such lot may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the existing developed lots. 
j. Multifamily efficiencies: 1-bedroom-320 square feet; 2-bedroom-390 square feet; 3-bedroom-460 square feet. 
k. Heated living area, excludes garages, basements, patios, porches, etc. 
TABLE 2. CITY OF BUENA VISTA LOT REGULATIONS FOR MOBILE HOMES, PARKS, AND SUBDIVISIONS 
[Dimensions] Mobile Home Park Stand within Park Mobile Home Subdivision Subdivision Mobile Home Lot Area 130,680 sf (3 acres) 3,400 sf 435,600 sf 7,000 sf (5 acres) with approval of health official Setback (see section 701.01-3) 25 feet N/A 25 feet 20 feet Frontage at the setback line 150 feet 40 feet 150 feet 50 feet Side yard:  One side 25 feet 7.5 feet 25 feet 11 feet  Both sides 50 feet 15 feet 50 feet 22 feet Rear 25 feet 7.5 feet 25 feet 25 feet Height 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet Accessory buildings Not to exceed 35 feet in height Not to exceed height of mobile home Not to exceed 35 feet in height Not to exceed 35 feet in height  
Appendix A. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR THE CITY OF BUENA VISTA 

\Preface 
    Nestled in the mountains of Virginia, Buena Vista enjoys a beautiful setting, a rich diversity of people and neighborhoods, cultural and educational opportunities, and a tradition of active participation by its citizens in recreational and service related activities. It is quiet and safe community where you can imagine children growing up on every street. Now, the community faces the challenge of preserving and enhancing its positive attributes, and the quality of life that they offer, in a time of growth and change. This document establishes design standards to protect the quality of life in Buena Vista while allowing it to evolve into a truly great community of the 21st century. 
A.  Intention. Appendix A and the following appendixes have been approved by the Buena Vista City Council and are intended to aid citizens, builders, developers, designers, and the city of Buena Vista in the process of protecting and modifying the built environment within the city. By focusing on basic design principles, regulations, patterns, and standards this document is designed to protect the value and the quality of the neighborhood and to help situate the social, economic, and environmental health of the community. This document is not intended to address issues of ownership or land use. Instead, this document focuses on the design of the built environment. These standards are not intended to restrict or limit imagination, innovation, or architectural style, but instead, provide a framework of guiding rules that ensure the compatibility of building forms in relationship to massing, form, scale, texture, and material. 
B.  Guiding Principles. In order to create, conserve and encourage a more habitable urban environment within the Seminary Hill District of Buena Vista, the following five principles are the foundation of this document: 
1.  Livability. The creation and conservation of livable streets and neighborhoods. Most people will agree that they want to have livable streets and neighborhoods, but what does that mean? While difficult to quantify and define, "livable" is described by the American Planning Association as a place where people can bring up children, have privacy, sleep, eat, relax, and rest. It implies a place that is well managed and relatively devoid of nuisance, overcrowding, noise, danger, air pollution, dirt, and trash. During public meetings held in Buena Vista, the citizens described the qualities that add to the livability of their community as: a safe environment, pedestrian friendly streets, quiet, established neighborhoods, tree lined streets, access to natural beauty, a strong connection to downtown areas, and a sense of history. Furthermore, the citizens also described a list of attributes that detract from the livability of their community as: traffic and street problems, vacant stores, loss of landscaping and street trees, high percentage of heavy vehicles on roads, sidewalks that are not well maintained, new structures that are not compatible with the neighborhood, overgrown lots, lack of communication and understanding about current and future development, construction of housing that "average people" can afford, lack of restaurants and businesses, lack of retirement facilities, and inadequate zoning processes. 
2.  Critical mass. The creation of a minimum level of human and building density within an intensity of land uses. Urban fabric requires people to live, work, play, learn, and do all the things that people do in close proximity to each other in order to foster human exchange, public life, diversity, and community. Neighborhoods must be more than a stage set without people. There must be a critical mass of people that spend a lot of their time in the neighborhood, including time spent at home. 
3.  Integration. The encouragement of living, working, shopping, public, spiritual, and recreational uses in reasonable, walk-able proximity to each other. 
4.  Positive urban places. Manmade environments, particularly buildings, that define public space in a manner that creates a place, as opposed to buildings that, for the most part, sit in space. 
5.  Organic Growth. Many separate buildings with complex arrangements and relationships built over time, as opposed to a few, large buildings built all at once. 
The underlying concept of allowing a community to grow organically is based upon the recognition that the community is alive that it will grow and evolve over time. Growth that occurs in numerous small increments ensures the stability of the whole. As each proposed project applies for zoning approval, it shall be examined in relationship to the whole. In this way, two types of projects are discouraged: long-term, overly specific master plans, and extremely large projects. 
C.  Master plans. This principle of organic growth precludes zoning approval of a master plan without reserving the right and expectation of the zoning administrator to review each structure within that plan for approval at the point in time that the land owner is ready and committed to implement it. For example, a specific 20-year master plan could outline the construction of three specific buildings to be constructed every five years for the next 20 years. This approach is valid for fund raising, planning, and visioning purposes. While this document is not intended to prevent landowners from developing a vision, such a vision cannot be considered zoning approval. This latter approach would fail to take into account that the needs of the landowner, developer, and/or the community could significantly change during that 20-year period. The preferred master planning approach would be to have a more generalized vision for the long-term. That vision could then be developed into successive short-term master plans, not to exceed a five to seven year time frame each. While each shorter-term master plan cannot guarantee zoning approval of any specific project within the master plan, it would allow the city and the landowner to establish some common guidelines and understandings to work within. As each specific project within the plan was to be implemented, it would be independently presented and evaluated in the city zoning approval process. This preferred approach allows both the landowner and the city maximum flexibility to respond to external forces (i.e., economic and social forces), as well as, providing an environment for all parties to learn from the previous project in the master plan. Applying for zoning approval for a specific project requires the submission of all documents necessary for a building permit. Master plans generally do not provide this level of detail about a structure to be constructed. 
D.  Extremely large projects. This principle of organic growth is incompatible with extremely large, single building projects; instead, such projects may be authorized only through a conditional zoning process. For example, a landowner might wish zoning approval for a two million square foot parking garage. This principle would suggest a solution to incrementally build several smaller parking garages, and allowing each of the smaller garages to be built in response to its surroundings. This allows a greater mix of uses within the community and also lowers the financial risks involved in any single increment of construction. Please note, that large structures are not forbidden by this document; but they require a more rigorous review and approval process in order to protect the neighborhood. 
Appendix B. - BUILDINGS DESIGN STANDARDS 
    Individual projects and structures should be seamlessly linked to their surroundings in an organic and evolutionary manner. This issue is independent of the architectural style of the building. As each project is conceived, it shall be designed to provide positive urban space. A building should be placed and shaped in a manner that reinforces the street and alley grid structure. The urban place of the community is the space that is created by buildings and structures. Each project should be examined in terms of the space that it creates. This space should be well formed. In addition, a project might lend itself toward the creation of pedestrian walkways, or urban gardens. Through gradual, piecemeal growth the projects should add to the larger whole of the neighborhood. 
A.  General standards. 
1.  All proposed structures within the neighborhood must be built in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and ordinances. 
2.  All structures shall be built in compliance with the BOCA/CABO model building code as a minimum standard. 
3.  All new development must be careful to integrate into the existing neighborhood or district. Placement of new structures in residential districts shall take care to maintain privacy between existing structures. 
4.  The building footprint of any single structure shall not exceed 50 percent of the area of a city block, without going through the conditional use permitting process. 
5.  Single large buildings meeting or exceeding the sizes set forth below must receive a conditional use permit prior to construction: 
District Square feet Mixed Residential 10,000 Mixed Business 10,000 Institutional 25,000  
6.  Building designs shall be sensitive to the neighborhood character with regard to scale, style, and use of material, massing, and historical context. 

7.  Buildings are to be designed specifically for their site. Repetitive building designed used in other communities should not be used. If a landowner wishes to construct a building that was designed for a different location, or with no location in mind, then the landowner would need to go through the conditional use permitting process and demonstrate the compliance with the other standards in this document and the compatibility and appropriateness of the building to the neighborhood. 


Repetitive design
8.  Buildings shall achieve a human scale and pedestrian interest. This can be achieved by using elements like balconies, awnings, canopies, arcades, reveals, etc. 

9.  The glazing materials on the front elevation of buildings should not exceed 75 percent (50 percent in the mixed business district) of its overall surface area. The glazing materials on the ground floor of the front elevation of buildings should not be less than 50 percent of its overall surface area. 
10.  Buildings must be divided into increments or bays along the street front that respect the existing rhythm of the street. These bays should never exceed 50 feet. Wide structures should be subdivided along the street elevation with columns, pilasters, change in material, etc to break up the wall plane. The building may extend as necessary along the street front (200 feet, for example), but visible articulation of the mass must occur at a minimum of 50 foot increments, or as dictated by the surrounding structures. 


11.  Entrance doors shall be placed on the street front. Main entries should be prominent and easy to identify and distinguish from the storefront. Recessed entries are encouraged. In all cases, entrances from the street front must be established. This does not imply that additional entrances from parking areas, pedestrian walkways, gardens, etc. cannot be established. 

12.  Building facades shall be articulated and varied. Primary signs of residential life such as front porches, bays, and balconies shall face the street. In no case will a building be permitted where the street façade is an unarticulated blank wall. 



Blank walls are not allowed 
13.  Rooflines shall be varied through the use of a combination of story heights, chimneys, cupolas, dormers, etc. Traditional roof forms shall be used to relate structures within the neighborhood. 


14.  Where large structures are required, the mass shall be broken up into small units through the use of setbacks, landscaping, windows, doors or other design techniques. No single mass may be longer than 30 feet along the street. 




15.  All residential units shall have a primary "front door" that is articulated and that fronts the street, not interior blocks or parking facilities. Private backdoor entries are permitted providing access from alleys, garages, parking lots, etc. 
16.  Residential garages may be attached or detached from the home. In all cases, the garage shall be placed in a manner that limits their impact when viewed from the street. Attached garages may set no closer to the street than the front wall of the main structure. Rear-loading garages are encouraged. 




Appendix C. - BUENA VISTA DESIGN STANDARDS 
    Street design standards. The Buena Vista Street Design Standards must be met all by all streets requesting zoning approval within designated districts. The physical definition of streets and other public spaces are essential to the quality of place for the neighborhood. Streets are considered to be interlinked public spaces that should be designed to be safe, comfortable, and interesting to the pedestrian. Obviously streets must also adequately accommodate automobiles, but not at the expense of the pedestrian, accessibility, or openness. 
A.  General standards. 
1.  An engineer licensed in the State of Virginia shall design all streets. 
2.  Streets that will be dedicated to the city shall be built to VDOT standards. 
3.  All streets shall be built along the traditional rectilinear grid pattern of City of Buena Vista and have interconnected streets (no streets may end in a cul-de-sac). Exceptions to this standard may be granted on a case-by-case basis where topography prevents this street pattern from being implemented. In cases where topography prevents a traditional rectilinear street grid from being implemented, it is still required to have interconnected streets. 

4.  All new streets, except alleys shall be lined with trees 


5.  Street vistas. All streets, except alleys should frame vistas of core areas, public buildings, parks, and/or other natural features. Any street that terminates should do so at significant buildings or places. Because the property at the end of a street vista becomes the centerpiece of the urban street fabric, its design must be considered by more carefully. 


6.  On-street parking is required on all streets, except alleys and thoroughfares. 

7.  In alleys, utilities (power lines, telephone, cable, etc.) may be above ground. All other streets and roads shall have all associated utilities (power lines, telephone, cable, etc.) buried below ground. 
8.  All new intersections within the neighborhood shall have the pattern of a sidewalk bulb stamped into the asphalt everywhere that there is on street parking. This is a matter of stripping and no a matter of actual elevation changes in the street cross-section. The use of a true, elevated sidewalk bulb is not required. This bulb pattern flares out into the parking lane. While it does not encroach upon the traffic lanes, it does provide a visual hierarchy between pedestrian and car. 

9.  All streets, except alleys shall have curb and gutter on both sides of the roadway and be designed to flow into a stormwater management system that is approved by the city. 
; 

B.  Materials. Materials shall provide a nonmonolithic texture, color, and pattern for the pedestrian. Additionally, the sidewalks and crosswalks shall exist in contrast to the road surface. For example, given a standard black asphalt road surface, the sidewalks and crosswalk surfaces could be continuous brick, cobblestone, or stamped, dyed asphalt. Alternatively, the surfaces could also be a more monolithic material such as asphalt or concrete, if the materials above are used to articulate the pedestrian surfaces and create an appropriate pattern. An example of this would be five feet square concrete pads surrounded with brick pavers. 

C.  Street types. In order to meet the diverse transportation needs of the neighborhood we recognize that several types of streets may be necessary or desired ranging from more pedestrian oriented streets to more vehicular oriented streets. Towards this realization, we have developed three street typologies, which are designed to meet these various needs. Over time it may be necessary to revise these prototypical streets or to add new prototype streets to this typology. All streets in subject to these regulations shall be designated to be one of the street types specified in this document. All currently existing streets (public or private) shall belong to the "Town Street" category until such time as the city changes its designation. No modifications to streets are required until such time as significant renovations, modifications, or construction is done to the street. If a landowner chooses to make significant modifications to structures along a street, the corresponding street improvements may be required by the city. When a new street is proposed, whether that street is public or private, it shall be designated to be one of the street types specified in this document and built to those standards. 
1.  Thoroughfare; description. The intention for this street type is to handle increased traffic along major access roads running through a commercial area. It is envisioned that Beech Avenue and 29th Street West of Ridge Avenue could be expanded in the future to this type of street reviving the old historic downtown, mixed-use nature of these streets. The road would be a divided highway with each side of road having two travel lanes plus a parking lane. 
Design Criteria 
Design Speed Trees Lighting/Trees 35 mph 25'-0" on center flowering trees 3'-5' (surface shall be landscaped)  
Parking Lane Travel Lanes Medium Sidewalk 8'-10' (2 lanes) at 12'-0" 5'-10' (with approved flowering trees) 7'-10'  

Thoroughfare street profiles

Thoroughfare plan view
2.  Town street; description. Typical neighborhood mixed-use street creates an intimate environment that maintains drive-by visibility to stores, businesses, and institutions. Wide sidewalks, limited curb cuts, street trees, awnings, and arcades should be used to encourage an active pedestrian environment. 
Design Criteria 
Design Speed Travel Lanes Parking Lane 25 mph (2 lanes) at 10'-12' 8'-10'  
Trees Lighting/Trees Sidewalk 25'-0" on center flowering trees or 50'-0" on center shade trees 3'-5' (surface may be landscaped or sidewalk) 10'-15'  

Town street profile

Town street plan view
3.  Pedestrian streets; description. The pedestrian streets have wide sidewalks with arcades forming a promenades, squares, and centers that identify offices, laboratories, lecture halls, student quarters, etc. While, mixed-use development is encouraged throughout the neighborhood, it is envisioned that the institutional district will generate a high-density population that mostly pedestrian. The pedestrian street requires the incorporation of appropriate locations for bike racks in addition to parking. While the use of landscaping is required, it may be located at both sides of the street, or in the center creating a common. 
Pedestrian Street with Commons Design Criteria 
Design Speed Travel Lanes Parking Lane 15-20 mph 2 lane at 10' 8'-10'  
Trees Landscaped Common Sidewalk 25'-0" on center flowering trees 15'-30' (surface must be landscaped) 10'-20'  

Pedestrian street profile

Pedstrian street plan view
Pedestrian Street Without Commons Design Criteria 
Design Speed Travel Lanes Bike Lane Parking Lane 15-20 mph (2 lanes) at 10' 4' 8'-10'  
Lighting/Trees Sidewalk 25'-0" on-center flowering trees 5'-10' (surface must be landscaped) 10'-0'  

Pedestrian street profile

Pedestrian street plan view
4.  Alley; description. Buena Vista has a rich street grid network of consisting of both streets and alleys. In all future development this network, including the alleys shall be continued. Alleys provide access to individual parcels. By placing garages and utilities along the alley, the street is both safer and more pleasant. 
Design Criteria 
Design Speed Utility ROW Travel Lanes 10-15 mph 10' (1 lane) at 10'  

Alley street profile
Appendix D. - SIDEWALK DESIGN STANDARDS 
A.  General standards. 
1.  All streets, except alleys shall have sidewalks on both sides of the street. 


2.  Crosswalks shall be provided at all intersections in a manner that extends the natural flow of the sidewalk for the pedestrian. All sidewalks and crosswalks shall have a minimum unobstructed width of 5'. 

3.  Handicapped ramps shall be placed at all crosswalks and curb cuts. 
Appendix E. - BUENA VISTA DESIGN STANDARDS 
A.  Parking design standards general standards. It is expected that on-street parking will contribute substantially to everyday parking need. Please reference "[section] 703.03-1, parking space requirements for all districts" for the land use and the parking space requirement. 
B.  Surface lots. Parking shall be located in the rear or side of buildings. In no case will parking lots be allowed to be placed in front of a building, or be set any farther forward on the lot than the main structure on a lot. 
(Ord. of 12-18-2008, Att. A) 


1.  In areas where surface parking lots border the street edge, a vegetation border shall be established. This border may include grass, flowers, trees and hedges. 


2.  When a corner lot is used for parking, a three-foot garden wall that may incorporate seating may be used in place of hedges and screen planting. 

3.  The parking lot shall be designed to allow pedestrians to safely move from their vehicles to the building. In order to achieve this, a sidewalk shall be placed at the perimeter of the lot. In lots that have more than 20 spaces, pedestrian corridors shall be implemented within the parking area to channel pedestrians from the car to the perimeter of the lot. A paving material that is different from that of the vehicular area shall delineate these corridors. 


C.  Structured parking. 
1.  The use of structured parking facilities is highly encouraged, but not required by the City of Buena Vista. 
2.  Parking structures shall be located behind some kind of wall or facade, so that the cars and parking do not dominate the public street. The wall may be buildings, housing, shops, and natural features. Parking structures are encouraged to incorporate other uses at the street level in order to protect the street frontage. If a parking structure does not contain other uses, then it shall demonstrate a careful and respectful street elevation design. 


3.  Commercial, institutional and municipal garages shall be designed to blend in with the neighborhood and shall abide by building design standards 

(Ord. of 12-18-2009) 
Appendix F. - MISCELLANEOUS DESIGN STANDARDS 
A.  Bicycles. 
1.  Bicycle plan. A coordinated system of bikeways is planned for the City of Buena Vista, including the Seminary Hill Overlay District. Bike routes shall link important destinations throughout the city, such as core commercial areas, employment centers, parks, open spaces, schools, and other community facilities. Additionally, this plan shall be designed to link the city bicycle network with the development of a regional bicycle plan. Individual development projects shall make provision for constructing portions of the approved plan that lie within the project, as well as providing appropriate links to the network when it abuts the project. 
2.  Bicycle lane. A designated division of a roadway for the preferential or sole use of bicyclists designated through the use of pavement markings, striping and special signing. For bicyclists to feel comfortable, a bicycle lane should be at least five feet wide for a rural type roadway and at least four feet wide for a roadway with curb and gutter. A bicycle lane should be clearly marked with a four-inch to eight-inch wide stripe delineating the lane and appropriate signage. Individual development projects shall provide bicycle lanes as appropriate to accommodate this portion of the traveling public. 

3.  Separate bicycle path. A bikeway physically separated from motorized vehicles by an open space barrier, which is open to all forms of nonmotorized traffic. These facilities can be constructed adjacent to a street or highway with adequate safeguards that motorized vehicles will not attempt to enter the path. To be successful, bicycle paths should be designed to avoid conflict points with streets and other obstacles through the provision of bridges or underpasses. Careful attention should also be taken regarding overall security when paths are located in less developed areas. If there is enough right-of-way, bicycle paths should be at least ten feet wide, and optimally up to 12 feet in width if a great deal of pedestrian use is expected. Individual development projects shall make provision for constructing portions of a bicycle path shown on the approved plan that lie within the project, as well as providing appropriate links to any bicycle path abutting the project. Bicycle paths should be included among amenities planned for park and open space areas. 
4.  Bicycle parking facilities. Bicycle parking facilities must be provided throughout the neighborhood. These facilities should not block pedestrian routes. Bicycle parking facilities include bike racks, checks and lockers. Bike racks shall be provided at shopping, school, and recreational destinations. 
B.  Private lighting. 
1.  In an effort to make the city as interesting and inviting at night and in the evening as it is in the daytime, property owners and/or developers shall be encouraged to light signs and symbols, architectural details, landscaping, and other portions of building that are of public interest. Other enhancements such as sparkling lights strung in trees, on trellises, and on awnings are encouraged. Ground level walkway lighting in passageways and courtyards that will benefit visitors, as well lighting to illuminate landscaping and special features such as art also are encouraged. 
2.  Lighting shall be directed toward walls, landscaping or the ground, and should neither create glare nor be obtrusive to neighboring property. Landscaping, special effects (such as water features and trellises) and lighting treatments shall be subtle and designed to maintain the area's ambiance. When using external illumination, any lighting shall be directed toward the sign or building and shielded so as to illuminate only the sign or building. 


CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1967 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1967 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1967 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1967 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1, 1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-2 1-4 1-3 1-17 1-4 1-7 1-5 1-3 2-1 2-3 2-2 2-1 2-2.1 18-26 2-4, 2-5 2-58, 2-59 2-6 2-132 2-7 2-286 2-8 2-63 2-9 2-129 2-11 2-71 2-12 2-127 2-13 2-61 2-14 2-60 2-15 2-68 2-16 2-62 2-17 2-126 2-18 2-128 2-19, 2-20 2-64, 2-65 2-21 2-169 2-22 2-69 2-23 2-131 2-24 2-174 2-25 2-170 2-26 2-208 2-27 2-67 2-28 2-70 2-29-2-33 2-202-2-206 2-34 2-163, 2-164 2-35 2-165 2-36 2-167 2-37 2-171 2-38 2-207 2-39 2-166 2-40 2-168 2-41 2-173 2-42 2-66 2-43 2-172 2-44 2-101 2-45 2-130 2-46 2-102 2-47 2-106 2-48 2-105 2-49 2-104 2-50 2-103 2-51, 2-52 2-259, 2-260 2-53 2-240 2-54 2-287 2-55 2-309 2-56 2-308 2-57 2-310 2-58 2-261 2-59 2-2 2-60 2-340 2-61 2-339 2-62 2-343 2-63 2-342 2-64 2-341 3-1 14-21 3-2 14-20 3-3 14-19 4-2 4-4 4-3 4-2 6-3 8-50 8-57 6-4-6-9 8-51-8-56 6-10 8-21 6-11 8-50 6-12 8-22 6-21 8-22 8-1, 8-2 12-42, 12-43 8-3, 8-4 12-19 10-1, 10-2 1-14, 1-15 11-1 18-1 11-2 18-23 11-3 18-21 11-4 18-25 11-5 18-24 11-6 18-27 11-7 18-90 11-8, 11-9 18-110, 18-111 11-10 18-109 12-1 10-78, 10-79 12-2-12-4 10-80-10-82 12-5 10-82 12-6 10-78 12-7 10-84 12-9, 12-10 10-83, 10-84 12-11 10-112, 10-113 12-12 10-114 16-1 32-6 16-2 32-1 16-4, 16-5 32-3, 32-4 16-6 32-8 32-10 16-7 32-9, 32-10 16-8 32-11 16-9 32-594 16-10 32-12 16-11 32-23 32-123 16-12 32-57, 32-58 32-450 16-13 32-53 16-14, 16-15 32-59, 32-60 16-16 32-63 16-17 32-25 16-18 32-61 16-21 32-64 16-22 32-19 16-23 32-55 16-24 32-65 16-25-16-27 32-20-32-22 16-29 32-29 16-30 32-31 16-31 32-2 16-32 32-14 16-33 32-477 16-34 32-16 16-35 32-478 16-37 18-22 16-38, 16-39 32-479, 32-480 16-40 32-446 16-41 32-453 16-42, 16-43 32-352, 32-353 16-44, 16-45 32-499, 32-500 16-46 32-500 16-47 32-502 16-48, 16-49 32-506, 32-507 16-50 32-503 16-51 32-505 16-52 32-508-32-510 32-512 16-53, 16-54 32-514, 32-515 16-55 32-517 16-56-16-61 32-323-32-328 16-63, 16-64 32-330, 32-331 16-65 32-329 16-66 32-347 16-67 32-333 16-68 32-332 16-69, 16-70 32-334, 32-335 16-71 32-337 16-73 32-336 16-74, 16-75 32-338, 32-339 16-76, 16-77 32-341, 32-342 16-78 32-345 16-79 32-5 16-80 32-348 32-604 16-81, 16-82 32-350, 32-351 16-83 32-547 16-83-16-89 32-7 16-84 32-550-32-559 16-85 32-549 16-86 32-560 16-87 32-546 16-88, 16-89 32-562, 32-563 16-90, 16-91 32-414, 32-415 16-91 32-416 16-92, 16-93 32-602, 32-603 16-94 32-597 16-95 32-605 16-96 32-608 16-97, 16-98 32-610, 32-611 16-100, 16-101 32-598, 32-599 16-103 32-614 16-104 32-198 16-105 32-222 32-227 16-106, 16-107 32-223, 32-224 16-108 32-226 16-109 32-601 16-112 32-124 16-113-16-118 32-126-32-131 16-119 32-146 16-120, 16-121 32-134, 32-135 16-122 32-133 16-123 32-132 16-124 32-136 16-125 32-248 16-127-16-130 32-249-32-252 16-131, 16-132 32-137, 32-138 16-132 32-199 32-600 16-133 32-302 16-134, 16-135 32-139, 32-140 16-136 32-300 16-138 32-301 16-139 32-145 16-140 32-151 16-142 32-121 16-143, 16-144 32-147, 32-148 16-145-16-147 32-177-32-179 16-148 32-176 16-149-16-152 32-182-32-185 16-152 32-188 16-153-16-156 32-191-32-194 16-158, 16-159 32-195, 32-196 16-160, 16-161 32-792, 32-793 16-162 32-791 16-163-16-166 32-794-32-797 16-167 32-736 32-798 16-168 32-800 16-170 32-801 16-171, 16-172 32-861 16-173 32-872 16-174 32-859 16-176 32-679 16-177 32-677 16-178 32-680 16-184 32-729 16-185 32-728 16-186, 16-187 32-731, 32-732 16-188 32-735 16-189 32-734 16-190 32-737 16-191-16-194 32-758-32-761 18-1 22-30 18-2 22-22 18-3 22-20 18-5 22-23 18-6 22-18 18-7 22-4 18-8 22-28 18-9 22-1 18-10 22-3 18-11 22-17 18-12 22-33 18-14 22-19 18-15 22-25 18-16, 18-17 22-11, 22-12 18-19 22-21 18-19.1 22-26 18-20 22-2 18-21 22-5 18-22 22-32 18-23 22-24 18-24 22-34 18-24.1 22-27 18-25, 18-26 22-29 18-27-18-30 22-13-22-16 19-1-19-3 26-19-26-21 19-4 26-26 19-5 26-22 19-6, 19-7 26-24, 26-25 19-8 26-23 21-1 2-569 21-2 2-568 21-3 2-571 21-4 2-570 23-1 32-893 24-1 28-1 24-3 28-21 24-7 28-23 24-8 28-22 24-8.1 28-24 24-9, 24-10 28-54, 28-55 24-11, 24-12 28-58, 28-59 24-13, 24-14 28-56, 28-57 25-1 34-19 25-3 34-137 25-3.1, 25-3.2 34-20, 34-21 25-4 34-50 25-5 34-55 25-6, 25-7 34-51, 34-52 25-8, 25-9 34-56, 34-57 25-10 34-49 25-11 34-48 25-12 34-58 25-13 34-53 25-15 34-54 25-16 34-79 25-17 34-81 25-17.1 34-80 25-18 34-55 25-24 34-59 26-1 10-191 26-2 10-193 26-3 10-195 26-4 10-194 26-5 10-167 26-7 10-250 26-8-26-10 10-214-10-216 26-12-26-14 10-217-10-219 26-15 10-189 26-16 10-188 27-1 30-2 27-2 30-1 27-3, 27-4 30-13, 30-14 27-5 30-3 27-6 30-5 27-6.1 30-8 27-7 30-4 27-8 30-7 27-9 30-9 27-10, 27-11 22-26 27-12 30-11 27-13 30-10 27-14 30-12 27-14.1 30-6 27-15-27-17 30-76-30-78 27-18 30-80 27-19 30-79 27-20 30-75 27-21, 27-22 30-36, 30-37 27-23 30-39 27-24 30-38 27-25 30-40 27-26 30-42 27-27 30-41 27-28 30-43 27-29 30-35 27-30 30-34 28-1 16-19 28-2-28-4 16-22-16-24 28-4.1 16-185 28-5 16-154 28-15 16-155 28-16 16-25 28-17 16-27 28-18 16-26 28-20 16-27 29-1 36-19 29-2 36-25 29-3 36-24 29-4 36-22 29-5 36-31 29-6 36-23 29-8 36-29 29-9 36-28 29-10, 29-11 36-26, 36-27 29-12 36-30 29-13 36-20 29-14-29-16 36-51-36-53 29-17 36-55 29-18 36-54 29-19-29-22 36-56-36-59 29-23 36-63 29-24 36-60 29-25 36-62 29-26 36-61 29-27 36-85 29-28 36-87 29-29 36-89 29-30 36-88 29-31 36-90 29-32 36-92 29-33 36-91 29-34 36-97 29-35, 29-36 36-93, 36-94 29-37 36-96 29-38 36-95 29-39 36-86 30-1 22-6 30-2 22-9 30-3 22-7 30-4 22-10 30-5 22-8 31-1 34-495 31-2 34-493 31-3 34-492 31-4 34-497 31-5 34-494 34-539 31-6 34-534 31-7 34-502 31-8 34-501 31-9 34-535 31-9.2 34-536 31-10, 31-11 34-537, 34-538 31-12-31-14 34-540-34-542 31-16 34-498 31-17 34-491 31-18 34-500 31-19 34-499 31-20 34-505 31-21 34-490 31-22 34-504 31-23 34-503 31-24 34-496 31-25 34-567 31-26 34-569 31-27 34-568 32-1 22-81-22-88 32-2-32-5 22-63-22-66  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1981 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1981 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1, 1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-2 1-4 1-3 1-3 1-4-1-14 1-7-1-17 2-1-2-3 2-1-2-3 2-21 2-27 2-31-2-44 2-58-2-71 2-51-2-56 2-101-2-106 2-66-2-69 2-126-2-129 2-71-2-73 2-130-2-132 2-81-2-92 2-163-2-174 2-101-2-107 2-202-2-208 2-119 2-240 2-126, 2-127 2-259, 2-260 2-139, 2-140 2-286, 2-287 2-141 2-308 2-153 2-309 2-154 2-261 2-155 2-310 2-167-2-171 2-339-2-343 3-1-3-3 14-19-14-21 3-21-3-23 8-352-8-354 4-1, 4-2 4-1, 4-2 4-3 4-4 6-16 8-21 6-21, 6-22 8-22 6-24 8-23 6-31-6-38 8-50-8-57 7-1, 7-2 12-19 7-16, 7-17 12-42, 12-43 9-1 18-1 9-16-9-22 18-21-18-27 9-34 18-90 9-41-9-43 18-109-18-111 10-1, 10-2 10-78, 10-79 10-4-10-8 10-80-10-84 10-21-10-23 10-112-10-114 13-1-13-7 32-1-32-7 13-9-13-26 32-8-32-25 13-27, 13-28 32-25 13-29, 13-30 32-26, 32-27 13-35-13-38 32-28-32-31 13-51-13-63 32-53-32-65 13-76-13-80 32-90-32-94 13-91-13-98 32-117-32-124 13-99-13-113 32-126-32-140 13-114-13-125 32-142-32-153 13-137-13-150 32-175-32-188 13-151-13-159 32-191-32-199 13-166-13-171 32-222-32-227 13-181-13-185 32-248-32-252 13-201-13-220 32-283-32-302 13-236-13-242 32-323-32-329 13-244-13-251 32-330-32-337 13-253-13-258 32-338-32-343 13-259-13-262 32-345-32-348 13-263-13-269 32-350-32-356 13-270-13-272 32-414-32-416 13-291-13-294 32-446-32-449 13-296-13-300 32-450-32-454 13-316, 13-317 32-477, 32-478 13-318-13-320 32-478-32-480 13-336, 13-337 32-499, 32-500 13-338-13-341 32-500-32-503 13-342, 13-343 32-505, 32-506 13-345-13-356 32-507-32-518 13-371 32-547 13-372, 13-373 32-549, 32-550 13-373 32-551-32-559 13-374 32-560 13-375 32-546 13-376 32-562 13-378 32-564 13-391-13-396 32-594-32-599 13-398-13-406 32-600-32-608 13-407, 13-408 32-610, 32-611 13-409, 13-410 32-613, 32-614 13-431, 13-432 32-634, 32-635 13-446-13-449 32-677-32-680 13-481-13-490 32-728-32-737 13-506-13-509 32-758-32-761 13-526-13-533 32-791-32-798 13-534-13-536 32-800-32-802 13-556-13-560 32-828-32-832 13-576-13-588 32-858-32-870 13-589 32-872 13-1377 32-563 16-1-16-19 22-1-22-19 16-21-16-31 22-20-22-30 16-32-16-36 22-32-22-36 17-1, 17-2 24-1, 24-2 18-1 10-167 18-16-18-23 10-188-10-195 18-36-18-38 10-214-10-216 18-40-18-42 10-217-10-219 18-57 10-250 19-1, 19-2 2-536, 2-537 20-16-20-23 26-19-26-26 21-1-21-4 2-568-2-571 22-2 32-893 23-1-23-3 34-19-34-21 23-4 34-137 23-8 34-22 23-17-23-27 34-48-34-58 23-29, 23-30 34-59, 34-60 23-36-23-38 34-79-34-81 23-66, 23-67 34-136, 34-137 23-71 34-138 23-73 34-139 24-2 28-1 24-16 28-21 24-20 28-22 24-22-24-24 28-23-28-25 24-31-24-36 28-54-28-59 25-1-25-14 30-1-30-14 25-31-25-40 30-34-30-43 25-52-25-57 30-75-30-80 26-1, 26-2 16-19, 16-20 26-3-26-5 16-22-16-24 26-42, 26-43 16-25, 16-26 26-45, 26-46 16-27, 16-28 26-47, 26-48 16-28, 16-29 26-54-26-61 16-47-16-54 26-65-26-68 16-106-16-109 26-69-26-72 16-132-16-135 26-76, 26-77 16-154, 16-155 26-101-26-104 16-183-16-186 26-175 16-211 26-176-26-184 16-213-16-221 26-185 16-212 26-190-26-194 16-251-16-255 26-195 16-255 26-200 16-274 26-201, 26-202 16-276, 16-277 26-204 16-278 26-206 16-279 26-213 16-275 26-214 16-280 26-221 16-311 27-1-27-13 36-19-36-31 27-26-27-38 36-51-36-63 27-51-27-63 36-85-36-97 28-17 14-174 29-1-29-16 34-490-34-505 29-31-29-40 34-534-34-543 29-56-29-58 34-567-34-569 30-1 22-63 30-2 22-81-22-88 30-3-30-6 22-64-22-67 6.5-17-6.5-19 20-19-20-23 6.5-20 20-27 11.5-16-11.5-19 10-19-10-23 11.5-20, 11.5-21 10-25, 10-26 11.5-22-11.5-25 10-28-10-31 11.5-30-11.5-37 10-142-10-149  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 74-6 10-24-1974 1-13 75-07  6-12-1975 28-24 75-12  7-24-1975 32-6 75-13  8-28-1975 12-19 76-20  1- 8-1976 34-534 76-26  8-12-1976 24-2 77-09 10-13-1977 1(a)-(f) 16-154 6 16-155 78-01  2- 9-1978 16-20 78-03  4-27-1978 32-606 78-13  3-22-1979 32-90-32-93  6-14-1979(Ord.) 16-19  6-28-1979(Ord.) 16-47-16-54 34-52 34-493 34-534  7-12-1979(Ord.) 4-1  8-23-1979(Ord.) 32-607  2-28-1980(Ord.) 26-20  4-10-1980(Ord.) 28-4.1 16-183 28-4.2, 28-4.3 16-185, 16-186 28-4.5 16-184  4-24-1980(Ord.) 16-47 16-50 16-52  6-26-1980(Ord.) 16-25 16-27  7-10-1980(Ord.) 28-24 12-11-1980(Ord.) 1 20-21 2 20-19 3, 4 20-22, 20-23 5, 6 20-27 7 20-20  1- 8-1981(Ord.) 3-1, 3-2 10-19, 10-20 3-3, 3-4 10-22, 10-23 3-5, 3-6 10-25, 10-26 3-7-3-10 10-28-10-31 3-11 10-21  4- 9-1981(Ord.) 32-91  5-28-1981(Ord.) 34-52  7-23-1981(Ord.) 34-60 34-137 34-502 12-10-1981(Ord.) 34-136-34-139  1-12-1982(Ord.) 1(a)-1(d) 16-106-16-109 2(a)-2(d) 16-132-16-135  2-11-1982(Ord.) 1-3 8-352-8-354 12- 8-1983(Ord.) 16-28  6-14-1984(Ord.) 16-52 10-25-1984(Ord.) 16-24 16-27 11- 8-1984(Ord.) 22-35  5-30-1985(Ord.) 28-24  1- 8-1987(Ord.) 16-29  5-28-1987(Ord.) 32-92  6-11-1987(Ord.) 16-211-16-221  6-25-1987(Ord.) 34-22 10-22-1987(Ord.) 32-91 12-10-1987(Ord.) 2-537  5-11-1989(Ord.) 32-594, 32-595  5-25-1989(Ord.) 16-28  5-26-1989(Ord.) 28-24  9-14-1989(Ord.) 16-311  9-28-1989(Ord.) 16-52 11- 9-1989(Ord.) 16-251-16-254 22-67 32-93, 32-94 12-14-1989(Ord.) 32-6 1 10-142-10-149  5-31-1990(Ord.) 28-24  7-26-1990(Ord.) 8-23  9-13-1990(Ord.) 22-65  9-27-1990(Ord.) 22-64 12-13-1990(Ord.) 16-255  6-13-1991(Ord.) 32-6 LDR608.00  1-23-1992(Ord.) 28-25  7-16-1992(Ord.) 22-36  7-23-1992(Ord.) 14-174  9-23-1992(Ord.) 32-27  6-10-1993(Ord.) 16-254 16-274-16-279  2-17-1994(Ord.) 22-65  6-23-1994(Ord.) 22-33  4-13-1995(Ord.) 28-24 34-20 34-535  5-23-1996(Ord.) 2-392 16-35 22-37  6-13-1996(Ord.) 34-535  6-27-1996(Ord.) 14-262 10-10-1996(Ord.) I 16-351 A 16-342 B 16-341 C-F 16-343-16-346 G, H 16-349, 16-350 10-24-1996(Ord.) 13-411 32-615 11-26-1996(01)(Ord.) 8-1, 8-2 14-46, 14-47 11-26-1996(02)(Ord.) 13-6 32-6  1-23-1997(Ord.) 2-438  6-12-1997(Ord.) 22-89  7-24-1997(Ord.) 2-438 11-13-1997(Ord.) LDR 602.00 LDR 603.00 LDR 604.00 LDR 605.00 LDR 606.00 LDR 608.00 LDR 610.00 LDR 611.0 LDR 613.00 LDR 1301.00 LDR 1302.00 LDR 1303.00 LDR 1304.00 LDR 1305.00 LDR 1306.00 LDR 1307.00 LDR 1308.00 LDR 1309.00 LDR 1310.00 LDR 1311.00 LDR 1313.00 LDR 1314.00 LDR 1315.00 LDR 1401.00 LDR 1402.00 LDR 1403.00 LDR 1404.00 LDR 1405.00 12-11-1997(Ord.) 16-351  5- 7-1998(Ord.) 28-24  6-11-1998(Ord.) 16-379  7- 7-1998(Ord.) 16-402  9-10-1998(Ord.) 16-379  2-16-1999(Ord.) 16-379  4- 8-1999(Ord.) 36-26  5-13-1999(Ord.) 34-535  7-22-1999(Ord.) 30-104  8-14-1999(Ord.) LDR 710.00 11- 4-1999(Ord.) 36-26  6- 8-2000(Ord.) 14-262 32-1  7-13-2000(Ord.) I 16-274 II, III 16-276, 16-277 IV 16-280 V 16-279 VI 16-278 VII 16-281 VIII 16-275 10-12-2000(Ord.) 26-76 16-154 26-77, 26-78 16-156, 16-157 26-79 16-155 12-14-2000(Ord.) 5-1-5-9 6-1-6-9 5-21-5-25 6-39-6-43 5-26 6-46 5-36 6-67 5-38-5-44 6-68-6-74 5-56-5-64 6-92-6-100 5-76-5-78 6-129-6-131 5-91-5-94 6-161-6-164 12-14-2000(Ord.) LDR 1501.00 LDR 1502.00 LDR 1503.00 LDR 1504.00 LDR 1505.00 LDR 1506.00 LDR 1507.00 LDR 1508.00  5-17-2001(Ord.) 34-20  7-12-2001(Ord.) LDR 602.00 LDR 603.00 LDR 604.00 LDR 605.00  9-13-2001(Ord.) 32-797 12-13-2001(02)(Ord.) 34-79 12-13-2001(03)(Ord.) 34-79 12-13-2001(04)(Ord.) 34-567 12-13-2001(05)(Ord.) 34-567  6-13-2002(Ord.) 14-262 32-1  8- 8-2002(Ord.) 2-440 16-52  9-12-2002(01)(Ord.) 32-6  9-12-2002(02)(Ord.) 32-7 12-12-2002(Ord.) 34-544  4-10-2003(Ord.) LDR 1908 LDR 2000.00 LDR 2002.00 LDR 2003.00 LDR 2003.01 LDR 2003.02 LDR 2003.03 LDR 2003.04 LDR 2003.05 LDR 2003.06 LDR 2003.07 LDR 2003.08 LDR 2003.09 LDR 2003.10 LDR 2003.11 LDR 2003.12 LDR 2003.13 LDR 2003.14 LDR 2003.15 LDR 2003.16 LDR 2003.17 LDR 2003.18 LDR 2003.19 LDR 2003.20 LDR 2003.21 LDR 2003.22 LDR 2003.23 LDR 2003.24 LDR 2003.25 LDR 2003.26 LDR 2003.27 LDR 2003.28 LDR 2003.29 LDR 2003.30 LDR 2003.31 LDR 2003.32 LDR 2003.33 LDR 2003.34 LDR 2003.35 LDR 2003.36 LDR 2003.37 LDR 2003.38 LDR 2003.39 LDR 2003.40 LDR 2003.41 LDR 2003.42 LDR 2003.43 LDR 2003.44 LDR 2003.45 LDR 2003.46 LDR 2003.47 LDR 2003.48 LDR 2003.49 LDR 2003.50 LDR 2003.51  9-11-2003(Ord.) 30-15 10- 2-2003(02)(Ord.) 16-37 22-37 10- 2-2003(Ord.) 32-659 11-13-2003(01)(Ord.) 32-6 11-13-2003(02)(Ord.) 32-7  6-10-2004(Ord.) LDR 302.26 LDR 605.00  8-12-2004(Ord.) 16-465  9- 9-2004(Ord.) 2-464-2-473 10-14-2004(Ord.) 16-433 18-58  1-13-2005(Ord.) 32-92  2-10-2005(Ord.) 34-539  3-10-2005(Ord.) 32-602 11-10-2005(Ord.) 32-141  2- 7-2006(Ord.) LDR 506.00  5-11-2006(Ord.) 32-594-32-596 1, 2 34-162, 34-163 3.1 34-195 3.2 34-196 3.3 34-197 3.4 34-198 3.5 34-199 3.6 34-200 4.1 34-224 4.2 34-225 5.1 34-244 5.2 34-245 5.3 34-246 5.4 34-247 5.5 34-248 5.6 34-249 5.7 34-250 5.8 34-251 5.9 34-252 5.10 34-253 6.1 34-285 6.2 34-286 6.3 34-287 6.4 34-288 6.5 34-289 6.6 34-290 6.7 34-291 6.8 34-292 6.9 34-293 6.10 34-294 6.11 34-295 6.12 34-296 6.13 34-297 6.14 34-298 6.15 34-299 6.16 34-300 6.17 34-301 6.18 34-302 7.1 34-323 7.2 34-324 7.3 34-325 7.4 34-326 7.5 34-327 7.6 34-328 7.7 34-329 7.8 34-330 7.9 34-331 7.10 34-332 7.11 34-333 8.1 34-355 8.2 34-356 8.3 34-357 8.4 34-358 8.5 34-359 8.6 34-360 8.7 34-361 8.8 34-362 8.9 34-363 8.10 34-364 9.1 34-387 9.2 34-388 10.1 34-420 10.2 34-421 10.3 34-422 10.4 34-423 10.5 34-424 11.1 34-447 11.2 34-448 11.3 34-449 12.1 34-467 12.2 34-468  7-13-2006(Ord.) 2-4  5-10-2007(Ord.) 2-438 8-1, 8-2 14-46, 14-47 8-3-8-6 14-49-14-52 8-7 14-48 8-8 14-53  1-13-2008(Ord.) LDR 1706 LDR 610.00 LDR 1102.00 LDR 1103.00  1-18-2008(Ord.) LDR 703.00  2-10-2008(Ord.) LDR 1604.00  3-13-2008(02)(Ord.) 712 LDR 712.00  4-10-2008(Ord.) LDR 302.26 LDR 807.00 LDR 808.00  4-13-2008(Ord.) LDR 1501.00 LDR 1502.00 LDR 1504.00 611 LDR 611.0  5-10-2008(Ord.) LDR 506.00 LDR 801.00 LDR 802.00 LDR 1001.00 LDR 1004.00  5-27-2008(Ord.) 16-19-16-21 34-20 34-535  6- 8-2008(Ord.) LDR 601.00 LDR 613.00 12-18-2008(Ord.) I-VII 2-500-2-506 Att. A LDR, App. E 12-18-2008(2)(Ord.) 14-262 15-1-15-3 14-109-14-111 15-4 14-113 15-5 14-112 15-6-15-10 14-114-14-118 15-11-15-13 14-150-14-152 15-14-15-16 14-173-14-175 15-17, 15-18 14-204, 14-205 15-19 14-234 15-21 14-288 15-22 14-310 15-23, 15-24 14-339, 14-340 15-25-15-30 14-369-14-374  1-18-2009(Ord.) LDR 302.26 LDR 1501.00 LDR 1504.00  2-19-2009(Ord.) LDR 602.00 LDR 603.00 LDR 604.00 LDR 605.00  4-13-2009(Ord.) LDR 1501.00  4-16-2009(Ord.) 1, 2 8-244, 8-245 5 8-246 6-121-6-123 8-137-8-139 6-124 8-162 6-125-6-128 8-193-8-196 6-129 8-199 6-130, 6-131 8-197, 8-198 6-132 8-200 6-133 8-224 6-134 8-225  5-21-2009(Ord.) 16-19-16-21 16-253  6-18-2009(Ord.) 2-439  8-20-2009(Ord.) 4-1  9- 3-2009(Ord.) 14-1, 14-2 14-80, 14-81 14-3 14-83 14-4 14-82 14-5-14-11 14-84-14-90  9- 6-2009(Ord.) LDR 904.00 2003.01 LDR 2003.01 2003.02 LDR 2003.02 2003.03 LDR 2003.03 2003.04 LDR 2003.04 2003.05 LDR 2003.05 2003.06 LDR 2003.06 2003.07 LDR 2003.07 2003.08 LDR 2003.08 2003.09 LDR 2003.09 2003.10 LDR 2003.10 2003.11 LDR 2003.11 2003.12 LDR 2003.12 2003.13 LDR 2003.13 2003.14 LDR 2003.14 2003.15 LDR 2003.15 2003.16 LDR 2003.16 2003.17 LDR 2003.17 2003.18 LDR 2003.18 2003.19 LDR 2003.19 2003.20 LDR 2003.20 2003.21 LDR 2003.21 2003.23 LDR 2003.22 2003.24 LDR 2003.23 2003.25 LDR 2003.25 2003.27 LDR 2003.26 LDR 2003.27 2003.28 LDR 2003.28 2003.29 LDR 2003.29 2003.30 LDR 2003.30 2003.31 LDR 2003.31 2003.32 LDR 2003.32 2003.33 LDR 2003.33 2003.34 LDR 2003.34 2003.35 LDR 2003.35 2003.36 LDR 2003.36 2003.37 LDR 2003.37 2003.38 LDR 2003.38 2003.39 LDR 2003.39 2003.4 LDR 2003.24 2003.40 LDR 2003.40 2003.41 LDR 2003.41 2003.42 LDR 2003.42 2003.43 LDR 2003.43 2003.44 LDR 2003.44 2003.45 LDR 2003.45 2003.46 LDR 2003.46 2003.47 LDR 2003.47 2003.48 LDR 2003.48 2003.49 LDR 2003.49 2003.50 LDR 2003.50 2003.51 LDR 2003.51 LDR 2004.00 12-17-2009(Ord.) 36-22 15-20 14-111 14-262 12-18-2009(Ord.) LDR, App. E 10-1  5-20-2010 34-20 34-535 11-1  2-17-2011 12-75, 12-76 11-10  9-15-2011 6-121 8-322 6-122 8-271 6-124-6-127 8-291-8-294 6-128 8-323, 8-324 12-02  4-19-2012 5-10 6-10 12-09  5-24-2012 16-276 12-10  5-24-2012 16-213 13-01  1-24-2013       Rpld 14-80-14-90 14-1-14-9       Added 14-81-14-89 13-02  2-21-2013 Att. A       Added LDR 2003.02-12 13-03  3-21-2013 Adopting ord., 
pg. xi 13-04  4- 4-2013 Att. B       Added LDR 614.00 13-05  4- 4-2013 Att. C LDR 711 14-01  3- 6-2014 Exh. A       Added LDR 614.04-11B 14-07  6- 5-2014       Added LDR 1801.00-1801.23 16-02  4- 7-2016 14-109-14-374 16-07 10- 6-2016       Added 2-441 16-08 10- 6-2016       Added 32-900-32-909 18-01  1-18-2018       Rpld LDR 702 18-03  1-18-2018 LDR Art. 10 intro       Rpld LDR 1001-1003 18-04  2-15-2018       Added 22-38 18-05  3- 1-2018       Added 32-951, 32-952  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter, Code and Land Development Regulations, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Virginia Statutes. 
Code of Virginia 
Section Section 

this Code 1-200 et seq. 1-2 1-217 1-3 2.2-614.3 Ch. 10, Art. V 2.2-1112 32-134 2.2-3300 2-3 2.2-3700 et seq. Char. § 3.9       Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2 2-71 2.2-3707 2-59 2-102 2.2-3705.6.11 2-503 2.2-4337 2-506       Ch. 10, Art. V, Div. 4 3.1-896.40 6-1 3.2-6500 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) 3.2-6521       Ch. 6, Art. II, Div. 3 3.2-6522 6-1 3.2-6524-3.2-6569       Ch. 6, Art. II 3.2-6524 6-40 3.2-6530 6-40 3.2-6531 6-42, 6-43 3.2-6532 6-45 3.2-6538 6-68 3.2-6540 6-4 3.2-6546- 
3.2-6548 Ch. 6, Art. II, 
Div. 2 3.2-6546 6-99 3.2-6546C 6-71 3.2-6554 6-8 3.2-6557 6-74 3.2-6585 6-5 4.1-100 et seq. Char. § 2.4 Ch. 4 (note) 4.1-100 22-83 4.1-129 4-1 4.1-308 4-2 4.1-309 4-3 4.1-333 22-83 4.2-613.3 32-62 8.01-388 32-551 9.1-101 22-81 10.1-560 et seq. 14-46 LDR 906.00 Ch. 14, Art. III 10.1-561 14-49 14-50 10.1-561.1 14-49 10.1-562 14-49 10.1-562K 14-48 10.1-563 14-50 10.1-563E 14-50 10.1-565 14-51 10.1-566 14-52 10.1-569 14-48 10.1-604 et seq. 14-47 10.1-1100 et seq. 14-47 LDR 1801.03 10.1-1163B 14-47 LDR 1801.03 10.1-1400 32-299 10.1-1414 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 30-11 10.1-1142 22-37 10.1-1450 32-299 13.1-501 et seq. 16-341 15.1-136.2 18-26 15.1-235.1 Ch. 12 (note) tit. 15.2 8-324 14-110 tit. 15.2, ch. 22 LDR 103.00 15.2-100 Char. (note) 15.2-106 2-4 15.2-109 LDR 706.00 15.2-207 Char. § 1.3 15.2-900 et seq. Ch. 14 15.2-900 22-2 15.2-901 Ch. 8, Art. IV Ch. 14, Art. V 15.2-904       Ch. 14, Art. V, Div. 6 32-27 15.2-911-15.2-914       Ch. 10 (note) 15.2-913 10-188 15.2-915.3 22-89 15.2-918 Ch. 14, Art. IV 15.2-922.1 Ch. 18 22-37 15.2-925 22-27 15.2-926 22-32 22-33 22-36 15.2-930 Ch. 28 (note) 15.2-953 18-26 15.2-974       Ch. 18, Art. IV, Div. 2 15.2-980 14-84 15.2-1100 et seq. Char. § 2.1 15.2-1104 Char. § 2.2 Ch. 16 (note) 16-19 15.2-1113 Ch. 18, Art. IV 22-64 15.2-1114 Ch. 10, Art. II Ch. 10, Art. V 15.2-1115 Ch. 8 (note) 15.2-1124 Char. § 2.4 15.2-1127       Ch. 14, Art. V, Div. 2 15.2-1400 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 15.2-1405 Char. Art. 2 15.2-1429 1-14 15.2-1432 8-225 15.2-1433 1-1 1-11 1-12 15.2-1521       Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 3 15.2-1534 2-26 15.2-1605 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VIII 15.2-1608.1 Char. § 3.940 15.2-1630 Char. § 3.943 15.2-1636.1 Char. § 3.941 15.2-1636.20 16-21 15.2-1700 2-568 Ch. 22 (note) 15.2-1704 Ch. 2, Art. IX 15.2-1710 2-569 15.2-1714 Ch. 32, Art. XVIII 15.2-1716 32-7 Ch. 32, Art. XI 15.2-1720 Ch. 32, Art. XV       Ch. 32, Art. XV, Div. 3 32-761 15.2-1731 Char. § 5.908 15.2-1806 Ch. 24 (note) 15.2-1900 et seq. Char. § 2.3 15.2-2001 32-677 15.2-2009-15.2-2012       Ch. 30 (note) 15.2-2013 22-28 32-12 15.2-2014 Ch. 30, Art. III 15.2-2015 Ch. 36, Art. II 15.2-2024 Ch. 30, Art. II 15.2-2025 30-13 15.2-2108.23 Ch. 16, Art. XI 15.2-2109 Ch. 34, Art. III 15.2-2111 34-19 15.2-2122 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 15.2-2143 34-535 15.2-2146 Ch. 34, Art. VI 15.2-2200 et seq. Ch. 26 (note) LDR (note) 15.2-2200 LDR 201.00 LDR 802.00 15.2-2204 LDR 607.00 LDR 806.00 LDR 807.00 LDR 808.00 LDR 2003.27 15.2-2208 LDR 1102.00 15.2-2209 LDR 1103.00 15.2-2210 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II 15.2-2210 26-19 15.2-2212 26-20 26-21 26-22 26-26 15.2-2214 26-24 15.2-2217 26-25 15.2-2221 26-23 15.2-2240 et seq. LDR 810.00 LDR Art. 9 (note) 15.2-2241 LDR 902.00 15.2-2245 LDR 2003.51 15.2-2271-15.2-2278       LDR 911.00 15.2-2288.3 14-85 15.2-2306       LDR Art. 16 (note) LDR 1601.00 LDR 1609.00 15.2-2308 Char. § 3.6 15.2-2311 LDR 801.00 15.2-2500 et seq. Char. § 3.906 15.2-2500 Char. § 4.1 2-309 15.2-2511 Char. § 4.3 15.2-2513 Char. Art. 4 (note) 15.2-4900 et seq. 2-392 16.1-69.6 Char. § 2.4 16.1-278 et seq. 22-31 16.1-278.5 22-33 16.1-278.9 32-546 32-548 16.1-279.1 22-6 17-59 LDR 902.00 17.1-281 2-438 17.1-281D 2-439 17.1-287 Char. § 3.944 17.1-410B 22-83 17.1-500 et seq. Char. § 5.1 18.1-54 32-546 18.2-1 et seq. Ch. 22 (note) 18.2-8 Char. § 3.51 18.2-9 1-14 18.2-11 32-2 18.2-27 22-1 18.2-36.1 22-83 32-447 32-546 32-560 32-563 18.2-51.4 22-83 22-546 32-447 32-561 32-563 18.2-57 22-4 18.2-95(iii) 22-5 18.2-96 22-5 18.2-119 22-6 18.2-121 22-10 18.2-128 22-7 18.2-128B 22-7 18.2-130 22-9 18.2-137 22-11 18.2-140 22-12 18.2-144 6-7 18.2-146 22-13 18.2-147 22-14 18.2-148 22-15 18.2-175 2-571 18.2-178.8 32-548 18.2-179 22-17 18.2-212 22-18 18.2-212.1 32-802 18.2-214 et seq. 10-167 18.2-216 Ch. 14, Art. II 18.2-247 et seq. 22-83 18.2-251 22-83 32-564 18.2-258.1H 32-564 18.2-266 et seq. 32-7 Ch. 32, Art. XI 18.2-266 22-83 32-447 32-546 32-547 32-549 32-550 32-551 32-552 32-553 32-556 32-557 32-558 32-561 32-562 32-563 18.2-266(i)-(v) 32-550 32-558 18.2-266(i) 32-550 32-564 18.2-266(ii)-(iv) 32-560 32-564 18.2-266.1 32-548 32-549 32-550 32-551 32-552 32-553 32-556 32-557 32-558 32-562 18.2-267 32-549 18.2-268.1-18.2-268.12       32-549 32-550 32-560 32-562 32-563 18.2-268.2 32-550 32-551 32-555 32-557 32-559 18.2-268.3 32-551 32-555 32-559 32-563 18.2-268.3A 32-552 18.2-268.4 32-552 32-555 32-559 18.2-268.5 32-553 32-554 32-555 32-559 18.2-268.6 32-554 32-555 32-559 18.2-268.7 32-555 32-559 18.2-268.8 32-556 32-559 18.2-268.9 32-557 32-559 18.2-269 32-560 18.2-270 32-546 32-547 32-548 18.2-270E 32-551 32-563 18.2-270.1 32-561 18.2-270.2 32-560 32-561 18.2-271 32-448 32-548 32-562 32-563 18.2-271.1 32-548 32-556 32-561 32-654 18.2-271.1E 32-447 32-451 32-505 32-563 18.2-271.2 32-564 18.2-272 32-447 32-451 32-563, 
32-564 18.2-272B 32-550 32-551 32-552 32-556 32-557 32-558 18.2-278.9 32-548 18.2-278B 32-549 18.2-280 22-64 22-83 18.2-282 22-63 22-83 18.2-286.1 22-83 18.2-301C 32-505 18.2-308       Ch. 22, Art. II, Div. 2 22-89 18.2-308A-C 22-82 18.2-308D-L 22-83 18.2-308M, N 22-81 18.2-308O 22-84 18.2-308P 22-85 18.2-308P.1 22-86 22-87 18.2-308Q 22-88 18.2-308R 22-88 18.2-308.1:1-18.2-308.1:4       22-83 18.2-308.2 22-83 18.2-308.2C 22-83 18.2-309 10-145 18.2-319 22-19 18.2-325 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. III 18.2-325 10-78 18.2-326 10-79 18.2-329 10-80 18.2-330 10-81 18.2-331 10-82 18.2-332 10-83 18.2-340.2 10-113 18.2-340.3 10-114 18.2-340.15 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. III, 
Div. 3 18.2-344 22-20 18.2-345 22-21 18.2-365 22-22 18.2-366 22-23 18.2-387 22-25 18.2-388 4-4 22-24 22-83 18.2-403.1-18.2-403.4       Ch. 6 (note) 18.2-404 22-26 18.2-405 22-27 18.2-406 22-28 18.2-415 22-29 22-35 18.2-416 22-30 18.2-434 22-83 18.2-460 22-34 18.2-463 2-570 19.2-8 Ch. 8 (note) 8-225 19.2-30 et seq. Char. § 3.6 19.2-59 32-23 19.2-82 32-31 19.2-152.10 22-6 19.2-182.7 22-83 19.2-187.1A 32-555 32-557 19.2-187.1B 32-555 32-557 19.2-260 et seq. 32-552 19.2-354 1-15 19.2-386.30 10-84 19.2-386.34 32-546 20-103 22-6 22.1-1 et seq. Char. § 6.3 23-232 et seq. 22-81 24.2-1 et seq. Ch. 12 24.2-200 Char. § 3.906 24.2-222.1 Char. § 3.4 Char. § 3.7 Ch. 12, Art. IV 12-75 12-76 24.2-223 Char. § 6.2 12-76 24.2-226 Char. § 3.5 24.2-304.1-24.2-309       Ch. 12, Art. III 24.2-307 Char. § 3.1 24.2-310 Ch. 12, Art. II 25.1-102 Char. § 2.3 27-1 et seq. Ch. 18 27-1 18-24 27-2 18-24 27-6.1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 27-13 Char. § 3.929 27-14 18-25 27-15.1 18-21 18-22 18-23 27-30 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 27-96 Ch. 18, Art. IV 18-111 27-96.1 18-109 27-97       Ch. 18, Art. IV, Div. 2 18-111 32.1-163 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 32.1-167 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. VI 32.1-177 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) 33.1-12 LDR 709.00 33.1-48 32-515 33.1-69 LDR 709.00 33.1-224 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 33.1-348 LDR 704.00 36-70 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) LDR 302.13 36-96-2 20-23 36-96-9-36-96.20 20-27 36-96.1:1 20-19 36-96.3 20-19 20-22 20-23 36-96.4 20-19 20-24 36-96.5 20-19 20-22 36-96.6 20-19 20-25 36-96.7 20-26 36-96.9 20-19 36-97 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 8-21 36-98 Ch. 8 (note) 36-99.01 Ch. 14, Art. V       Ch. 14, Art. V, Div. 2 36-105 Ch. 8 (note) 36-105(C)(3) 8-225 36-105.1:1 Ch. 8, Art. III 8-137 8-139 8-162 8-193 36-105.1:1(B) 8-162 36-105.1:1(B)(3) 8-162 36-105.1:1(E) 8-196 36-105.1:1(F) 8-197 8-198 36-105.1:1(G) 8-199 36-105.1:1(H) 8-200 36-106 8-225 37.2-1012 22-83 40.1-79.1 18-58 40.1-117 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) tit. 45.1 LDR 1801.03 45.2-800 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. VI 45.2-802 32-730 45.2-803 32-325 45.2-824 32-338 45.2-826 32-341 tit. 46.2 32-6 32-55 32-56 32-61 46.2-100 14-111 22-7 32-1 32-27 32-185 32-197 32-291 32-550 32-561 32-564 32-900 32-951 46.2-102 32-13 46.2-103 32-23 46.2-104 32-57 32-450 46.2-108 32-24 46.2-109 32-829 32-831 46.2-110 32-828 46.2-111A 32-598 46.2-111B 32-599 46.2-112 32-153 46.2-113 32-1 32-2 32-344 32-454 46.2-300 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. VIII 32-453 46.2-300 32-446 32-448 46.2-301 32-447 46.2-301.1 32-447 46.2-302 32-448 46.2-303-46.2-308       32-446 46.2-304 32-447 46.2-310 Char. § 2.4 Ch. 32, Art. VIII       Ch. 36, Art. II, Div. 3 46.2-325 32-446 46.2-329 32-451 46.2-341.1 et seq. 32-447 32-448 32-505 32-562 32-564 46.2-341.4 32-561 46.2-341.24 22-83 32-447 32-560 32-562 32-563 46.2-341.24A 32-546 32-562 32-564 46.2-341.26:1- 
46.2-341.26:11 32-562 46.2-341.28 32-564 46.2-346 32-452 46.2-349 32-453 46.2-350 32-454 46.2-357 32-447 46.2-368 32-514 32-903 46.2-371 et seq. 32-860 46.2-371 32-862 46.2-372 32-863 32-864 46.2-373 32-597 32-865 32-871 46.2-374 32-867 46.2-376 32-866 46.2-377 32-868 46.2-378 32-869 46.2-379 32-870 46.2-381 Ch. 32, Art. XVIII 32-860 46.2-381 32-863 46.2-389 32-563 46.2-391 32-561 32-563 46.2-391.2 32-447 32-548 32-551 32-552 32-562 32-563 46.2-391A 32-562 46.2-395 32-447 46.2-392 32-503 46.2-393 32-505 46.2-398 32-449 32-500 32-505 32-564 32-861 46.2-435 et seq. 32-448 46.2-489 et seq. 32-612 tit. 46.2, ch. 6 6-10 46.2-600 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. II 46.2-613 32-53 32-58 46.2-613.2 32-60 46.2-613.3 32-62 46.2-616 32-56 46.2-617 32-55 46.2-618A 32-61 46.2-644.03 32-55 46.2-655 et seq. 32-53 32-58 46.2-655-46.2-661       32-19 46.2-660 32-63 46.2-662 et seq. 32-53 32-58 32-300 46.2-676 32-902 46.2-697 32-64 46.2-698 32-300 46.2-700 32-175 46.2-704 32-64 46.2-705 32-871 46.2-706 32-871 46.2-712 Ch. 36, Art. II 46.2-715 32-59 46.2-716 32-59 46.2-724 32-65 46.2-752-46.2-756       Ch. 32, Art. III 46.2-752 et seq. 32-92 46.2-752 32-89 32-91 46.2-800 et seq. 32-1 Ch. 32, Art. XV       Ch. 32, Art. XV, Div. 2 46.2-800 32-4 32-678 46.2-801 32-3 46.2-802 32-323 32-504 32-730 46.2-803 32-325 46.2-804 32-326 32-504 46.2-807 32-324 46.2-810 32-18 46.2-811 32-354 46.2-812 32-355 46.2-813 32-26 46.2-816 32-347 32-504 46.2-817 32-506 46.2-821 32-340 32-504 46.2-822 32-338 46.2-823 32-338 46.2-824 32-338 46.2-825 32-339 46.2-826 32-341 46.2-827 32-342 46.2-828 32-343 32-344 46.2-828.1 32-344 46.2-829 32-345 46.2-830 32-11 32-325 32-477 46.2-831 32-479 46.2-832 32-480 46.2-833 32-478 46.2-833.1 32-504 46.2-837 et seq. 32-323 32-730 46.2-837 32-327 46.2-838 32-328 32-504 46.2-843 32-329 46.2-841 32-330 32-504 46.2-842 32-331 32-504 46.2-842.1 32-504 46.2-843 32-504 46.2-844 32-128 46.2-845 32-333 46.2-846 32-332 46.2-848 32-338 32-500 46.2-849 32-138 32-335 46.2-850 32-337 46.2-851 32-336 46.2-852 32-499 46.2-853-46.2-864       32-505 46.2-853-46.2-865       32-500 46.2-859 32-128 46.2-866 32-501 46.2-868 32-345 32-502 46.2-868.1 32-504 46.2-869 32-507 46.2-870 et seq. 32-504 46.2-873 32-510 46.2-874 32-509 46.2-875 32-508 46.2-877 32-512 46.2-878.1 32-349 46.2-879 32-513 46.2-880 32-518 46.2-882 32-514 32-515 46.2-884 32-352 46.2-885B 32-353 46.2-888-46.2-891       32-597 46.2-888 32-504 46.2-894-46.2-899       32-861 46.2-894 et seq. 32-861 46.2-900 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. XIII 46.2-900 32-858 32-861 46.2-901 32-861 46.2-902 32-872 46.2-902.1 32-871 46.2-904 32-733 46.2-905 32-731 32-732 46.2-906 32-734 46.2-903 32-351 46.2-909 32-634 46.2-910 32-635 32-659 46.2-912 32-117 46.2-915 32-152 46.2-916.2 et seq. 32-902 46.2-916.3 32-952 46.2-918 32-514 46.2-919 32-18 46.2-920 32-5 32-342 32-351 32-356 46.2-920C 32-189 46.2-921 32-348 32-604 46.2-921.1 32-349 46.2-922 32-350 46.2-923-46.2-929       Ch. 32, Art. XVI 46.2-923 32-792 46.2-924 32-793 46.2-925 32-791 46.2-926 32-794 46.2-927 32-795 46.2-928 32-796 46.2-929 32-796 46.2-931 22-3 46.2-932 32-736 32-797 46.2-933 32-800 46.2-934 32-799 32-801 46.2-936 32-29 32-31 46.2-937 32-28 46.2-938 32-29 32-30 46.2-940 32-29 32-31 46.2-942 32-517 46.2-945 32-31 46.2-1000 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. IV 46.2-1002 32-119 46.2-1003 32-120 46.2-1004 32-121 46.2-1010 et seq. 32-292 46.2-1010 32-175 32-903 46.2-1011 32-177 46.2-1012 32-178 32-180 46.2-1013 32-179 46.2-1014 32-180 46.2-1015 32-181 46.2-1016 32-176 46.2-1017 32-182 46.2-1018 32-183 46.2-1019 32-184 46.2-1020-46.2-1027       32-191 46.2-1020 32-188 46.2-1022-46.2-1024       32-345 32-349 46.2-1022 32-127 32-514 46.2-1023 32-127 32-185 32-514 46.2-1024 32-188 46.2-1025 32-185 32-283 46.2-1025.A.1 32-349 46.2-1025.A.2 32-349 46.2-1028 32-186 46.2-1029 32-187 46.2-1029.1 32-189 46.2-1029.2 32-190 32-514 46.2-1030 32-189 32-191 32-598 46.2-1031 32-192 46.2-1032 32-193 46.2-1033 32-194 46.2-1034 32-195 46.2-1035 32-196 46.2-1036 32-197 46.2-1037 32-198 46.2-1038 32-137 46.2-1039 32-138 46.2-1040 32-199 32-600 46.2-1041- 
46.2-1043 Ch. 32, Art. IV, 
Div. 4 46.2-1041 32-248 46.2-1042 32-249 46.2-1043 32-250 46.2-1044 32-251 46.2-1045 32-252 46.2-1046 32-118 46.2-1047 32-140 46.2-1048 32-144 46.2-1049 14-87 32-139 46.2-1050 32-142 46.2-1052 32-134 46.2-1053 32-134 46.2-1054 32-135 46.2-1055 32-133 46.2-1056 32-136 46.2-1057 32-132 46.2-1059 32-124 46.2-1060 32-160 46.2-1061 32-127 46.2-1065 32-123 46.2-1066 32-125 32-222 32-227 46.2-1067 32-223 46.2-1068 32-224 46.2-1069 32-225 46.2-1070 32-226 46.2-1071 32-601 46.2-1072 32-19 46.2-1076 32-25 46.2-1077 32-151 46.2-1079 32-516 46.2-1081 32-150 32-331 32-903 32-905 46.2-1082 32-131 46.2-1083 32-146 46.2-1084 32-122 46.2-1088 32-145 46.2-1089 32-129 46.1-1090 32-1 32-128 32-129 32-500 46.2-1091 32-149 46.2-1092 32-147 46.2-1093 32-148 46.2-1101 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. V 32-283 46.2-1102 32-283 46.2-1104 32-296 46.2-1109 32-284 46.2-1110 32-285 46.2-1111 32-289 46.2-1112 32-286 46.2-1115 32-287 46.2-1116 32-290 46.2-1117 32-290 46.2-1118 32-291 46.2-1120 32-288 46.2-1121 32-302 46.2-1122-46.2-1127       32-294 32-299 46.2-1126 32-283 32-293 46.2-1128 32-293 46.2-1129 32-299 46.2-1130 32-295 46.2-1135 32-299 46.2-1137 32-299 46.2-1139 32-297 32-298 46.2-1150 32-292 46.2-1151 32-294 46.2-1155 32-301 46.2-1156 32-300 46.2-1157 et seq. 32-292 46.2-1157 32-20 32-292 46.2-1158 32-20 36-25 46.2-1158.01 32-20 46.2-1158.02 32-20 46.2-1159 32-20 46.2-1172 32-21 46.2-1173 32-22 46.2-1175.1 32-185 46.2-1176 et seq. 32-292 46.2-1212 32-859 46.2-1213-46.2-1217       32-610 46.2-1213 32-608 32-609 46.2-1215 32-611 46.2-1216 32-609 46.2-1218 32-830 46.2-1219.1 32-612 46.2-1220 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. XII 46.2-1220 32-8 32-596 32-613 46.2-1221 32-613 46.2-1225 32-595 46.2-1231 32-613 46.2-1234 32-614 46.2-1239 32-602 46.2-1241 32-615 46.2-1242 32-615 46.2-1300 et seq. Ch. 32 (note) 32-8 Ch. 32, Art. IX 46.2-1300 32-284 Ch. 32, Art. IX 32-511 32-513 46.2-1301 32-9 32-10 46.2-1305 32-15 46.2-1309 32-16 46.2-1310 32-17 46.2-1313 22-31 32-7 Ch. 32, Art. XI 46.2-2000 32-134 46.2-2062 36-26 46.2-2067       Ch. 36, Art. II, Div. 2 48-1 et seq. Ch. 14 (note) 51.1-1 et seq. 22-82 51.5-44 32-799 53.1-29 22-82 53.1-120 2-438 53.1-131.1 2-440 32-564 tit. 54.1 Ch. 10 (note) 54.1-400 et seq. 14-47 LDR 1801.06 54.1-900 et seq. 22-88 54.1-1100 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 54.1-4100 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 54.1-4101 10-20 10-24 10-28 54.1-4101.1 10-28 54.1-4102 10-29 54.1-4103 10-30 54.1-4104 10-26 54.1-4105 10-27 54.1-4107 10-31 54.1-4108 10-22 10-23 54.1-4109 10-32 54.1-4110 10-21 55-79.1 et seq. 32-13 32-609 55-79.39 et seq. 32-13 32-609 56-235.8 16-154 56-257 et seq. Ch. 30 (note) 56-345 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. XIX 56-412.1 32-893 56-412.2 32-893 56-468.1 Ch. 16, Art. XI 16-402 56-468.1.J 16-402 56-484.12 32-480 56-575.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII 56-575.1-56-575.16       2-500 56-575.1 2-500 56-575.3:1 2-500 56-575.4 2-501 56-575.4(A) 2-503 56-575.4(G) 2-501 56-594 16-154 57-48 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. V       Ch. 10, Art. V, Div. 4 58-638 Char. § 2.2 58-760.1(e) 16-52 tit. 58.1 16-341 58.1-1 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 58.1-1200 et seq. Char. § 4.5 Ch. 16, Art. IV 16-186 58.1-1201 16-183 58.1-1204 16-185 58.1-1204.1 16-185 58.1-1205 16-183 58.1-1207 16-186 58.1-1208 Ch. 16, Art. IV 16-185 58.1-1211 16-185 58.1-1212 16-186 58.1-1821 16-346 58.1-1822 16-346 58.1-2401 LDR 302.13 58.1-2600 et seq. Char. § 2.2 58.1-2600 16-154 58.1-2901 16-154 16-156 16-157 58.1-3010 16-19 58.1-3011 16-19 58.1-3200 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. II 58.1-3210 et seq.       Ch. 16, Art. II, Div. 2 58.1-3210 16-49 58.1-3215 16-54 58.1-3217 2-468 Ch. 10, Art. V 16-47 58.1-3220 et seq.       Ch. 16, Art. II, Div. 3 58.1-3220 16-109 58.1-3230 et seq. 16-28 58.1-3230 16-28 58.1-3233.2 16-28 58.1-3236 16-28 58.1-3237 16-28 58.1-3292 16-29 58.1-3400 Ch. 16, Art. VIII 16-311 58.1-3500 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. VI 58.1-3503 16-255 58.1-3506 16-255 58.1-3506(13) 16-255 58.1-3507 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. VI 58.1-3509 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. VI 58.1-3516 Ch. 16, Art. VI 58.1-3606.A.1 16-311 58.1-3606.A.3 16-311 58.1-3606.A.4 16-311 58.1-3606.A.7 16-311 58.1-3650 et seq. 16-156 16-157 58.1-3700 et seq. 16-341 58.1-3701-58.1-3716       16-351 58.1-3701 16-341 16-344 58.1-3702 Ch. 16, Art. IX 58.1-3703 Ch. 16, Art. IX 58.1-3703.A.1 16-343 58.1-3703.A.2 16-343 58.1-3703.A.3 16-344 58.1-3703.A.4 16-345 58.1-3703.A.5 16-346 58.1-3703.A.6 16-346 58.1-3703.1.A.3 16-350 58.1-3703.1.A.7 16-347 58.1-3703.1.A.8 16-348 58.1-3703.1.A.9 16-349 58.1-3706 Ch. 16, Art. IX 16-344 16-350 58.1-3712 16-351 58.1-3712.1 16-351 58.1-3712.13 16-351 58.1-3714.B 16-341 58.1-3715 16-341 16-344 58.1-3717 16-343 16-351 58.1-3718 16-343 58.1-3719.1 16-351 58.1-3727 16-351 58.1-3728 16-343 16-351 58.1-3729 16-351 58.1-3731 16-343 58.1-3800 et seq. 16-433 58.1-3800 Ch. 16, Art. XII 58.1-3812 16-376 58.1-3813.1 16-156 16-157 58.1-3814 Ch. 16, Art. III 16-156 16-157 58.1-3814F 16-156 58.1-3814G 16-156 58.1-3814H 16-157 58.1-3814I 16-157 58.1-3814J 16-154 16-157 58.1-3819 Ch. 16, Art. V 16-213 58.1-3819D 16-217 58.1-3825 Ch. 16, Art. V 16-213 58.1-3826 16-211 58.1-3840 Ch. 16, Art. VII 16-276 16-280 58.1-3850 16-465 58.1-3903 16-345 58.1-3906 16-275 58.1-3912 16-22 58.1-3913 16-23 58.1-3916 16-24 16-25 16-27 16-251 16-253 16-343 58.1-3940 16-345 58.1-3942 32-55 58.1-3984 16-345 16-347 58.1-3986 16-344 58.1-3993 16-344 59.1-365 10-79 62.1-44.2 et seq. LDR 1801.02 62.1-44.15:27 LDR 1801.00, 1801.04 62.1-44.15:34A LDR 1801.23 62.1-44.15:35 LDR 1801.06 62.1-44.15:40 LDR 1801.14 62.1-44.15:44 LDR 1801.16  
