CODE OF THE TOWN OF BLACKSBURG, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Published in 1999 by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
BLACKSBURG, VIRGINIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Roger E. Hedgepeth 
Mayor 
____________ 
R. Michael Chandler 
Alvah T. Leighton, Jr. 
Joyce K. Lewis 
Frances M. Parsons 
Ron Rordam 
Thomas M. Sherman 
Town Council 
____________ 
Gary A. Huff 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Kathleen A. Dooley 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Donna Boone-Caldwell 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Blacksburg, Virginia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the Town Code, as supplemented, adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as chapter 12.5. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Kathleen A. Dooley, Town Attorney, and Linda Burnsed, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Blacksburg, Virginia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; numbering system; code comparative table and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Blacksburg, Virginia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Blacksburg, Virginia. 1999. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. Ch. 658  3-30-09 Included 14 1591 10-12-10 Included 14 1595 11- 9-10 Included 14 1598  2- 8-11 Included 14 1600  3- 8-11 Included 14 1604  3- 8-11 Included 14 1607  4-26-11 Included 14 1611  6-14-11 Included 14 1612  6-14-11 Included 14 1614  6-14-11 Included 14 1615  7-12-11 Included 14 1623 10-11-11 Included 15 1625 10-11-11 Included 15 1626 10-11-11 Included 15 1627 10-11-11 Included 15 1628 11- 8-11 Included 15 1632  1-10-12 Included 15 1633  1-10-12 Included 15 1640  3-12-12 Included 15 1643  4-24-12 Included 15 1644  4-24-12 Included 15 1647  5- 8-12 Included 15 1649  8-14-12 Included 15 1651  8-14-12 Included 15 1654  9-11-12 Included 15 1656  9-11-12 Included 15 1657  9-11-12 Included 15 1655 12-11-12 Included 16 1658 10- 9-12 Included 16 1660 12-11-12 Included 16 1666  1- 8-13 Included 16 1667 12-11-12 Included 16 1668  4- 9-13 Included 16 1680  5-14-13 Included 16 1681  5-14-13 Included 16 1684  6-11-13 Included 16 1685  6-11-13 Included 16 1678  4-23-13 Included 17 1704  1-14-14 Included 17 1705  1-14-14 Included 17 1707  1-14-14 Included 17 1708  1-14-14 Included 17 1713  2-11-14 Included 17 1720  4-22-14 Included 17 1722  5-13-14 Included 17 1723  6-10-14 Included 17 1724  6-10-14 Included 17 1725  5-13-14 Included 17 1726  6-10-14 Included 17 1727  6-10-14 Included 17 1728  6-10-14 Included 17 1741 10-14-14 Included 17 1742 10-14-14 Included 17 1744 12- 9-14 Included 18 1748 12- 9-14 Included 18 1755  1-13-15 Included 18 1757  2-10-15 Included 18 1762  4-14-15 Included 18 1763  4-28-15 Included 18 1765  6- 9-15 Included 18 1768  9- 8-15 Included 18 1772  8-11-15 Included 18 1770 10-13-15 Included 19 1775 10-13-15 Included 19 1776 10-13-15 Included 19 1777  1-12-16 Included 19 1780  1-12-16 Included 19 1781  3- 8-16 Included 19 1791  5-10-16 Included 19 1794  6-14-16 Included 19 1798  8- 9-16 Included 19 1799  8- 9-16 Included 19 1800 10-11-16 Included 19 1804 10-11-16 Included 19 1789  4-12-16 Included 20 1795  8- 9-16 Included 20 1807 12-13-16 Included 20 1809  1-10-17 Included 20 1810  1-10-17 Included 20 1811  1-10-17 Included 20 1814  3-14-17 Included 20 1816  4-11-17 Included 20 1819  3-14-17 Included 20 1822  4-11-17 Included 20 1823  6-13-17 Included 20 1826  5- 9-17 Included 20 1830  5- 9-17 Included 20 1831  5- 9-17 Included 20 1838  8- 8-17 Included 20 1845 12-12-17 Included 21 1849  1- 9-18 Included 21 1856  1- 9-18 Included 21 1670  8-13-13 Included 21 1848  3-13-18 Included 21 Ch. 317   3-19-18(1) Included 21 1863  4-25-18 Included 21 1864 10- 1-18 Included 21 1869  7-10-18 Included 21 1883  3-12-19 Included 22 1884  2-12-19 Included 22 1885  1- 8-19 Included 22  
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Charter is set out herein as enacted by section 1 of Chapter 619, 1975 Acts of the General Assembly, approved March 24, 1975. Any words appearing in brackets ([ ]) were added by the editor for clarity. Sections 2 and 3 of Acts 1975, Chapter 619, read as follows: 
"2. That Chapter 127 of the Acts of Assembly of 1964, as amended, which provide a charter for the town of Blacksburg, is repealed. 
"3. That an emergency exists and this act is in force from its passage." 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES 

§ 1.01. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the limits of the town of Blacksburg, as the same are now or may hereafter be established by law, shall constitute and continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the town of Blacksburg, and as such shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, contract and be contracted with, and may have a corporate seal which it may alter at its pleasure. 
§ 1.02. - Boundaries. 
    The present boundaries of the town are as recorded in the Clerk's office of the Circuit Court of Montgomery County, Chancery Order Book 25, page 320; Chancery Book 34, page 380, Common Law Order Book 57, page 259 (effective midnight July 1, 1998); or as the same may be hereafter altered as provided by law. 
(Acts of 1975, ch. 222, § 1; Acts of 1998, ch. 222, § 1) 
ARTICLE II. - POWERS 

§ 2.01. - General grant of powers. 
    The town of Blacksburg shall have and may exercise all powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to cities and towns under the Constitution and general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. It is intended that the town shall possess all powers which, under the Constitution, it would be competent for this charter to enumerate specifically, and no enumeration of particular powers shall be held to be exclusive, but in addition to this general grant. 
§ 2.02. - Construction. 
    The powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to the town under the Constitution and general laws of the Commonwealth and this charter shall be construed liberally when such powers are exercised by the town. 
§ 2.03. - Adoption of certain sections of the Code of Virginia. 
    The powers set forth in Chapter 18 of Title 15.1 of the Code of Virginia as in force on January 1, 1975, and any acts amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto, are hereby conferred on and vested in the town of Blacksburg. 
§ 2.04. - Eminent domain [and other powers relating to property]. 
    The town of Blacksburg is hereby empowered to acquire by condemnation, gift, lease, purchase or bequest, property, real or personal, or any interest or estate therein, either within or without its corporate limits, for any of its proper purposes, and may sell, lease, manage, and control such property as its interests require, and in such manner as the Council deems expedient. Such power without its corporate limits shall be limited to acquisition for water and sewer pipes, or lines or related facilities. 
    The powers of eminent domain set forth in Title 15.1, Title 25, Chapter 1.1, and Title 33.1, Chapter 1 of the Code of Virginia as in force on January 1, 1975, as amended, and all acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto, are hereby conferred upon the town of Blacksburg except that the powers of eminent domain specified in Chapter 1 Title 33.1 of such code shall be limited to acquisition for streets and for water and sewage facilities. Certificates issued pursuant to § 33.1-119 et seq., of the Code of Virginia, as amended, and acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto, may be issued by the town council, signed by the mayor and countersigned by the town manager. Such certificate shall have the same effect as certificates issued by the State Highway Commissioner, under the aforesaid laws, and may be issued in any case in which the town proposes to acquire property of any kind by the exercise of its powers of eminent domain for any lawful public purpose, whether within or without the town; provided, that the provisions of § 33.1-119 et seq., of the Code of Virginia, as amended, shall not be used except for the acquisition of lands or easements necessary for streets, water, sewer or utility pipes or lines or related facilities. 
ARTICLE III. - THE COUNCIL 

§ 3.01. - Definitions. 
    As used in this charter, the term "officer" refers to council members and persons appointed by and responsible to the Council, such as the town clerk, the town manager, and the town attorney; "officials" refers to administrative department heads; all other persons employed by the town are designated "employees." 
§ 3.02. - [General] powers and duties of the council. 
    The government of the town of Blacksburg shall be vested in the council which shall have the power to enact and enforce ordinances to carry into effect all powers granted by this charter and by law. The council shall be responsible for the determination of all matters of policy for the town of Blacksburg and for ensuring the implementation thereof by the town administration. 
§ 3.03. - Composition and qualifications. 
    The council shall be composed of seven council members, one of whom shall be the mayor, to be elected from the town at large. The Council members shall be qualified voters of the town. 
§ 3.04. - Election and term of office. 
    The council shall be elected in the manner provided by Virginia election laws, except insofar as they are amended by this section. Three council members shall be elected on the November 2011 general election date and every four years thereafter. A mayor and three other council members shall be elected on the November 2009 general election date and every four years thereafter. 
    The term of office for all council members shall begin on the first day of January next following their election, and each shall serve for a term of four years or until his or her successor shall have been elected and qualified. The council members may succeed themselves as often as the voters may choose. 
    Candidates for council shall be nominated only by petition in the manner prescribed by general law. Candidates for town council shall not be identified on the ballot by political affiliation. 
(Amd. of 3-16-03; Ch. 658, § 1, 3-30-09) 
§ 3.05. - Voters of the town. 
    The voters of the town of Blacksburg shall be the actual residents of the town who are qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly. 
§ 3.06. - Compensation; expenses. 
    The council may determine the annual salary of its members by ordinance or resolution in accordance with the requirement of state law. Council members shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
(Ch. 658, § 1, 3-30-09) 
§ 3.07. - Mayor and vice-mayor. 
    The mayor as a member of the council shall have the same powers and duties as other members of the council, with a vote, but no veto. In addition, he shall preside at meetings of the council, shall be recognized as head of the town government for all ceremonial purposes, for purposes of military law, and for the service of civil processes, but shall have no administrative duties. 
    At the first meeting of the council in January next following the date of each November council election, the council shall elect from its members a vice-mayor who shall serve for a term of two years. The vice-mayor shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor, and, if a vacancy occurs, shall become mayor until the next regular council member election. At that election a mayor shall be elected to fill the unexpired term. 
(Ch. 658, § 1, 3-30-09) 
§ 3.08. - Absence or disability of mayor and vice-mayor. 
    If both the mayor and vice-mayor are absent or unable to act, the council shall, by a majority vote of the members present, elect from its members a person to serve as acting mayor until either the mayor or vice-mayor is present and able to act. The person so elected shall possess the powers and discharge the duties of the mayor during such period of time. Whenever it is necessary to elect an acting mayor pursuant to this section, in the absence of both the mayor and vice-mayor, the town clerk or acting town clerk shall call the meeting of the council to order and shall preside until an acting mayor is elected. This shall not be construed to vest in the clerk any of the powers and duties of the mayor, except as expressly stated in this section. 
§ 3.09. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Holding other office. Except as otherwise authorized by law, a member of council shall not be eligible during his tenure of office as such member, or for one year thereafter, to any compensated town employment. If appointed by the council to a board or commission, he may be compensated as a member. 
(b)  Appointments and removals. Neither the council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any town administrative officials or employees whom the manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officials and employees. 
(c)  Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of discussions, informal reviews, inquiries and/or official investigations, the council or its members shall communicate with town officials and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any such official or employee, either publicly or privately. 
§ 3.10. - Vacancies; forfeiture of office; suspension and removal; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of a council member shall become vacant upon his death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law or this charter or forfeiture of his office. 
(b)  Forfeiture of office. A council member shall forfeit his office if he (1) lacks at any time during his term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by this charter or by law, (2) violates any express prohibition of this charter, (3) is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or (4) fails to attend three consecutive regular meetings of the council without being excused by the council. 
(c)  Suspension and removal. The council shall suspend or remove elected town officers for misconduct in office or neglect of duty, to be specified in the order of suspension or removal; but no removal shall be made without reasonable notice to the officer complained of and an opportunity afforded him to be heard in his defense. Removal shall require a unanimous vote of the remaining members of the council. 
(d)  Filling of vacancies. 
(1)  A vacancy on the council shall be filled within sixty days, for the unexpired term, by a majority vote of the remaining members, if the vacancy occurs two years or less before the date of expiration of such term. 
(2)  If the vacancy occurs more than two years before the expiration of the term, the vacancy shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members of council only until the next council member election, at which election the voters of the town shall elect a person to serve as council member for the remaining two years of the term. Any such election shall be subject to the requirements of § 24.2-226 of the Code of Virginia. When such an election is conducted, the candidates receiving the highest number of votes will be entitled to full terms and the candidate receiving the next highest number shall be entitled to the unexpired term caused by the vacancy. 
    Notwithstanding the requirement in § 3.15 (c) hereof that a quorum of the council consists of four members, if at any time the membership of the council is reduced to less than four, the remaining members shall call for a special election to fill the vacancies for the unexpired terms. 
(Ch. 658, § 1, 3-30-09) 
§ 3.11. - Judge of forfeiture. 
    A council member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of his office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of such hearing shall be published in one or more newspapers with general circulation in the town at least two weeks in advance of the hearing. After such hearing council by a unanimous vote of the other members may declare the office of a council member forfeited and vacant. 
§ 3.12. - Town clerk. 
    The council shall appoint a town clerk who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The clerk shall give notice of council meetings to its members and the public, keep the journal of its proceedings, keep all papers, documents and records pertaining to the town, keep and attest the official town seal, and perform such other duties as are assigned to him by this charter or by the council. 
§ 3.13. - Independent audit. 
    The council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all town accounts and may provide for such more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of such accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the town government or any of its officers. The council may, without requiring competitive bids, designate such accountant or firm annually. If the State makes such an audit, the council may accept it as satisfying the requirements of this section. 
§ 3.14. - Procedure. 
(a)  Meetings. The council shall meet regularly at least once in every month, at such times and places as the council may prescribe by ordinance. Special meetings may be held on the call of the mayor or of any two members upon no less than twenty-four hours' notice to each member, except in case of extreme emergency when the time limit may be waived. No business shall be transacted by the council in such special meeting which has not been stated in the notice unless all members of the council are present and give their unanimous consent to the consideration of such business, and such business is an emergency or of an unusual nature. 
    No vote shall be reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting unless at such special meeting there are present as large a number of members as were present when such vote was taken. 
(b)  Rules and journal. The council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings. This journal shall be a public record. 
(c)  Voting and quorum. Voting, except on procedural motions, shall be by roll call and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal. Four members of the council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. No action of the council, except as otherwise provided in the preceding sentence, in § 3.10(c) and § 3.11, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of four or more members of the council. 
    An affirmative recorded vote of five of the members is required for the adoption of any ordinance or resolution having for its object the levying of taxes or contracting a debt. 
§ 3.15. - Ordinances. 
(a)  Action requiring an ordinance. In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the town council shall be by ordinance which: 
(1)  Adopt or amend an administrative code or establish, alter or abolish any town department, office or agency; 
(2)  Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed; 
(3)  Levy taxes, except as otherwise provided in Article VI with respect to the property tax levied by adoption of the budget; 
(4)  Grant, renew or extend a franchise; 
(5)  Regulate the rate charged for its services by the town; provided, however, that the council may by resolution authorize the rates or fees charged by the Department of Parks and Recreation for use of its facilities or participation in its programs and authorize the rates and fees charged by other departments of the town for sale of maps, reports or other publications or making of copies of printed or recorded matter; 
(6)  Authorize the borrowing of money; 
(7)  Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of the town. 
    Acts other than those referred to in the preceding sentence may be done either by ordinance or by resolution if not in conflict with law. 
(b)  Form. Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one subject which shall be clearly expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "Be it ordained by the Council of the Town of Blacksburg...." 
(c)  Procedure. An ordinance may be introduced by any member at any regular or special meeting of the council. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the town clerk shall distribute a copy to each council member and to the manager, shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the town clerk and such other public places as the council may designate, and shall publish the ordinance together with a notice setting out the time and place for a public hearing thereon and for its consideration by the council. The public hearing shall follow the publication by at least five days, may be held separately or in connection with a regular or special council meeting and may be adjourned from time to time; all persons interested shall have an opportunity to be heard. After the hearing the council may adopt the ordinance with or without amendment or reject it but, if it is amended so as to materially change the purpose and character of the proposed ordinance, the council may not adopt it until the ordinance or its amended sections have been subjected to all the procedures hereinbefore required for a newly introduced ordinance. 
    To pass an ordinance, the council shall vote on the proposed ordinance two times. If at any stage in this procedure the proposed ordinance fails to receive the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the council, the ordinance shall be declared defeated and removed from the calendar of ordinances. An ordinance may only be passed at the same meeting at which the public hearing is held unless the agenda for such meeting indicates that the ordinance will not be acted on at the meeting. 
(d)  Effective date. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, every adopted ordinance shall become effective from its passage or at any later date specified therein. 
(e)  "Publish" defined. As used in this section, the term "publish" means to print in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the town: (1) the ordinance or a brief summary thereof, and (2) the places where copies of it have been filed and the times when they are available for public inspection. 
(f)  Penalties. The town council may prescribe either civil or criminal penalties for violations of ordinances. Any civil penalty shall be paid into the general fund of the town. No civil penalty prescribed for an ordinance violation shall be inconsistent with the penalty established for a violation of a substantially similar state law. No such civil penalty shall exceed $1,000 for any individual violation. 
(Acts of 1981, Ch. 79, § 1; Acts of 1982, Ch. 58, § 1; Ch. 658, § 1, 3-30-09; Acts of 2018, Ch. 317, § 1, 3-19-18(1) ) 
§ 3.16. - Emergency ordinances. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided in subsection 6.09(b). An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. After its adoption the ordinance shall be published and printed as prescribed for other adopted ordinances. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance except one made pursuant to subsection 6.09(b) shall automatically stand repealed as of the ninety-first day following the date on which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
§ 3.17. - Codes of technical regulations. 
    The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations, such as building, electrical and sanitary codes, by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance, if such codes are not in conflict with State law. The procedure and requirements governing such an adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally. 
§ 3.18. - Authentication and recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  Authentication and recording. Every ordinance or resolution upon its final passage shall be recorded by the town clerk in a properly indexed book designated for the purpose and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the town clerk. 
(b)  Codification. Within three years after adoption of this charter and at least every ten years thereafter, the council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all town ordinances and resolutions having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the council by ordinance and shall be published promptly in loose-leaf form, together with this charter and any amendments thereto, pertinent provisions of the Constitution and other laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the council may specify. The compilation shall be known and cited officially as the Blacksburg Town Code. Copies of the code shall be furnished to town officers and officials, placed in libraries and public offices for free public reference and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price fixed by the council. 
(c)  Printing of ordinances and resolutions. The council shall cause each ordinance and resolution having the force and effect of law and each amendment to this charter to be printed or otherwise reproduced promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances, resolutions and charter amendments shall be distributed or sold to the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the council. Following publication of the first Blacksburg Town Code and at all times thereafter, the ordinances, resolutions and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for integration therein. The council shall make such further arrangements as it deems desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to the provisions of the Constitution and other laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, or the codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the town code. 
§ 3.19. - Town attorney. 
    An attorney shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the council. He shall be qualified to practice law in the Commonwealth of Virginia. He shall serve as chief legal advisor to the council, and may also serve as legal advisor to the town administration. 
§ 3.20. - Committees, boards and commissions. 
(a)  Creation and appointment. The council may create committees, boards and commissions to be composed of such numbers of citizens as the council may deem expedient as authorized by law. The council shall appoint the members, prescribe the compensation, if any, and the powers and duties of such committees, boards and commissions consistent with the general law. 
(b)  Removal. All members of committees, boards and commissions appointed by the town council may be removed by the council unless otherwise provided by general law. 
ARTICLE IV. - THE TOWN MANAGER 

§ 4.01. - Appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
    A town manager shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the council which shall fix his compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. He need not be a resident of the town or the Commonwealth at the time of his appointment but may reside outside the town while in office only with the approval of the council. 
§ 4.02. - Powers and duties of the town manager. 
    The town manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the town. He shall be responsible to the council for the administration of all town affairs placed in his charge by or under this charter. He shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  He shall appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good of the service, suspend or remove all town employees and appointive administrative officials provided for by or under this charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this charter. He may authorize any administrative official who is subject to his direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that official's department, office or agency. 
(2)  He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the town, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(3)  He shall attend all council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote. 
(4)  He shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter and acts of the council, subject to enforcement by him or by officials subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
(5)  He shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the council, and shall be responsible for the execution of the budget. 
(6)  He shall submit to the council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the town as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(7)  He shall make such other reports as the council may require concerning the operations of town departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and supervision. 
(8)  He shall keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the town and make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the town as he deems desirable. 
(9)  He shall ensure that adequate and accurate personnel records are maintained on all employees of the town. 
(10)  He shall provide a system for handling complaints from citizens. 
(11)  He shall perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or may be required by the council. 
§ 4.03. - Acting town manager. 
    By letter filed with the town clerk within thirty days after assuming duties, the manager shall designate, subject to approval of the council, a qualified town administrative official to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during his absence, disability or suspension. During such absence, disability or suspension, the council may revoke such designation at any time or appoint another official of the town to serve until the manager shall resume his duties. 
§ 4.04. - Removal. 
    The council may remove the manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the manager from duty for a period not to exceed forty-five days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the manager. 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the manager, he may file with the council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a council meeting not earlier than fifteen days nor later than thirty days after the request is filed. The manager may file with the council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing. 
(3)  The council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the manager, if he has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after the public hearing if he has requested one. 
    The manager shall continue to receive his salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS 

§ 5.01. - Creation of departments. 
    The council may establish all departments, offices and agencies it determines are necessary for the proper administration of the town with such powers and duties and subject to those regulations it deems proper, consistent with the provisions of this charter and the Constitution and general laws of the Commonwealth. 
    Administrative departments shall include but shall not be limited to departments concerned with public safety, finance, public works, planning, and parks and recreation. 
§ 5.02. - Direction by manager. 
    All departments, offices and agencies except as otherwise provided by this charter or by general law shall be under the direction of the town manager and shall be administered by an official appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the manager. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 

§ 6.01. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the town shall begin on the first day of July and end on the last day of June. 
§ 6.02. - Submission of budget and budget message. 
    On or before the fifteenth day of April of each year, the manager shall submit to the council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying message. 
§ 6.03. - Budget message. 
    The manager's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the town for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues together with the reasons for such changes, summarize the town's debt position and include such other material as the manager deems desirable. 
§ 6.04. - Budget. 
    The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all town funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year and, except as required by law or this charter, shall be in such form as the manager deems desirable or the council may require. In organizing the budget the manager shall utilize the most feasible combination of expenditure classification by fund, organization unit, program, purpose or activity, and object. It shall begin with a clear general summary of its contents; shall show in detail all estimated income, indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year; and shall be so arranged as to show comparative figures for actual income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. It shall indicate in separate sections: 
(1)  Proposed expenditures for current operations during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed by offices, departments and agencies in terms of their respective work programs, and the method of financing such expenditures; 
(2)  Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed by offices, departments and agencies when practicable, and the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure; and 
(3)  Anticipated net income or net loss for the ensuing fiscal year of each utility owned or operated by the town and the proposed method of its disposition; subsidiary budgets for each such utility giving detailed income and expenditure information shall be attached as appendices to the budget. 
    The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated available funds. (Acts of 1981, Ch. 79, § 1) 
§ 6.05. - Capital program. 
(a)  Submission to council. The manager shall prepare and submit to the council a five-year capital program at least three months prior to the final date for submission of the budget. 
(b)  Contents. The capital program shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
    The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
§ 6.06. - Council action on budget. 
(a)  Notice and hearing. The council shall publish in one or more local newspapers the general summary of the budget and a notice stating: 
(1)  The times and places where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public, and 
(2)  The time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication, for a public hearing on the budget. 
(b)  Amendment before adoption. After the public hearing, the council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated available funds. 
(c)  Adoption. The council shall adopt the budget before the first day of the fiscal year for which adopted. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated and shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein proposed. 
§ 6.07. - Council action on capital program. 
(a)  Notice and hearing. The council shall publish in one or more local newspapers the general summary of the capital program and a notice stating: 
(1)  The times and places where copies of the capital program are available for inspection by the public, and 
(2)  The time and places, not less than two weeks after such publication, for a public hearing on the capital program. 
(b)  Adoption. The council by resolution shall adopt the capital program with or without amendment after the public hearing and on or before the fifteenth day of April of the current fiscal year. 
§ 6.08. - Public records. 
    Copies of the budget and the capital program as adopted shall be public records and shall be made available to the public at suitable places in the town. 
§ 6.09. - Amendments after adoption. 
(a)  Supplemental appropriations. If during the fiscal year the manager certifies that there are available for appropriation funds in excess of those estimated in the budget, the council by ordinance may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of the excess. 
(b)  Emergency appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in accordance with the provisions of § 3.16. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated funds to meet such appropriations, the council may by such emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to time, all as may be authorized by the Constitution and general law but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which the emergency appropriation was made. 
(c)  Reduction of appropriations. If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the manager that the funds available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken by him and his recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce one or more appropriations. 
(d)  Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year the manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department, office or agency and, upon written request by the manager, the council may by ordinance or resolution transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office or agency to another. 
§ 6.10. - Lapse of appropriations. 
    Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if five years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
§ 6.11. - Temporary loans. 
    The council may negotiate and secure short term loans for the purpose of paying current expenses or debts of the town. Such loans shall be evidenced by bonds or notes bearing interest, payable in not more than one year from the date of issue. The aggregate of such short term bonds and notes outstanding at any one time shall not exceed an amount equal to fifteen percent of the previous year's revenues. (Acts of 1981, Ch. 79, § 1) 
§ 6.12. - Municipal assessment. 
    The assessment of real and personal property in the town for the purpose of municipal taxation may be set by the town council in such manner as the council may provide in accordance with the Constitution and the general laws of the Commonwealth. 
§ 6.13. - Assessments for local improvements. 
    The council may impose special assessments for local improvements and force payment thereof, subject to such limitations prescribed by the laws of the Commonwealth as may be in force at the time of the imposition of such special assessments. 
    The council may provide that the persons, firms, and corporations against whom the special assessments have been made may pay such assessments in equal installments over a period not exceeding ten years, together with interest on the unpaid balances as allowed by the Constitution and the general laws of the Commonwealth. (Acts of 1981, Ch. 79, § 1) 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

§ 7.01. - Charter amendment. 
    Amendments to this charter may be made only in accordance with the procedure specified in the general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
§ 7.02. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the charter shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the application of the charter and its provisions to other persons shall not be affected thereby. 
§ 7.03. - Oaths of office and official bonds. 
    All elected or appointed officers and officials of the town shall take the oath of office and execute such bonds as may be required by general law, by this charter, or by ordinance or resolution of the town council and file duplicate certificates with the town clerk and the clerk of the circuit court of Montgomery County before entering upon the discharge of their duties. If the requirements of this section have not been complied with by any officer or official within thirty days after the term of office shall have begun or after his appointment to fill a vacancy, then such office shall be considered vacant unless general law otherwise provides in which event general law shall prevail. 
§ 7.04. - Books, records, et cetera. 
    All books, records and documents used by any elected or appointed town officer, official or employee in his office or pertaining to his duties shall be deemed to be the property of the town. Any person designated by this charter, the general laws of the Commonwealth or the Blacksburg Town Code as responsible for the keeping of such books, records and documents shall, within ten days after the end of his term of office, or within ten days after the date of his resignation or removal from office, deliver to the town clerk all such books, records, and documents and town property. Any person failing to deliver such books, records and documents and property shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined no less than one hundred dollars and not more than five hundred dollars, or imprisoned not exceeding six months, or both, at the direction of the court or jury before whom the case is tried. 
§ 7.05. - Town sergeant. 
    There shall not be a town sergeant in the town of Blacksburg. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

§ 8.01. - Ordinances. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations of the town of Blacksburg not inconsistent with this charter shall remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed by the town council. Ordinances, resolutions, orders and regulations which are in force when this charter becomes effective and which are inconsistent with this charter are repealed. 
§ 8.02. - Continuity of terms of officers. 
    The officers of the town of Blacksburg who were in office immediately prior to the effective date of this charter shall remain in office until the expiration of their several terms, or until their successors have been duly elected and qualified. 
§ 8.03. - Citation of act. 
    This act may for all purposes be referred to or cited as the charter for the town of Blacksburg, Virginia, of nineteen hundred seventy-five. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Town Charter. 
Acts of the General Assembly YearChapterSection Section 
this Charter 1975 619 1 1.01-8.03 1981 79 1 3.15(e)(2) 6.04(3) 6.11(d) 6.13(d) 1982 58 3.15(e)(2) 1998 222 1 1.02 2003 1 3.04 2009 658 1 3.04 3.06 3.07 3.10 3.15 2018 317 1 3.15  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1-100. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the Town of Blacksburg, Virginia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Blacksburg Town Code." 
Charter reference- Codification of ordinances required, § 3.18. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to codify and recodify its ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
Section 1-101. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions of the town, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the town council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Generally. The rules of construction given in sections 1-13 through 1-13.36 of the Code of Virginia shall govern, so far as applicable, the construction of all words not defined in this section or other sections of this Code. 
    And; or. "And" shall be construed as a conjunction connecting words or phrases expressing the idea that the latter is to be added to or taken along with the preceding. "Or" shall be construed as a disjunctive particle used to express an alternative or to give a choice of one among two or more things. 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter for the Town of Blacksburg, being Chapter 619 of the 1975 Acts of the Virginia General Assembly, as amended. 
    Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is used without further qualification, it shall mean the "Blacksburg Town Code " as designated in section 1-100. 
    Code of Virginia. A reference to the "Code of Virginia" or "Virginia Code" is a reference to Virginia Code, 1950, as amended. A reference to a specific section shall incorporate subsequent amendments thereof and successor sections. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day. If the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
    Council; town council. The term "council" or "town council" shall mean the council of the Town of Blacksburg, Virginia. 
    County. The terms "the county" and "this county" shall mean the County of Montgomery in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only, shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Health department. The words "health department" shall mean the Montgomery County Health Department or the duly authorized agent of such department. 
    Health officer. The words "health officer" shall mean the director of the Montgomery County Health Department or his authorized agent. 
    In the town. The words "in the town" or "within the town" shall mean any territory, jurisdiction of which, for the exercise of its regulatory power, has been conferred on the town by public or private law. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons. 
    May; shall. The word "may" is permissive and the word "shall" is mandatory. 
    Minor. The word "minor" shall mean any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person or thing; and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Occupant or tenant. The word "occupant" or "tenant," applied to a building or land, shall mean any person who holds a written or oral lease of or who actually or constructively occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to a particular officer, department, board, commission or other agency, without further qualification, it shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Town of Blacksburg," unless otherwise specifically provided. Any reference to an officer shall include his designated representative. 
    Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are specified in this Code, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the town. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such property. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company, business, trust, joint venture or other legal entity. 
    Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State; commonwealth. The terms "the state," "the commonwealth... this state" and "this commonwealth" shall be construed to mean the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    State Code. References to the "State Code" or the "Code of Virginia" shall mean the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public highways in the town, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. 
    Swear, sworn. The word "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent to the word "affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
    Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The words "town... the town" and "this town" shall mean the Town of Blacksburg, in the County of Montgomery and the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Town Manager means the Manager or his or her designee. 
    Written or in writing shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions and rules of construction applicable to state law, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.3 et seq. 
Section 1-102. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to sections of state code, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9. 
Section 1-103. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds or any evidence of indebtedness; 
(2)  Authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract; 
(3)  Granting any franchise or right; 
(4)  Appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to an annual budget; 
(5)  Authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement; 
(6)  Making any assessment; 
(7)  Establishing, extending or contracting the corporate limits of the town; 
(8)  Authorizing or otherwise relating to the sale or conveyance of town property; 
(9)  The purposes of which have been accomplished; 
(10)  Which is temporary, although general in effect; or 
(11)  Which is special, although permanent in effect; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Section 1-104. - Provisions of Code considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of prior town codes and ordinances adopted subsequent to such codes and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Section 1-105. - Code and new ordinances do not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any offense committed against the former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued, or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform so far as practicable, to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions applicable to state statutes, Code of Virginia, § 1-16. 
Section 1-106. - Repeal of ordinance not to revive former ordinance. 
    When any ordinance which has repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions applicable to state statutes, Code of Virginia, § 1-17. 
Section 1-107. - Basic town bench mark. 
    The basic bench mark of the town shall be the U.S. Bureau of Land Management bench mark at elevation 2334.887 which is located on the municipal golf course property. 
Section 1-108. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division." 
Section 1-109. - Copies of Code and supplements to be available for public inspection. 
    At least three copies of this Code and every supplement thereto shall be kept in the office of the town clerk and shall there be available for public inspection, during normal business hours. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3. 
Section 1-110. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the town council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
Section 1-111. - Classification of and penalties for violations; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the town or any rule or regulation promulgated by any officer or agency of the town, under authority duly vested in such officer or agency, it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a Class 1, 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Class 1 misdemeanor. By a fine of not more than $2,500.00, or by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(2)  Class 2 misdemeanor. By a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by confinement in jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and confinement. 
(3)  Class 3 misdemeanor. By a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(4)  Class 4 misdemeanor. By a fine of not more than $250.00. 
(b)  Whenever in any provision of this Code or in any other ordinance of the town or any rule or regulation promulgated by an officer or agency of the town, under authority duly vested in such officer or agency, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation of such provision and such violation is not described as being of a particular class of misdemeanor, such violation shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor and be punished as prescribed in subsection (a)(1) above. 
(c)  Each day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance, rule or regulation referred to in this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except where otherwise provided. 
State Law reference- Classification of misdemeanors and punishment therefor, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-9, 18.2-11; authority of town to provide penalties for violation or ordinances, § 15.2-1429; authority of court trying case, upon conviction, to require bond conditioned that the person convicted will not violate the ordinance for the breach of which he was convicted for a period of not more than one year, § 15.2-1430; injunctive relief for continuing violations of ordinances, § 15.2-1432. 
Section 1-112. - Penalty and interest for failure to pay accounts when due. 
    Any person failing to pay any account due the Town on or before its due date shall incur a penalty thereon of ten percent, added to the total amount of the account due. No penalty shall be imposed for failure to pay any account if such failure was in no way the fault of the debtor. Interest at the rate of ten percent annually from the first day following the day such account is due may be collected on the principal and penalty of all such accounts. 
Section 1-113. - Fee for passing bad checks to the town. 
    There is hereby established a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for the writing, uttering, publishing, or passing to the town of any check or draft for payment of taxes or any other sums due the town, which check or draft is subsequently returned for insufficient funds or because there is not account or the account has been closed. This fee shall be imposed on the person on whose account such check or draft was delivered to the town. 
(Ord. No. 1244, § 1, 10-2-00; Ord. No. 1368, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1368, § 6, adopted July 13, 2004, provided for an effective date of July 1, 2004. 
State Law reference- Va. Code Section 52.1-106. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- The council, Art. III. 
Cross reference- Elections, ch. 9; administration and violations for licenses, § 11-300 et seq.; purchasing, ch. 16; taxation, ch. 22; administration of zoning, app. A, art. I. 

ARTICLE I. - TOWN SEAL, MAYOR, COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Elections, ch. 9. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Section 2-100. - Town seal. 
    There is adopted, as the seal of the town, two (2) embossed concentric circles between which shall be embossed, at the top, the words "Blacksburg, Virginia" and, at the bottom, the word and figures "Founded 1798". The area within the inner circle shall be divided into three (3) equal segments and shall contain the drawings as in the seal below: 

Section 2-101. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1791, § 1, adopted May 10, 2016 , repealed § 2-101, in its entirety. Former § 2-101 pertained to "Compensation of Town Council and Mayor," and was derived from Original Code. 
Charter reference- Authority of council to determine salary of its members, § 3.06. 
State Law reference- § 15.2-1406; 14.1-47.3. 
Section 2-102. - Establishment of council committees; mayor as member. 
(a)  The town council may, by resolution, establish such committees as it deems necessary in carrying out its functions. 
(b)  The mayor shall be an ex officio member of each committee. 
Charter reference- Authority of council to create committees, § 3.20. 
State Law reference- § 15.2-1411. 
DIVISION 2. - COUNCIL MEETINGS 

Section 2-103. - Time and place of regular meetings. 
    The town council shall each year at its first meeting in July adopt a resolution establishing the day, time and place of its regular meetings to be held during the ensuing months. Unless otherwise provided in the annual resolution, the town council shall meet in regular session on the second Tuesday of each month and in adjourned session on the fourth Tuesday of each month in the municipal building and the meeting shall be called to order at 7:30 p.m. 
Charter reference- Council to meet at least once per month at time and place prescribed by ordinance, § 3.14. 
State Law reference- § 15.2-1416. 
Section 2-104. - Order of proceedings; consent agenda. 
(a)  Town council may establish an agenda format to reflect its order of proceedings by resolution. Any such resolution to change the agenda format shall not be effective until the next regularly scheduled or adjourned meeting of council. 
(b)  Any such agenda format established by council shall include a consent agenda, which shall include by way of illustration, but not by limitation, the following: 
(1)  Approval of minutes. 
(2)  First readings of proposed ordinances and scheduling of public hearings and second readings thereof. 
(3)  Requests for permits which have been determined by the appropriate town staff as meeting the requirements of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, or ordinance of the town. 
(4)  Resolutions and/or motions appointing persons to boards, committees, posts and commissions. 
(5)  Resolutions authorizing interdepartmental budget transfers. 
(6)  Acceptance of reports and petitions and scheduling of public hearings thereon. 
(7)  Resolutions accepting dedication of streets and/or utilities. 
(8)  Any item believed by the town clerk to be routine and not controversial in nature. 
(c)  Any member of Council may by request have any item removed from the consent agenda, which item shall then be discussed as new business on the regular agenda. 
(d)  A single motion and roll call vote in favor thereof shall approve all items remaining on the consent agenda. 
(e)  Occasionally, situations and/or questions of a critical nature arise after the deadline has passed for items to be placed on the agenda. A majority of the members of the council must vote to approve the addition of any resolution or action item on the agenda after it has been distributed to the council. The person requesting that an item be added to the agenda must provide a copy of the item or other pertinent information to all other members of the council, the town manager, town clerk and town attorney as soon as reasonably possible. 
(f)  As provided by Charter § 3.15, the adoption of an ordinance requires the council to vote on an ordinance two (2) times. The term "first action " means the first time that the council votes on an ordinance to schedule a public hearing; this will typically occur as part of the consent agenda. The term "second action " means the council's second vote on an ordinance, which is preceded by a public hearing. An ordinance may be amended between these two (2) actions to address concerns on the part of town council or the public in accord with the provisions of Charter § 3.15. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ; Ord. No. 1885 , § 1, 1-8-19) 
Charter reference- Forfeiture of office for absence from meetings, § 3.10; council to determine its own rules and order of business, § 3.14(b). 
State Law reference- Authority of town council to adopt rules for the regulation of its proceedings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1427. 
Section 2-105. - Addressing council. 
(a)  No person shall address the town council during public addresses, unless recognized by the mayor. 
(b)  Persons appearing before town council or attending town council meetings will not be allowed to do the following: 
(1)  Campaign for public office; 
(2)  Promote private business ventures; 
(3)  Use profanity or vulgar language or gestures; 
(4)  Use language which insults or demeans any person or which, when directed at a public official or employee, is not related to his or her official duties; 
(5)  Interrupt other speakers or engage in behavior that disrupts the meeting; 
(6)  Engage in behavior that intimidates others. 
(c)  The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum at council meetings. He or she may order the expulsion of any person for violation of these rules, disruptive behavior, or any words or actions that incite violence or disorder. Any person so expelled shall not be readmitted for the remainder of the meeting from which expelled. Any person who has been so expelled and who, at a later meeting, again engages in behavior justifying expulsion may also be barred from attendance at future council meetings for a specified and reasonable period of time not to exceed six (6) months. 
(d)  In any public hearing, time limits for speakers may be extended by the mayor, as long as all speakers are treated similarly. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Section 2-106. - How debate conducted. 
    The question shall be stated by the chair before it is debated. In any debate no member shall speak more than once on the same question until all others have spoken who desire to do so, nor more than twice upon the same question, except by consent of the council. 
Section 2-107. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1791, § 1, adopted May 10, 2016 , repealed § 2-107, in its entirety. Former § 2-107 pertained to "Calling for aye and nay vote," and was derived from Original Code. 
Section 2-108. - How questions determined. 
(a)  After debate, the presiding officer shall ensure that the motion is clear and call for the vote. 
(b)  No action of the council, except adjournment, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of four (4) or more members of the council. A tie vote means that the motion has been rejected. When a motion fails on a tie vote, the "no" votes prevail. All questions submitted to the council for decision shall be decided by a roll call vote of the council. The clerk shall announce the results of the vote. 
(c)  No ordinance or resolution appropriating money exceeding the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), imposing taxes, or authorizing the borrowing of money shall be passed except by a recorded affirmative vote of five (5) members. 
(d)  No rights in and to any streets, avenues, parks, bridges, or other public places, or gas, water, or electric works shall be sold except by ordinance or resolution passed by a recorded affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all elected members (six (6) members). 
(e)  Passage of a motion to approve, ordain, or resolve an item is required to take any positive action. For example, the defeat of a motion to deny a conditional use permit does not result in the approval of the permit; the permit must be approved by an affirmative motion. Conversely, if a motion to approve an ordinance to rezone property fails, the rezoning is deemed to have been denied. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ; Ord. No. 1885 , § 1, 1-8-19) 
Charter reference- § 3.14. 
State Law reference- Art. VII, § 9, Va. Constitution. 
Section 2-109. - Motion to reconsider. 
    No motion to reconsider a question which has been decided shall be entertained unless it is made by a member who voted with the prevailing side, and unless the motion to reconsider is made at the same meeting of the council or any adjournment thereof or the next subsequent meeting to that at which the question to be reconsidered was decided. All motions to reconsider shall be decided by a majority vote of the members present. In the event of a tie vote on the original motion, any council member may introduce a motion to reconsider. The motion cannot interrupt deliberation on a pending matter but is in order when action on a pending matter concludes. A motion to reconsider may not be used in a land use decision involving a rezoning, conditional use permit or special exception. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Charter reference- Reconsideration of vote at special meeting, § 3.14. 
Section 2-110. - Motion to adjourn. 
    The motion to adjourn shall always be in order, except: 
(1)  When a member has the floor; 
(2)  When the ayes and nays are being called; 
(3)  When the previous question has been ordered; or 
(4)  When a motion to adjourn has been made and lost without any other business intervening. 
    No motion to adjourn shall be debatable. The presiding officer, at the conclusion of the meeting's agenda, may also adjourn the meeting. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Section 2-111. - Robert's Rules of Order. 
    The rules of parliamentary procedure set out in this article and as contained in Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the council in its deliberations except in cases where Robert's Rules of Order may conflict with the laws of the Commonwealth, special rules adopted by council or by historic practice of council. However, the failure of council to strictly comply with Robert's Rules of Order shall not invalidate any action of council. Further, council shall have the right to temporarily suspend any of its rules by a vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members present. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Section 2-112. - Action by the council. 
    Items of business will be considered and dealt with one (1) at a time, and a new proposal may not be put forth until action on the preceding one (1) has been concluded. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1791, § 1, adopted May 10, 2016 , repealed and replaced § 2-112, in its entirety. Former § 2-112 pertained to "Suspension of rules," and was derived from Original Code. 
Section 2-113. - Public hearings. 
(a)  The "public hearings" section of the agenda shall be for public hearings as required by town, state or federal law, or as council may direct. This section shall include by way of illustration but not limitation: 
(1)  Petitions for amendments to the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Requests for conditional use permits; 
(3)  Ordinances as required by town charter § 3.15. 
(b)  The following rules shall apply during this section of the agenda: 
(1)  For zoning petitions and conditional use permits: 
a.  Staff will make a presentation summarizing the petition; 
b.  The applicant, or his or her representative, shall be allowed a maximum of ten (10) minutes of speaking time to make a presentation in support of the petition; 
c.  During the public hearing there shall be a time limit of three (3) minutes for each individual speaker; 
d.  The applicant shall then be allowed an additional three (3) minutes for rebuttal; 
e.  The floor will then be closed to public participation and open for council's discussion. If it wishes, council may ask questions of the speakers, who may respond, but may not engage in further debate. 
(2)  In all other public hearings: 
a.  During the public hearing there shall be a time limit of three (3) minutes for each individual speaker; 
b.  After the speaker has used the allotted time, council may ask questions of the speaker and the speaker may respond, but may not engage in further debate; 
c.  The floor will then be closed to public participation and open for council's discussion. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Section 2-114. - Quorum. 
(a)  As provided by town charter § 3.14, four (4) members of the council must be present to conduct business. 
(b)  Quorum refers to the number of members present at a meeting, not the number of members voting on an issue. If no quorum is present or if a quorum is lost, the council can only: 
(1)  Adjourn, 
(2)  Recess, or 
(3)  Take steps to obtain a quorum. 
(c)  If the Virginia Conflict of Interests Act prevents some council members from participating in an item of business, Virginia Code §§ 2.2-3113 and 15.2-1415 provide that a majority of the remaining members of council shall constitute a quorum. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Section 2-115. - Comments and queries. 
(a)  The presiding officer shall keep discussion germane to the subject. 
(b)  Council members may address questions to the town manager or staff present at the meeting. Staff members should be at the podium when answering council members' questions. All legal questions should be addressed to the town attorney. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Section 2-116. - Motions. 
(a)  Any member, including the presiding officer, may make a motion; however a member may make only one (1) motion at a time. 
(b)  Except for matters recommended by a council committee, or as otherwise stipulated in this article, all motions require a second and a motion dies for lack of a second. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Section 2-117. - Substantive motions. 
(a)  A substantive motion is any motion that deals with the merits of an item of business and is within the council's legal powers, duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  A substantive motion is out of order while another substantive motion is pending. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Section 2-118. - Procedural motions. 
(a)  Procedural motions are those motions that the council may use to act upon a substantive motion by amending it, delaying consideration of it, and so forth. Procedural motions are in order while a substantive motion is pending and at other times, except as otherwise noted. 
(b)  In addition to substantive proposals, only the following procedural motions and no others are in order. Unless otherwise noted, each motion and a second is debatable, may be amended, and requires four (4) votes (unless section 2-113 applies), a quorum being present, for adoption. Procedural motions are listed below in their order of priority. If a procedural option is not listed below, then it is not available. 
(1)  To appeal a procedural ruling of the presiding officer. A decision of the presiding officer ruling a motion in or out of order, determining whether a speaker has gone beyond reasonable standards of courtesy in his or her remarks, or entertaining and answering a question of parliamentary law or procedure may be appealed to the council which shall decide the matter by majority decision. Such an appeal is in order immediately after such a decision is announced and at no other time. The member making the motion need not be recognized by the presiding officer, the motion does not require a second, and the motion, if timely made, may not be ruled out of order. 
(2)  Motion to adjourn. See section 2-110. 
(3)  To take a brief recess. This motion allows the council to pause briefly in its proceedings. A motion to take a brief recess in between items on the agenda is in order. Members of council shall not discuss public business during the recess. 
(4)  To defer consideration. The council may defer action on a substantive motion to a more convenient time. The council may use the following motions to defer consideration of a substantive motion: 
a.  The motion to "lay on the table" is used to temporarily set aside an item of business during the same meeting to deal with a more urgent item. Once an item of business has been laid on the table, a motion to "take from the table" is needed to bring the item back before the public body for discussion. The motion should be acted upon before the end of the meeting. 
b.  The motion to "postpone" delays debate on an item of business so that it may be considered at a later date. Any motion to postpone consideration of an ordinance must conform with the requirements of charter § 3.15. 
c.  An item of business may be "postponed definitely," when it is continued to a definite time or date or "postponed indefinitely" if no future time or date is specified in the motion. A matter that has been postponed to a certain time or day shall be brought up again automatically when that time arrives. When a matter has been postponed indefinitely it takes an affirmative vote of a majority of the council to bring the matter back for further discussion. 
d.  Zoning Ordinance section 1152 requires that a zoning petition must be acted upon within six (6) months after the planning commission's recommendation. The council may defer action on a zoning petition for consideration at a more convenient time. However, the council may not dispose of a zoning petition with a motion to postpone indefinitely. 
[(5)]  [ Reserved. ] 
(6)  Call the question. The motion to call the question is not in order until every member of the council has had an opportunity to speak once and the deliberation by the council on an item of business has exceeded thirty (30) minutes. 
(7)  To amend. Any substantive motion properly on the floor may be amended. An amendment to a motion must be pertinent to the subject matter of the motion. An amendment is improper if adoption of the motion with that amendment added would have the same effect as rejection of the original motion. A proposal to substitute completely different wording for a motion or an amendment shall be treated as a substitute motion. A motion may be amended no more than twice. Once a motion has been offered to the council, it is up to the council to decide whether or not it should be changed by amendment. It is not necessary for the person making the original motion to approve of any proposed amendment to the motion. 
(8)  Substitute motion. A substitute motion shall be allowed to replace any motion properly on the floor. It shall have precedence over an existing motion and may be discussed prior to being voted on. If the substitute motion fails, the former motion can then be voted on. If the substitute motion passes, the substitute motion replaces the main motion and the matter is decided. No more than one (1) substitute motion may be made. 
(9)  Withdrawal of motion. A motion may be withdrawn by the introducer at any time before it is amended or before the presiding officer puts the motion to a vote, whichever occurs first. 
(10)  Motion to reconsider. See section 2-109. 
(11)  Motion to prevent reintroduction for six (6) months. The motion shall be in order immediately following the defeat of a substantive motion and at no other time. If adopted, the restriction imposed by the motion remains in effect for six (6) months. As with every other procedural motion, the motion to prevent reintroduction may be dissolved by a motion to suspend the rules. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Section 2-119. - Duty to vote. 
(a)  Each member of the council who is present at a meeting shall be required to vote upon all issues presented for decision unless prohibited from doing so by the Virginia Conflict of Interests Act or unless excused from voting by the other members of the council. A member who wishes to be excused from voting shall state his or her reasons for abstaining and the presiding officer shall ask if any of the remaining members object. If there are any objections, the council shall take a vote of the remaining members on the question of whether or not to allow the member to abstain from voting. 
(b)  If there is an abstention, it shall be the responsibility of the town clerk to note the abstention and the reason for abstaining for the record. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Section 2-120. - Decisions on points of order. 
    Any council member may raise a point of order without being recognized by the presiding officer. The presiding officer shall refer any point of order to the town attorney and/or the town clerk. They shall advise the presiding officer, who shall then make a ruling on the point of order. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Section 2-121. - Numbering and indexing of resolutions and ordinances. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the clerk to number and index all resolutions and ordinances adopted by the council. The resolutions shall be numbered consecutively and use the last two (2) digits of the calendar year. Example: for the first resolution in January, 2016, the resolution number would be shown as: 1-A-16. Ordinances shall be numbered consecutively. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
Section 2-122. - Special rules of procedure. 
    The council may adopt its own special rules of procedure to cover any situations that are not adequately addressed in this article. Adoption of special rules of procedure requires an affirmative vote of four (4) members of the council. 
( Ord. No. 1791, § 1, 5-10-16 ) 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Police, § 17-100 et seq.; fire department, § 17-200 et seq. 
State Law reference- Pensions and retirement, Code of Virginia, Title 51.1. 

Section 2-200. - Tenure of officers and employees. 
    All appointments of officers and hiring of other employees shall be without definite term, unless for temporary services not to exceed one year, or except as otherwise provided by general law or special act. 
State Law reference- § 15.2-1503(A). 
Section 2-201. - Authority of deputies, assistants and acting officers and employees. 
(a)  Authority vested in and duties imposed upon town officers by state law, the town Charter, this Code or other ordinances and resolutions of the town council may be exercised or performed by their deputies, assistants and other subordinates, to the extent not prohibited by state law, the town Charter, this Code or other ordinance or resolution of the town council. 
(b)  When any town officer or employee is absent or disabled, or when any office or position in the town government is vacant, the person designated by competent authority to act in the place of such absent or disabled town officer or employee or to hold temporarily the vacant office or position shall have the powers and perform the duties of such absent or disabled officer or employee or appertaining to such vacant office or position. 
State Law reference- § 15.2-1502. 
Section 2-202. - Participation in Virginia retirement system. 
(a)  The town shall participate in the Virginia Retirement System and all full-time pay plan officers and employees, and all part-time pay plan employees working an average of 30 or more hours per week shall be members of the Virginia Retirement System. 
(b)  The town council shall, each year, appropriate sufficient funds to make its required employer contributions to the board of trustees of the Virginia supplemental retirement system. All such contributions shall be paid by the finance director to such board of trustees in compliance with rules, regulations and procedures established by that board. 
(c)  The town manager shall be responsible for the performance by the town of all duties imposed upon the town and its member officers and employees under the applicable provisions of Code of Virginia, Title 51.1, Chapter 1, Article 5. The town manager may assign to the town clerk, finance director and other town employees specific duties in this connection. 
Section 2-203. - Right of entry for purposes of inspection. 
    Whenever any officer or employee of the town is required or authorized by state law, the provisions of this Code or any ordinance or resolution, or rules and regulations or orders issued thereunder, in order to carry out his or her duties thereunder, to enter any premises or vehicle for the purpose of making an inspection thereof or of anything therein contained, such officer or employee shall have the right to enter any such premises or vehicle in accordance with law at any reasonable time in pursuance of such duties. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIFIC OFFICERS 

Section 2-300. - Town manager. 
(a)  The town manager, as the chief administrative officer of the town as provided in section 4.02 of the Charter, shall be the administrative head of the town and shall be responsible for the proper management of all the affairs of the town which the governing body has authority to control. 
(b)  The town manager, unless otherwise provided by general law, charter, or by ordinance or resolution of the town, shall: 
(1)  See that all ordinances, resolutions, directives and orders of the town council and all laws of the Commonwealth required to be enforced through the town council or officers subject to the control of the town council are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Make reports to the town council from time to time as required or deemed advisable upon the affairs of the town under the manager's control and supervision; 
(3)  Receive reports from and give directions to all heads of offices and departments of the town under the manager's control and supervision; 
(4)  Submit to the town council a proposed annual budget, in accordance with general law, with the manager's recommendations; 
(5)  Execute the budget as finally adopted by town council; 
(6)  Keep the town council fully advised on the town's financial condition and its future financial needs; 
(7)  Appoint all officers and employees of the town, except as the manager may authorize the head of an office or department responsible to the town manager to appoint subordinates in such office or department. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law, Charter or ordinance, the town manager or his or her designee shall be authorized to make and execute, during the ordinary course of business and within the limitations of appropriations, all contracts on behalf of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1455, § 1, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1755, § 1, 1-13-15 ) 
Charter reference- Town manager generally, Art. IV. 
State Law reference- §§ 15.2-1536, 15.2-1540, 15.2-1541, 19.2-389. 
Section 2-301. - Town clerk. 
    The town clerk shall have such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by state law, the Charter, this Code and other ordinances and resolutions of the town council. No record or other item of personal property of the town shall be removed from the office of the town clerk except by the clerk's authority, and for which the clerk may require a written receipt, or by authority of the town council, the town manager or a valid subpoena duces tecum issued by a court, tribunal, officer or other body having competent jurisdiction. 
Charter reference- Duties of clerk in absence of mayor and vice-mayor, § 3.08; appointment, term and duties generally, § 3.12; duties relating to ordinances, §§ 3.15, 3.18; filing of oaths of office and official bonds, § 7.03; books, records and documents, § 7.04. 
Section 2-302. - Town attorney. 
(a)  The town council shall retain the services of a member of the bar of the Commonwealth, or a law firm or partnership of two (2) or more members of the bar of the commonwealth, and the person, firm or partnership so retained shall be known as the town attorney. 
(b)  The town attorney shall be the legal advisor to the town council and its committees and to the mayor, the town manager and other officers of the town, and when requested, shall furnish written or verbal opinions upon any subject involving questions of law in which the town is interested. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the town attorney to draft all bonds, deeds, obligations, contracts, leases, conveyances, agreements and other legal instruments, of whatever nature, which may be required by any ordinance or order of the town council, or which, by law, usage or agreement, should be drawn by the town. It shall also be the town attorney's duty to commence and prosecute all actions and suits to be brought by the town before any tribunal in this commonwealth, or to request the appointment of other counsel for such purpose, also to appear, defend and advocate the rights and interests of the town in any suit or prosecution brought against it, and the town attorney shall perform such other duties as are or may be required for the town under his or her contract therewith or by any ordinance or resolution of the town council. 
(d)  The town attorney, in consultation with the town manager, shall have the authority to compromise and settle disputes, claims and controversies involving the interests of the town, and to discharge any such claims; provided that, where any proposed compromise or settlement involves the payment of more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) by the town, the town attorney shall obtain the approval of the town council for such payment. The town attorney, in consultation with the town manager, is authorized to deny any claim against the town, its officers, officials, agents, or employees, for any reason supported by the law. 
(e)  The town attorney is authorized, with the concurrence of the Montgomery County Commonwealth's Attorney, to prosecute criminal cases charging the violation of town ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 1708, § 1, 1-14-14 ) 
Charter reference- Appointment, term, qualification and duties of attorneys § 3.19. 
State Law reference- §§ 15.2-1536, 15.2-1542. 
Section 2-303. - Claims procedure. 
(a)  Persons proposing to make a claim against the town, its officers, officials, agents, or employees, for injury to person or property or for wrongful death, alleged to have been sustained by reason of the negligence of the town, its officers, officials, agents, or employees, shall file within six (6) months after the injury or damage is alleged to have occurred, with the mayor, town manager, or town attorney, a written statement of the nature of the claim and of the time and place at which the injury or damage is alleged to have occurred. 
(b)  The claim notice shall be transferred to the town attorney who shall cause a factual investigation to be made of the claim, research the law governing the claim, and in consultation with the town manager, deny or offer to settle the claim or make a recommendation with respect thereto, in accord with section 2-302 of this Code. 
(c)  In reviewing any such claim, the town attorney shall consider any available insurance coverage and shall utilize such coverage when the town attorney shall deem such course in the best interest of the town, its officers, officials, agents, or employees. 
(d)  Settlement or denial of claims, or recommendations with respect thereto, shall be in accord with official written policies or ordinances of this council or law of the commonwealth and United States of America, as determined by the town attorney, as appropriate. 
Section 2-304. - Director of finance. 
    The director of finance shall have such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed for the office by state law, the Charter, this Code and other ordinances and resolutions of the town council. The director of finance shall issue, and keep comprehensive records of, all town licenses and permits for which no other issuing authority is indicated. 
Cross reference- Licenses, Ch. 11. 
State Law reference- §§ 15.2-1527, 15.2-1537. 
Section 2-305. - Signatures on town checks. 
    All checks drawn against the town shall be signed by the director of finance, or in the absence of the director of finance, either by the assistant director of finance or the town manager. 
Section 2-306. - Payment by credit or debit card. 
    The director of finance is authorized to accept payments of local taxes, other fees, or charges generated by the sale of utility services by use of a credit card or debit card. 
(Ord. No. 1244, § 2, 10-2-00) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3013. 
Section 2-307. - Background investigations of applicants for public employment and volunteer positions. 
(a)  In the interest of public welfare and safety and as authorized by Virginia Code §§ 15.2-1505.1 and 19.2-389, the human resources manager or the manager's designee shall request from the Virginia Central Criminal Record Exchange a criminal record check of each person offered town employment. The same background check shall be done for each person volunteering for town volunteer service whose anticipated duties or responsibilities may involve (i) access to public records or to personal information as defined in Virginia Code § 2.2-3801, (ii) accountability for public funds, (iii) access to town supplies, (iv) entry into secured areas outside of working hours, (v) right of entry onto private property, or (vi) child care or assistance to the elderly or disabled. 
(b)  In addition, in the interest of public welfare and safety and as authorized by Virginia Code §§ 15.2-1503.1 and 19.2-389, the human resources manager or the manager's designee may also require any applicant who accepts employment with the town or who volunteers as described above to submit to fingerprinting and to provide descriptive information to be forwarded along with the applicant's fingerprints through the central criminal record exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining criminal history information regarding the applicant. 
(c)  Where authorized under the provisions of Virginia Code §§ 15.2-1503.1 or 15.2-1505.1, the town may require applicants to pay for the cost of fingerprinting or a criminal records check, or both. 
(d)  The human resources manager or the manager's designee is authorized to obtain criminal history information from commercial sources if the record check or criminal history described in (a) or (b) is not available prior to the date the employee is to start employment with the town. 
(e)  (1)  An applicant's criminal history shall not, in itself, be a barrier to employment with the town, unless required by state or federal law. An applicant's criminal record shall be reviewed to determine if the conviction or pending charge is compatible with the nature of the employment or volunteer service. 
(2)  In making this determination, the human resources manager or designee who must be a governmental employee shall consider the following criteria: 
a.  The nature and seriousness of the crime; 
b.  The relationship of the crime to the work to be performed in the position; 
c.  The extent to which the position applied for might offer an opportunity to engage in further criminal activity of the same type; 
d.  The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity or fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the position being sought; 
e.  The extent and nature of the person's past criminal activity; 
f.  The age of the person at the time of the commission of the crime; 
g.  The amount of time that has elapsed since the person's last involvement in the commission of a crime; 
h.  The conduct and work activity of the person prior to and following the criminal activity; 
i.  Evidence of the person's rehabilitation or rehabilitative efforts while incarcerated or following release. 
    The human resources manager shall establish appropriate policies to guide these determinations. 
(f)  Any applicant who is denied employment or rejected as a volunteer on the basis of criminal history information obtained in accordance with this section may inspect that information for the purpose of clarifying, explaining or denying the information therein. 
(g)  The criminal history information provided in accordance with this section shall be used solely to assess eligibility for public employment or service, and shall not be disseminated to any person not involved in the assessment process. 
( Ord. No. 1755, § 1, 1-13-15 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - TOWN DEPARTMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Police, § 17-100 et seq.; fire department, § 17-200 et seq. 

Section 2-400. - Department of parks and recreation; director. 
(a)  There is hereby created the department of parks and recreation for the town. 
(b)  There shall be a director of parks and recreation appointed by the town manager. The director shall be the administrative head of the department of parks and recreation. The director shall have one (1) or more assistants and such staff as the town council from time to time shall authorize. 
(c)  The department of parks and recreation shall be under the supervision and control of the town manager, and the director of parks and recreation shall report directly to the town manager. 
Charter reference- Administrative departments, § 5.01 et seq. 
Section 2-401. - Duties of department. 
    It shall be the duty of the department of parks and recreation to: 
(1)  Develop and coordinate all recreational activities of the town. 
(2)  Prepare development plans for present parks and for future park areas. 
(3)  Investigate all applicable programs for park and recreation development and prepare necessary forms for such. 
(4)  Develop and supervise a park maintenance program. 
(5)  Develop and supervise a swimming pool operation. 
(6)  Coordinate town-wide beautification efforts. 
(7)  Perform such other duties and conduct such other activities in connection with the park, recreation and cultural needs of the inhabitants of the town as the town council shall from time to time provide. 
Cross reference- Amusements, Ch. 4; parades and other outdoor assemblies, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to establish and conduct system of public recreation and playgrounds, Code of Virginia, § 15.2.1806. 
Section 2-402. - Parks and recreation advisory board created; composition; appointment; terms of office; compensation. 
    There is hereby created a parks and recreation advisory board to be composed of not more than nine (9) members to be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the town council. Members shall serve for a term of four (4) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. All members shall take office the first day of September of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired term only. All members of the parks and recreation advisory board shall serve without compensation. 
Charter reference- Authority of council to create committees, boards and commissions, § 3.20. 
Section 2-403. - Same-Meetings; duties. 
    The parks and recreation advisory board shall meet periodically with the director of parks and recreation, as determined by the advisory board's by-laws. The advisory board shall advise and recommend to the director of parks and recreation, the town manager and the town council on all aspects of parks and recreation activities, and shall prepare an annual progress report on parks and recreation activities. 
( Ord. No. 1748, § 1 12-9-14 ) 
Section 2-404. - Required services and fees therefor for functions and events at the recreation center and community center. 
(a)  The following services are hereby required at the functions and events listed below, when conducted or held at the recreation center or community center, and the fees for such services are hereby established, as follows: 
(1)  The presence of a police officer shall be required at all dances. The person or organization sponsoring such dances shall pay the fees established by section 17-104 of this Code in the manner therein prescribed for the presence of such police officer. 
(2)  The presence of a supervisor shall be required during the use of either the recreation center or the community center when, in the opinion of the director of parks and recreation, supervision is required. The person or organization using either facility shall pay a minimum fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the presence of a supervisor for the first two (2) hours during such use. For each additional hour or part thereof, there is imposed a fee of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) per hour for the presence of said supervisor. 
(3)  The services of a custodian shall be required at any function or event at either the recreation center or community center which, in the opinion of the director of parks and recreation, will require clean-up or set-up beyond the usual work required for custodial upkeep of either building so used. The person or organization using either such building in such a manner to require such additional custodial service shall pay a minimum fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the first two (2) hours of service so required. For each additional hour or part thereof that custodial service is needed, there is imposed a fee of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50). 
(b)  The foregoing fees shall be paid to the director of parks and recreation or an employee designated by him. 
Section 2-405. - Recreation department fees, generally. 
(a)  Fees charged by the town for use of facilities, or participation in any league, program, or event, of the department of parks and recreation shall be established by resolution of the town council. 
(b)  Payment of department of parks and recreation fees shall be made prior to the use of such town facility or building or part thereof, or prior to participation in any league, program, or event sponsored by the department of parks and recreation. These fees shall be paid to the director of parks and recreation or his authorized designee and may be paid by appropriate credit card under standard banking practices. 
Charter reference- Authority for subsection (a), § 3.15(a)(5). 
Section 2-409. - Department of engineering and GIS; director. 
(a)  There is created the department of engineering and GIS (geographic information system) of the town. This department shall provide the functions of utility planning, erosion and sedimentation control, surveying, engineering, and GIS services for the town. 
(b)  There shall be a director of the department of engineering and GIS who shall be appointed by the town manager. The director of the department of engineering and GIS shall be the administrative head of this department and shall have such staff and assistants as the town council may from time to time authorize. 
(c)  The department of engineering and GIS shall be under the supervision and control of the town manager, and the director of this department shall report directly to the town manager. 
(d)  The director of engineering and GIS or, under written designation, his or her qualified designee, shall serve as the town's engineer. 
(e)  The director of engineering and GIS shall maintain in his or her office for public information comprehensive and accurate maps, plats, records of street grades and elevations, and data of similar character. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(a), 2-12-08) 
Section 2-410. - Department of planning and building; director. 
(a)  There is created the department of planning and building of the town. This department shall provide the functions of administering land use, zoning and building regulations for the town. 
(b)  There shall be a director of the department of planning and building who shall be appointed by the town manager. The director of the department of planning and building shall be the administrative head of this department and shall have such staff and assistants as the town council may from time to time authorize. 
(c)  The department of planning and building shall be under the supervision and control of the town manager, and the director of this department shall report directly to the town manager. 
(d)  The director of planning and building shall be the immediate supervisor of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 2-411. - Fee for review of site development plans; when payable. 
(a)  The fees charged by the department of planning and building shall be as established in this code or by a fee schedule in the budget ordinance or amendments thereto. Fees shall remain at the level established until amended by ordinance. 
(b)  Fees shall be due and payable at the time each application is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 1360, § 11.5, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1380, § 20(Exh. 1), 4-26-05; Ord. No. 1388, § 1, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Sec. 2-412. - Telecommunications lease application fee. 
(a)  The director of engineering and GIS shall charge an application fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for any person who proposes to lease space on a town water tank or other town property for the placement of commercial licensed wireless telecommunications facilities. The director shall charge the applicant a radio frequency review fee of one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00). 
(b)  The director shall charge the applicant who proposes to lease space on a town water tank an operations and maintenance review fee of three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) and a construction inspection fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(c)  The director shall charge the applicant who proposes to lease space on other town property an operations and maintenance review fee of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). 
(d)  The director shall charge the applicant such additional outside consultant review fees as may be incurred by the town in the review of the application. The director shall charge the applicant any additional construction inspection fees based on time and expenses as may be incurred by the town in the inspection of work completed. 
(Ord. No. 1293, § 1, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 2-420. - Department of public works; director. 
(a)  There is created the department of public works of the town. This department shall provide the functions of public utility facilities construction, operation, maintenance, and repair; maintenance and operation of general properties; street construction maintenance and repair; and landscaping, horticulture, and tree preservation. 
(b)  There shall be a director of public works who shall be appointed by the town manager. The director of public works shall be the administrative head of this department and shall have such staff and assistants as the town council may from time to time authorize. 
(c)  The department of public works shall be under the supervision and control of the town manager and the director of this department shall report directly to the town manager. 
(d)  The director of public works shall assume and carry out responsibility for all landscaping, tree preservation, tree planting, and care for public areas and land of and in the town. The department of public works shall serve as the town's tree department and shall address issues and formulate procedures and measures for the attainment of the town's goals of supporting, maintaining, planting, and preservation of trees in the town. The director of public works shall be responsible for writing and implementing the town's annual community forestry program, in accord with the town's public tree-care policies for planting, maintenance, and removal of trees and street trees, set out in Appendix A, Zoning Ordinance, Blacksburg Town Code. The community forestry program shall include an inventory of trees growing on public property, analysis of the present state of the urban forest with recommendations for future management, methods to address dead and hazardous tree removal, safety, fine pruning, planting, watering, fertilizing, and insect and disease control of trees on public property. 
Charter reference- Town to provide public works functions, § 5.01. 
Cross references- Sewers, Ch. 18; solid waste, Ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 20; water, Ch. 23. 
Section 2-421. - Establishment of bonus programs. 
    The town manager is authorized to establish bonus programs to address a variety of needs, including recruitment, retention, and performance. Bonuses may be provided to employees in accordance with adopted personnel rules and regulations. A "bonus" shall be defined as a lump-sum payment to an employee that is not part of the base salary. 
(Ord. No. 1504, § 1, 11-11-08) 
ARTICLE V. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PLACES 

Section 2-500. - In general. 
    The purpose of this article is to adopt regulations controlling and regulating smoking in public places in the town and to direct and authorize the town manager to develop and implement smoking policies and procedures for town-owned and controlled buildings and work areas. 
Section 2-501. - Authority; definitions. 
    The authority for this article is found in the Virginia Indoor Clean Air Act, § 15.2- 2820 and following, Code of Virginia, hereafter sometimes referred to as "state law." The definitions used there also apply here. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 2-9-2010) 
Section 2-502. - Smoking prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any of the following places: 
(1)  Elevators, regardless of capacity; 
(2)  Common areas in an educational facility, including, but not limited to, classrooms, hallways, auditoriums, and public meeting rooms; 
(3)  Indoor service lines and cashier areas; 
(4)  School buses and public conveyances; 
(5)  Hospital emergency rooms or local or district health departments; 
(6)  Polling rooms; 
(7)  Public restrooms in any building owned or leased by the Commonwealth or any agency thereof; 
(8)  The interior of a child day care center licensed pursuant to Virginia Code § 63.2-1701 that is not also used for residential purposes; however, this prohibition shall not apply to any area of a building not utilized by a child day care center unless otherwise prohibited by this section; 
(9)  Public restrooms of health care facilities; and 
(10)  Restaurants, as provided by Virginia Code § 15.2-2825. 
(b)  Reasonable no-smoking areas, considering the nature of the use and the size of the building, shall be designated in the following places: 
(1)  Retail and service establishments of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more serving the general public, including, but not limited to, department stores, grocery stores, drug stores, clothing stores, and shoe stores; 
(2)  Health care facilities, or educational facilities, except as provided in subsection (a) above; 
(3)  Rooms in which a public meeting or hearing is being held; 
(4)  Places of entertainment and cultural facilities, including but not limited to theaters, concert halls, gymnasiums, auditoriums, other enclosed arenas, art galleries, libraries, and museums; 
(5)  Indoor facilities used for recreational purposes; and 
(6)  Other public places. 
(c)  These prohibitions shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Conference or meeting rooms and public or private assembly rooms while such rooms are being used for private functions; 
(2)  Private work places; 
(3)  Areas of enclosed shopping centers or malls that are external to the retail stores therein, are used by customers as a route of travel from one store to another, and consist primarily of walkways and seating arrangements; 
(4)  Lobby areas of hotels, motels, and other establishments open to the general public for overnight accommodation; or 
(5)  Retail tobacco stores, tobacco warehouses, or tobacco manufacturing facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 2-9-2010) 
State Law reference- § 15.2-2804. 
Section 2-503. - Town-owned and controlled buildings and work places. 
(a)  The town manager shall provide in all town-owned and controlled buildings or enclosed public space reasonable smoking, and no smoking areas, considering the nature of the use and the size of the building. The town manager shall post as appropriate signs stating "Smoking Permitted" or "No Smoking." 
(b)  Designated smoking areas shall not encompass so much of the building structure, space, place, or area open to the general public that reasonable no smoking areas, considering the nature of the use and the size of the building, are not provided. 
(c)  Designated smoking areas shall be separate to the extent reasonably practicable from those rooms or areas entered by the public in the normal use of the particular business or institution. 
(d)  In designated smoking areas, ventilation systems and existing physical barriers shall be used when reasonably practicable to minimize the permeation of smoke into no smoking areas. However, this article shall not be construed as requiring physical modifications or alterations to any structure. 
(e)  The town manager may develop and implement policies and procedures governing smoking in parts of town-owned and controlled buildings or work areas not open to the general public in the normal course of business, except by invitation. The town manager shall enforce these policies and procedures through administrative methods. Any total ban on smoking in the workplace shall only be enforced by the town upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the affected employees voting. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 2-9-2010) 
State Law reference- §§ 15.2-2801, 15.2-2802. 
Section 2-504. - Signs. 
(a)  Any person who owns, manages, or otherwise controls any building or area in which smoking is regulated by a local ordinance shall post in an appropriate place in a clear, conspicuous, and sufficient manner, "Smoking Permitted" signs, or "No Smoking" signs, as appropriate; and, for restaurants, shall also post in a manner conspicuous to ordinary public view at or near each public entrance, "No Smoking Section Available" signs. 
(b)  No person shall smoke in a designated no smoking area. Any person who continues to smoke in such area after being asked to refrain from smoking may be subject to the civil penalty described below. 
(c)  In all cases, the civil penalty shall be payable to the town and shall be expended solely for public health purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 2-9-2010) 
State Law reference- § 15.2-2808. 
Section 2-505. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violation of this article, except for subsection 2-503(e) above, shall result in a civil penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) against the violator. Any aggrieved person, including the town, may seek to impose the civil penalty by civil action, which shall be paid to the town and shall be expended solely for public health purposes. 
(b)  Any law enforcement officer may issue a summons regarding a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 2-9-2010) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2809. 
Section 2-506. - Responsibility of building proprietors and managers. 
    Except as provided in Virginia Code § 15.2-2825, proprietors or persons who manage or otherwise control any building, structure, space, place or area governed by this article in which smoking is not otherwise prohibited may designate rooms or areas in which smoking is permitted, as follows: 
(1)  Designated smoking areas shall not encompass so much of the building, structure, space, place, or area open to the general public that reasonable no-smoking areas, considering the nature of the use and the size of the building, are not provided; 
(2)  Designated smoking areas shall be separate to the extent reasonably practicable from those rooms or areas entered by the general public in the normal use of the particular business or institution; and 
(3)  In designated smoking areas, ventilation systems and existing physical barriers shall be used when reasonably practicable to minimize the permeation of smoke into no-smoking areas. However, this shall not be construed as requiring physical modifications or alterations to any structure. 
(Ord. No. 1567, § 1, 2-9-2010) 
ARTICLE VI. - ARTS AND CULTURAL DISTRICT AND INCENTIVES FOR QUALIFYING BUSINESSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1660, § 1, adopted Dec. 11, 2012, repealed former Art. VI, §§ 2-600-2-608, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. Former Art. VI pertained to Tourism District and incentives for qualifying businesses and derived from Ord. No. 1548, § 1, adopted Nov. 10, 2009. 

Section 2-600. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The council of the Town of Blacksburg finds that the preservation and redevelopment of its historic downtown requires regulatory flexibility and economic incentives, and determines that an appropriate method is provided by the tourism zones authorized by Virginia Code § 58.1-3851. The town council finds that the establishment of a downtown tourism zone, as permitted by Virginia Code § 58.1-3851, will foster development of new tourism related businesses in the downtown that will serve a public purpose and benefit the public health, safety, welfare and convenience through the enhancement of public revenues and the creation of employment opportunities. 
(b)  The council also recognizes that the creative economy is critical to the town's future economic success. Arts and cultural enterprises enhance the lives of the town's residents and visitors and boost the town's economy. Therefore the council finds that it is important and appropriate to establish an arts and cultural district, as authorized by Virginia Code § 15.2-1129.1, that overlaps the existing downtown tourism zone. 
(Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Section 2-601. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings below, unless otherwise expressly indicated to the contrary: 
    Qualified arts business means a new business (including for profit or not-for-profit organizations, but not colleges or universities) primarily engaged in (i) presenting live performances of theatre, dance, music, or other imaginative work or (ii) producing or exhibiting physical works of art created by, or under the direction of, one (1) or more artists that are intended for unique production or limited reproduction. Museums or historic sites, the primary use of which is education, history or historic preservation, shall also qualify as qualified arts businesses. No minimum capital investment shall be required for a qualified arts business. 
    Qualified tourism business means a new business (including for profit or not-for-profit organizations) in the downtown tourism zone primarily engaged in (i) presenting live performances of theatre, dance, music, or other imaginative work or (ii) producing or exhibiting physical works of art created by, or under the direction of, one (1) or more artists that are intended for unique production or limited reproduction. Museums or historic sites, the primary use of which is education, history or historic preservation, shall also qualify as qualified tourism businesses, as well as (iii) retail businesses (not including restaurants). 
    A qualified tourism business shall provide a minimum capital investment of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in improvements to real estate located in the downtown tourism zone. Qualification shall be granted and certified in writing by the town manager or the manager's designee. 
    Qualified tourism zone resident means an owner or tenant of real property located in the downtown tourism zone who expands or rehabilitates such property to locate the operation of a qualified tourism business within the tourism zone. The minimum dollar amount of the proposed improvements shall be fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). The term "property" means a parcel, lot or unit for which a site plan or building permit application has been submitted for approval. Qualification of a zone resident shall be granted and certified in writing by the town manager or the manager's designee. A qualified zone resident shall only be eligible for the fee reimbursements under town ordinances described in section 2-605 of this article. 
    As used in this article, "new business" shall not include any business substantially similar in operation and in ownership to a business entity currently or previously doing business in the downtown tourism zone. 
(Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Section 2-602. - Boundaries of arts and cultural district. 
(a)  An arts and cultural district, as authorized by Virginia Code § 15.2-1129.1, known as the "Blacksburg Arts and Cultural District" is hereby established, in conjunction with the Downtown Tourism Zone previously established by Ordinance Number 1548. The boundaries of the Blacksburg Arts and Cultural District are as set forth on the map entitled "Blacksburg Arts and Cultural District and Zones," dated April 11, 2016, as maintained in the planning and building department, the provisions of which are incorporated fully herein by reference. Within the Blacksburg Arts and Cultural District, there shall be three (3) sub-zones: 
(1)  The "Live/Work/Sell Arts Overlay Zone," or "Arts Overlay Zone"; 
(2)  The "Downtown Tourism Zone"; and 
(3)  The "Creative Transitional Zone." 
The boundaries of these three (3) separate zones are set forth in the above-referenced map; each zone offers different incentives, as set forth in the following sections. 
(b)  The designation of this arts and cultural district and the establishment of its three (3) zones shall not in any respect override any applicable Town Code requirements, except as expressly set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 12-11-12; Ord. No. 1794, § 1, 6-14-16 ) 
Section 2-603. - License tax rebate for qualified tourism businesses. 
(a)  All qualified tourism businesses shall be entitled to a rebate of business, professional and occupational license taxes imposed by chapter 11 of the Town Code as follows: 
(1)  One hundred (100) percent rebate in year one (1); 
(2)  Seventy-five (75) percent rebate in year two (2); 
(3)  Fifty (50) percent rebate in year three (3). 
    Year one (1) is the first full calendar year in which a business operates as a qualified tourism business. However, if a business operates as a qualified tourism business for a period of less than six (6) months in the calendar year, such qualified tourism business may elect to designate the following calendar year as year one (1) for purposes of obtaining the business tax rebate. 
(b)  The rebate shall apply for a period of three (3) calendar years or until such time that the business no longer operates as a qualified tourism business, whichever is the first to occur. If a business ceases to be a qualified tourism business or removes its operation from the district or town during a year in which the rebate applies, the business shall not be qualified or receive the rebate for that year. 
(c)  (i)  To qualify for a business license tax rebate under this article, during the first twelve (12) months of operation within the tourism zone, a qualified tourism business must apply to the town manager or the manager's designee, who will determine if the business is a qualified tourism business. The qualified tourism business shall have the burden of demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the town manager, that it meets the definition of a qualified tourism business and that it meets all applicable criteria for a business license tax rebate. The qualified tourism business shall also file an annual business license application with the director of finance and shall provide the director with certification from the town manager that the business is a qualified tourism business. The amount of gross receipts to be earned shall be set out in the license application and shall be subject to verification by the director of finance by audit or inspection of documents. The qualified tourism business shall also provide the director with proof that no local taxes or fees are outstanding at the time of application for the business license tax rebate. 
(ii)  If more than one-half (1/2) of the gross receipts of a qualified tourism business are derived from a licensable activity that qualifies the business, the business license tax assessed on all gross receipts of such licensable activity shall be subject to the graduated rebates described above. If one-half (1/2) or less of the gross receipts of a particular licensable activity of a qualified tourism business is derived from qualifying operations, the graduated rebates shall be applied only to the amount of tax attributable to the gross receipts earned from the qualifying business activity. The determinations required by this subsection shall be performed by the finance director. 
(d)  Failure of a qualified tourism business to pay in full by the due date any taxes imposed by the town shall result in the denial or revocation of the tax rebate for the remainder of the current calendar year. 
(e)  All business license tax rebates are subject to adjustment by the director of finance based on actual gross receipts earned from qualifying tourism business activities. Any additional business license tax assessed due to such adjustments, or due to revocation of the tax rebate, shall be subject to collection and delinquency provisions set out in chapter 11 of the Town Code. 
(Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Section 2-604. - License tax exemption for qualified arts businesses in the Arts Overlay Zone. 
(a)  All qualified arts businesses in the Arts Overlay Zone shall be entitled to an exemption from business, professional and occupational license taxes imposed by chapter 11 of the Town Code as follows: 
(1)  One hundred (100) percent exemption in year one (1); 
(2)  Seventy-five (75) percent exemption in year two (2); 
(3)  Fifty (50) percent exemption in year three (3). 
    Year one (1) is the first full calendar year in which a business operates as a qualified arts business. However, if a business operates as a qualified arts business for a period of less than six (6) months in the calendar year, such qualified arts business may elect to designate the following calendar year as year one (1) for purposes of obtaining the business license tax exemption. 
(b)  The exemption shall apply for a period of three (3) calendar years or until such time that the business no longer operates as a qualified arts business, whichever is the first to occur. 
(c)  (i)  To qualify for a business license tax exemption under this article, during the first twelve (12) months of operation, a qualified arts business must apply to the town manager or the manager's designee, who will determine if the business is a qualified arts business. The qualified arts business shall have the burden of demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the town manager, that it meets the definition of a qualified arts business and that it meets all applicable criteria for a business license tax exemption. The qualified arts business shall also file an annual business license application with the director of finance and shall provide the director with certification from the town manager that the business is a qualified arts business. The amount of gross receipts to be earned shall be set out in the license application and shall be subject to verification by the director of finance by audit or inspection of documents. The qualified arts business shall also provide the director with proof that no local taxes or fees are outstanding at the time of application for the business license tax exemption. 
(ii)  If more than one-half (1/2) of the gross receipts of a qualified arts business are derived from a licensable activity that qualifies the business, the business license tax assessed on all gross receipts of such licensable activity shall be subject to the graduated exemption described above. If one-half (1/2) or less of the gross receipts of a particular licensable activity of a qualified arts business is derived from qualifying operations, the graduated exemption shall be applied only to the amount of tax attributable to the gross receipts earned from the qualifying business activity. The determinations required by this subsection shall be performed by the finance director. 
(d)  Failure of a qualified arts business to pay in full by the due date any other taxes imposed by the town shall result in the denial or revocation of the tax exemption for the remainder of the current calendar year. 
(e)  All business license tax exemptions are subject to adjustment by the director of finance based on actual gross receipts earned from qualifying arts business activities. Any additional business license tax assessed due to such adjustments, or due to revocation of the tax exemption, shall be subject to collection and delinquency provisions set out in chapter 11 of the Town Code. 
(Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Section 2-605. - License tax exemption for qualified arts businesses in the Creative Transitional Zone. 
(a)  All qualified arts businesses in the Creative Transitional Zone shall be entitled to an exemption from business, professional and occupational license taxes imposed by chapter 11 of the Town Code as follows: 
(1)  One hundred (100) percent exemption in year one (1); 
(2)  Seventy-five (75) percent exemption in year two (2); 
(3)  Fifty (50) percent exemption in year three (3). 
    Year one (1) is the first full calendar year in which a business operates as a qualified arts business. However, if a business operates as a qualified arts business for a period of less than six (6) months in the calendar year, such qualified arts business may elect to designate the following calendar year as year one (1) for purposes of obtaining the business license tax exemption. 
(b)  The exemption shall apply for a period of three (3) calendar years or until such time that the business no longer operates as a qualified arts business, whichever is the first to occur. 
(c)  (i)  To qualify for a business license tax exemption under this article, during the first twelve (12) months of operation, a qualified arts business must apply to the town manager or the manager's designee, who will determine if the business is a qualified arts business. The qualified arts business shall have the burden of demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the town manager, that it meets the definition of a qualified arts business and that it meets all applicable criteria for a business license tax exemption. The qualified arts business shall also file an annual business license application with the director of finance and shall provide the director with certification from the town manager that the business is a qualified arts business. The amount of gross receipts to be earned shall be set out in the license application and shall be subject to verification by the director of finance by audit or inspection of documents. The qualified arts business shall also provide the director with proof that no local taxes or fees are outstanding at the time of application for the business license tax exemption. 
(ii)  If more than one-half (1/2) of the gross receipts of a qualified arts business are derived from a licensable activity that qualifies the business, the business license tax assessed on all gross receipts of such licensable activity shall be subject to the graduated exemption described above. If one-half (1/2) or less of the gross receipts of a particular licensable activity of a qualified arts business is derived from qualifying operations, the graduated exemption shall be applied only to the amount of tax attributable to the gross receipts earned from the qualifying business activity. The determinations required by this subsection shall be performed by the finance director. 
(d)  Failure of a qualified arts business to pay in full by the due date any other taxes imposed by the town shall result in the denial or revocation of the tax exemption for the remainder of the current calendar year. 
(e)  All business license tax exemptions are subject to adjustment by the director of finance based on actual gross receipts earned from qualifying arts business activities. Any additional business license tax assessed due to such adjustments, or due to revocation of the tax exemption, shall be subject to collection and delinquency provisions set out in chapter 11 of the Town Code. 
(Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Section 2-606. - Fee reimbursements under town ordinances for qualified tourism businesses. 
    The fee reimbursements provided below shall apply to qualified tourism businesses and, where applicable, qualified zone residents, for new construction, alterations and rehabilitation, provided: (i) that at least one hundred (100) percent of the total cost of the construction is expended on facilities which will house or directly accommodate a qualified tourism business; and (ii) that the application for fee reimbursements is submitted to the town manager within eighteen (18) months from the date a certificate of occupancy is issued. Fees reimbursed pursuant to this article shall be paid out by the town manager, in conjunction with the finance director. Applications for reimbursement of the fees set out below shall be made to the town manager, along with supporting documentation demonstrating that the application meets the criteria for fee reimbursement: 
(a)  Fees imposed under the building code. The maximum reimbursement for any qualified tourism business shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Building code fees remitted to the Commonwealth of Virginia or other state agencies are not reimbursable. 
(b)  Fees imposed for subdivision and site plan review under the town's subdivision regulations (Appendix B) and the town's site plan requirements. 
(c)  Water and sewer connection fees imposed under Town Code chapters 18 and 24. 
(Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Section 2-607. - Fee exemptions under town ordinances for qualified arts businesses in the Arts Overlay Zone. 
    The fee exemptions provided below shall apply to qualified arts businesses in the Arts Overlay Zone for new construction, alterations and/or rehabilitation, provided: (i) that at least one hundred (100) percent of the total cost of the construction is expended on facilities which will house or directly accommodate a qualified arts business; and (ii) that the application for fee exemptions is submitted to the town manager within eighteen (18) months from the date a certificate of occupancy is issued. Applications for exemption from the fees set out below shall be made to the town manager, along with supporting documentation demonstrating that the application meets the criteria for exemption: 
(a)  Fees imposed under the building code. The maximum exemption for any qualified arts business shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Building code fees remitted to the Commonwealth of Virginia or other state agencies are not exempt. 
(b)  Fees imposed for subdivision and site plan review under the town's subdivision regulations (Appendix B) and the town's site plan requirements. 
(c)  Water and sewer connection fees imposed under Town Code chapters 18 and 24. 
(d)  Erosion and sediment control plan review and inspection fees imposed under Town Code chapter 10. 
(e)  Entrance permit fees. 
(f)  Fees imposed under the zoning ordinance. Qualified arts businesses in the Arts Overlay Zone shall be exempt from fees required for sign, zoning and conditional use permits required to establish the qualifying business; however, to qualify for this exemption, the arts business must demonstrate that it has registered with the planning and building department as required by the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Section 2-608. - Fee exemptions under town ordinances for qualified arts businesses in the Creative Transitional Zone. 
    The fee exemptions provided below shall apply to qualified arts businesses in the Creative Transitional Zone for new construction, alterations and/or rehabilitation, provided (i) that at least one hundred (100) percent of the total cost of the construction is expended on facilities which will house or directly accommodate a qualified arts business; and (ii) that the application for fee exemptions is submitted to the town manager within eighteen (18) months from the date a certificate of occupancy is issued. Applications for exemption from the fees set out below shall be made to the town manager, along with supporting documentation demonstrating that the application meets the criteria for exemption: 
(a)  Fees imposed under the building code. The maximum exemption for any qualified arts business shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Building code fees remitted to the Commonwealth of Virginia or other state agencies are not exempt. 
(b)  Fees imposed for subdivision and site plan review under the town's subdivision regulations (Appendix B) and the town's site plan requirements. 
(c)  Water and sewer connection fees imposed under Town Code chapters 18 and 24. 
(d)  Erosion and sediment control plan review and inspection fees imposed under Town Code chapter 10. 
(e)  Entrance permit fees. 
(f)  Sign permit fees imposed under the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Section 2-609. - Administration. 
    This article shall be administered and enforced by the town manager or the manager's designee. The town manager, together with the department of finance and the department of planning and building, will review the criteria and incentives for the downtown tourism zone and arts and cultural district programs annually to assure alignment with the town's strategy for the development of downtown. The town manager or the manager's designee shall develop programs to educate the public and potential businesses of the benefits of the arts and cultural district and Downtown Tourism Zone. 
(Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Section 2-610. - Nonwaiver. 
    Unless expressly stated herein, this article shall not be construed to waive the requirement of any ordinance, regulation or policy of the town, including, but not limited to, those ordinances, regulations and policies which require permits and approvals for land use and construction. Additionally, unless stated otherwise herein, nothing in this article shall be construed as waiving the right of the town to enforce its ordinances, regulations or policies to collect any taxes, fees, fines, penalties, or interest imposed by law on a qualified tourism business or qualified zone resident or upon real or personal property owned or leased by a qualified tourism business or qualified zone resident. The town reserves the right to remove qualified tourism business, qualified arts business or qualified zone resident status for any business that is not compliant with any town ordinance, regulation, policy or other legal requirement, including the payment of any required taxes or fees. 
(Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Section 2-611. - Restrictions. 
(a)  No qualified tourism business, qualified arts business or qualified zone resident may apply for or receive a tax or fee rebate, exemption or reimbursement under this article on the basis of a building permit issued for construction commenced prior to the establishment of the original Downtown Tourism Zone on November 10, 2009 or the arts and cultural district on December 11, 2012. 
(b)  The incentives established in this article shall be provided pursuant to and shall be subject to the appropriation of sufficient funds by the town council. The amount of any tax or fee rebate, exemption or reimbursement provided to any business pursuant to this article shall be a public record. The town manager shall develop policies to address the limitations of funding. 
(Ord. No. 1660, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Chapter 3 - AGRICULTURAL AND FORESTAL DISTRICTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, ch. 5; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 3-100. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for procedures to effectuate Title 15.2, Chapter 43 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, relating to the creation of agricultural and forestal districts. It is the policy of the Town to conserve and protect and to encourage the development and improvement of the Town's agricultural and forestal lands for the production of food and other agricultural and forestal products. It is also the policy of the Town to conserve and protect agricultural and forestal lands as valued natural and ecological resources which provide essential open spaces for clean air sheds, watershed protection, wildlife habitat, as well as for aesthetic purposes. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a means for a mutual undertaking by landowners and the Town to protect and enhance agricultural and forestal land as a viable segment of the Commonwealth's economy and as an economic and environmental resource of major importance. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, Title 15.2, Chapter 43, § 15.2-4300 et seq. 
Section 3-101. - Definitions. 
    Terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings assigned to them in Title 15.2, Chapter 43, section 15.2-4302, as such section may from time to time be amended. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4302. 
Section 3-102. - Advisory Committee created; membership; powers. 
(a)  There is hereby established an Agricultural and Forestal District Advisory Committee. Membership shall consist of four (4) landowners who are engaged in agricultural or forestal production, four (4) other landowners of the town, the Director of Finance, and one (1) member of the town council. The members of the committee shall be appointed by the town council, and the members shall serve at the pleasure of council. 
(b)  The advisory committee shall elect a chair and a vice chair and may elect or appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the committee. 
(c)  The committee shall have such powers and duties as set forth in § 15.2-4304 of the Code of Virginia. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4304. 
ARTICLE II. - CREATION, ADDITION, AND WITHDRAWAL FROM DISTRICT 

Section 3-201. - Creation of District. 
(a)  During the month of January of any calendar year, any owner or owners of land may submit an application to the town council for the creation of an agricultural, forestal, or agricultural and forestal district within the town. Each district shall have a core of no less than 200 acres in one parcel or in contiguous parcels. A parcel not part of the core may be included in a district if the nearest boundary of the parcel is within one mile of the boundary of the core, or if it is contiguous to a parcel in the district the nearest boundary of which is within one mile of the boundary of the core. No land shall be included in any district without the signature on the application, or the written approval of all owners thereof. 
(b)  The Town Manager shall prescribe an application form to be used by all applicants for the creation of a district, which form shall meet the minimum requirements of section 15.2-4303 of the Code of Virginia. The application shall describe any conditions to creation of the district and the period before the review of the district. 
(c)  The application fee shall be $150.00. 
(d)  Any district created under this chapter shall have a term of no less than four and no greater than ten years. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4305; § 15.2-4303 (fee); § 15.2-4311 (expiration date); § 15.2-4309 (conditions to be stated in application). 
Section 3-202. - Process for review of application-Referral to Planning Commission; notice. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a district or for an addition to an existing district, the town council shall refer such application to the planning commission. The planning commission shall provide notice of the application through each of the following methods: 
(1)  Publish a notice in a newspaper having general circulation within the district; 
(2)  Post notice in five conspicuous places within the district; 
(3)  Mail notice to adjacent property owners, via first class mail. 
(b)  The notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  An application for a district has been filed with the town council and referred to the planning commission pursuant to Virginia Code Title 15.2, chapter 43; 
(2)  The application will be on file open to public inspection in the office of the town clerk; 
(3)  Montgomery County may propose a modification which must be filed with the planning commission within thirty days of the date that the notice is first published; 
(4)  Any owner of additional qualifying land may join the application within thirty days from the date the notice is first published or, with the consent of town council, at any time before the town council public hearing; 
(5)  Any owner who joined in the application may withdraw his or her land, in whole or in part, by written notice filed with the town council, at any time before the town council adopts an ordinance creating or adding land to the district; 
(6)  Additional qualifying lands may be added to an existing district each January, pursuant to the terms of Chapter 3 of the Blacksburg Code; 
(7)  The application and proposed modifications will be submitted to the Advisory Committee; and 
(8)  Upon receipt of the report of the advisory committee, a public hearing will be held by the planning commission on the application and any proposed modifications. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4307. 
Section 3-203. - Same-Referral to advisory committee. 
    The planning commission shall refer such application and proposed modifications to the advisory committee. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4307. 
Section 3-204. - Same-Action by advisory committee. 
    The advisory committee shall review the application and proposed modifications, and make recommendations to the planning commission. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4308. 
Section 3-205. - Same-Planning commission review. 
(a)  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the application, and report its recommendations to the town council. The planning commission shall make a report including but not limited to the potential effect of the district and proposed modifications upon the town's planning policies and objectives. 
(b)  The planning commission shall then publish notice in a newspaper having general circulation within the district, describing the district or addition, any proposed modifications and any recommendations of the planning commission and the advisory committee. 
(c)  In addition, the planning commission shall send the notice by first-class mail to adjacent property owners and to the Montgomery County Executive. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4307. 
Section 3-206. - Same-Town council review. 
(a)  The town council, after receiving the report of the planning commission and the advisory committee, shall hold a public hearing on the application. 
(b)  After such public hearing, but no later than 180 days after the application was originally submitted, the town council may by ordinance create the district or add land to an existing district as applied for, or with any modifications it deems appropriate. The ordinance shall state any conditions to creation of the district, and shall prescribe the period before the first review of the district. 
(c)  The town council may require, as a condition to creation of the district, that any parcel in the district shall not, without the prior approval of the governing body, be developed to any more intensive use or to certain more intensive uses, other than uses resulting in more intensive agricultural or forestal production, during the period which the parcel remains within the district. 
(d)  Any conditions to creation of the district and the period before the review of the district shall be described, either in the application or in a notice at least two weeks prior to the adoption of the ordinance creating the district: 
(1)  Published in a newspaper having a general circulation within the district; and 
(2)  Mailed via first class mail to all landowners in the district. 
(e)  The town council shall submit a copy of the ordinance with maps to the Montgomery County Commissioner of Revenue, and the State Forester, and the Commissioner of Agriculture and Consumer Services for information purposes. 
(f)  The town council shall identify the district on the zoning map, where applicable, and shall designate the district on the comprehensive plan map each time the comprehensive plan map is updated. 
State Law reference- § 15.2-4309. 
Section 3-207. - Criteria for review of application. 
    Land being considered for inclusion in a district shall be evaluated by the advisory committee and the planning commission through the Virginia Land Evaluation and Site Assessment (LESA) System. The following factors shall be considered by the local planning commission and the advisory committee: 
(1)  The agricultural and forestal significance of land within the district or addition and in areas adjacent thereto; 
(2)  The presence of any significant agricultural lands or significant forestal lands within the district and in areas adjacent thereto that are not now in active agricultural or forestal production; 
(3)  The nature and extent of land uses other than active farming or forestry within the district and in areas adjacent thereto; 
(4)  Local developmental patterns and needs; 
(5)  The comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance; 
(6)  The environmental benefits of retaining lands in the district for agricultural and forestal uses; and 
(7)  Any other matter which may be relevant. 
    In judging the agricultural and forestal significance of land, any relevant agricultural or forestal maps may be considered, as well as soil, climate, topography, other natural factors, markets for agricultural and forestal products, the extent and nature of farm structures, the present status of agriculture and forestry, anticipated trends in agricultural economic conditions and such other factors as may be relevant. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4306. 
Section 3-208. - Effects of Districts. 
(a)  Land lying within a district and used in agricultural or forestal production shall automatically qualify for an agricultural or forestal use-value assessment pursuant to Article 4 (§ 58.1-3229 et seq.) of Chapter 32 of Title 58.1, if the requirements for such assessment contained therein are satisfied. 
(b)  No town ordinance shall unreasonably restrict or regulate farm structures or farming and forestry practices in contravention of the purposes of this chapter unless such restrictions or regulations bear a direct relationship to public health and safety. 
(c)  Any parcel in the district shall not, without the prior approval of town council, be developed to any more intensive use, other than uses resulting in more intensive agricultural or forestal production, during the period which the parcel remains within the district. 
(d)  The comprehensive plan and zoning and subdivision ordinances shall be applicable within the district, to the extent that they are not in conflict with the conditions to creation or continuation of the district set forth in the ordinance creating or continuing the district or the purposes of Title 15.2, Chapter 43, Code of Virginia. 
(e)  The creation of a district under this chapter shall have such other effects as prescribed by the Code of Virginia, Title 15.2, Chapter 43. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-4312, 15.2-4313. 
Section 3-209. - Addition to District. 
    Additional parcels of land may be added to an existing district by following the process prescribed for the creation of a new district. The criteria for evaluating a new district shall be applied to any application to add land to an existing district. Applications to add parcels of land to an existing district shall be accepted during the month of January of any calendar year. Such additions shall be reviewed at the time previously established for review of the district to which they are added. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4310. 
Section 3-210. - Withdrawal of land from District. 
(a)  At any time after the creation of a district under this chapter any owner of land lying in such district may file a written request to withdraw all or part of his or her land from the district for good and reasonable cause. Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4314 shall govern the procedure and criteria for review of the application, and the effects of any such withdrawal. 
(b)  When a district is reviewed, land within the district may be withdrawn at the owner's discretion by filing a written notice with the town council at any time before it acts to continue, modify or terminate the district. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-4314, 15.2-4311. 
ARTICLE III. - REVIEW OF DISTRICT 

Section 3-300. - Review of district. 
(a)  Town Council may review any district created under this chapter no less than four and no greater than ten years after the date of its creation and every four to ten years thereafter. 
(b)  Town Council may determine that review is unnecessary. If so, it shall set the year in which the next review shall occur. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4311. 
Section 3-301. - Process for review of district. 
(a)  If town council determines that a review is necessary, it shall begin such review at least ninety days prior to the expiration date of the period established when the district was created. 
(b)  Town council shall refer the review to the advisory committee and planning commission for recommendations whether to terminate, modify or continue the district. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4311. 
Section 3-302. - Same-Planning commission or advisory committee review. 
(a)  Either the planning commission or the advisory committee shall schedule a public meeting with the owners of land within the district. 
(b)  Written notice of the public meeting shall be mailed via first class mail to all such owners. 
(c)  The notice shall state: 
(1)  The time and place for the meeting; 
(2)  The district is being reviewed by the town council; 
(3)  The town council may continue, modify, or terminate the district; and 
(4)  Land may be withdrawn from the district at the owner's discretion by filing a written notice with the town council at any time before it adopts an ordinance to continue, modify or terminate the district. 
(d)  The planning commission and advisory committee shall make recommendations to town council. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4311. 
Section 3-303. - Same-Town council review. 
(a)  Town council shall hold a public hearing to review the district. 
(b)  Town council may stipulate conditions to the continuation of the district, and may establish a period before the next review of the district, which may be different from the conditions or period established when the district was created. 
(c)  Any such different conditions or period shall be described in a notice sent by first-class mail to all owners of land within the district and published in a newspaper having a general circulation with the district at least two weeks prior to adoption of the ordinance continuing the district. 
(d)  Unless the district is modified or terminated by the town council, the district shall continue as originally constituted, with the same conditions and period before the next review as that established when the district was created. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4311. 
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 4-100. - Circuses, carnivals and merry-go-rounds. 
(a)  No person shall exhibit any circus, carnival, merry-go-round or any other show of any kind, at any place within the town, unless it be situated so as not to disturb or annoy any of the citizens, and unless in addition, it shall first have been approved by the town council. 
(b)  The license tax for circuses, carnivals, and merry-go-rounds shall be forty-five dollars ($45.00) for each performance held in the town, but not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) total. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN-AIR CONCERTS AND SIMILAR ENTERTAINMENTS 

Section 4-200. - Permit required; exception. 
(a)  No person shall sponsor, organize or conduct within the town any open-air concert, music festival or other similar entertainment, for which an admission fee is charged or other consideration given for attendance thereat, except pursuant to a permit issued by the town council. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, person in charge, lessee or tenant of any property to permit the use of such property for any purpose for which a permit is required under this section, unless such permit has been granted by the town council. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any concert, music festival or other similar entertainment which is to be held on the grounds of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. 
Section 4-201. - Application for permit. 
    Each application for a permit under this division shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the person who shall be in charge of the activity for which the permit is sought, and shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, the place and date for the holding of the activity, the number of persons expected to attend, arrangements to be provided by the applicant for the accommodation of the persons expected to attend, and such other information as may be required by the town council. 
Section 4-202. - Appearance of applicant before council. 
    Prior to issuance of a permit under this division, the town council may require the applicant to appear before the council, in open meeting, and answer such questions relative to the activity for which the permit is sought as may be deemed necessary by the members of the council, to enable them to determine whether or not a permit should be granted. 
Section 4-203. - Issuance or denial of permit-Generally. 
    Subject to the provisions of section 4-204, the town council may, in its discretion, issue a permit applied for under this division; provided, however, if upon due consideration the council shall find reasonable likelihood of any of the following, the permit shall be denied: 
(1)  That adequate measures to preserve law and order, or to prevent the illegal use of drugs, narcotics, intoxicating liquor or marijuana, will not be provided by the applicant. 
(2)  That the number of persons or vehicles expected to attend the activity for which a permit is sought would impose an undue burden on the streets and parking places of the town or the public ways entering the town. 
(3)  That adequate sanitary facilities would not be provided for the persons expected to attend the activity for which the permit is sought. 
(4)  That adequate facilities for providing food or lodging to those in attendance at the activity for which the permit is sought would not be available. 
(5)  That the holding of the activity for which the permit is sought would be contrary to the peace, good order, comfort, convenience or general welfare of the town and its inhabitants. 
Section 4-204. - Payment of license tax prerequisite to issuance of permit. 
    No permit shall be granted under this division until the license tax, if any, provided for in Chapter 11, Town Code, has been paid. 
Section 4-205. - Contents of permit. 
    A permit issued under this division shall prescribe the time during which the activity is to be conducted and any other conditions or restrictions which the council deems necessary or desirable. 
ARTICLE III. - POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- License tax on pool and billiards § 11-203. 

Section 4-300. - Exemptions from article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to an establishment in which not more than three (3) miniature or bumper pool tables that operate on the coin-in-the-slot principle are exclusively kept or played. 
Section 4-301. - Minors prohibited. 
(a)  No minor, unless accompanied by the minor's parent, shall frequent, play in or loiter in any public poolroom or billiard room, nor shall the proprietor of any public poolroom or billiard room or the proprietor's agent permit any minor to frequent, play in or loiter in any such place. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall apply to any military or naval personnel in uniform in any poolroom or billiard room. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate presence of minors in places of amusement, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-432. 
Section 4-302. - Closing hours. 
    Public pool rooms and billiard rooms shall be closed and vacated each night not later than 1:00 a.m. and shall reopen the next morning not earlier than 7:00 a.m. 
Section 4-303. - Obstruction of view from outside. 
    No person owning, managing or otherwise in charge of any public poolroom or billiard room shall permit, at any time, any shades, blinds, curtains, screens or other obstructions to prevent a clear view from the outside into such room. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC DANCES AND DANCE HALLS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- License tax on dance halls, § 11-203. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate public dance halls, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Section 4-400. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Manager: Any person charged with conducting the business affairs of a public dance hall or a teenage nightclub, or in his or her absence during hours of operation, the person acting in his or her stead. 
    Public dance: A dance open to the general public where dancing is permitted, at which an admission fee is charged, or for which compensation is in any manner received, either directly or indirectly, by cover charge or otherwise, or where refreshments or food or any form of merchandise are served for compensation before, during or after dancing. The sale of any refreshments, foods or any form of merchandise at any such place or the exhibiting of such for sale shall be deemed direct compensation for such public dance within the meaning of this section. 
    Public dance hall: Any place or business open to the general public on a regular basis where dancing is permitted, at which an admission fee is charged, or for which compensation is in any manner received, either directly or indirectly, by cover charge or otherwise, or where refreshments or food or any form of merchandise are served for compensation before, during or after dancing. The sale of any refreshments, foods or any form or merchandise at any such place or the exhibiting of such for sale shall be deemed direct compensation for any public dance hall within the meaning of this section. Notwithstanding the above provisions of this paragraph, a restaurant located in the town licensed under Code of Virginia, §§ 4.1-100 and 4.1-210 to serve food and beverages and having a dance floor, with an area not exceeding ten (10) percent of the total floor area of the establishment, shall not be considered a public dance hall. 
    Teenage nightclub: Any establishment, open to teenage members of the general public and other persons authorized by this article, where dances or dancing activities, accompanied by either recorded music or live entertainment, are held or undertaken for consideration, whether such consideration is by cover charge, admission fee or the sale of refreshment, food or merchandise. 
    Teenage: Between and including the ages of thirteen (13) years and eighteen (18) years. 
(Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Section 4-401. - Rules and regulations of chief of police. 
(a)  The chief of police may promulgate rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, governing public dance halls, teenage nightclubs and public dances, including hours of operation. Such rules and regulations shall be presented to and approved by the council prior to becoming effective. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of these rules and regulations. 
(b)  The chief of police shall send a copy of the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this section to all holders of permits under this article. 
(c)  In the event any person holding a permit under this article believes such rules or regulations to be inapplicable or too restrictive such person may, within ten (10) days after transmission thereof by the chief of police, appeal to the town council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The decision of the town council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Section 4-402. - Right of entry of police. 
    Members of the police department may enter any public dance hall, teenage nightclub or public dance during all hours of operation to protect the peace and quiet of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Section 4-403. - Fire rules; building and zoning regulations. 
    The operation of a dance hall, teenage nightclub or other place where a public dance is held shall be in compliance with all applicable fire and health hazard regulations and all of the provisions of the building and zoning regulations of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Cross references- Building regulations, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 17 . 
Section 4-404. - Hours of operation. 
    The hours of operation for public dances and dance halls shall be the same as those prescribed by the alcoholic beverage control board for selling alcoholic beverages. 
State Law reference- Hours of sale of alcoholic beverages, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-111. 
Section 4-405. - Presence of certain persons prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a public dance hall or public dance in the town to suffer or permit any person under the influence of alcoholic beverages, marijuana or any narcotic to enter or remain in such public dance hall or at a public dance. 
Section 4-406. - Violations of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Section 4-407. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a public dance hall, teenage nightclub or hold a public dance in the town, unless he or she has a current permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to dances held for benevolent, civic, patriotic or charitable purposes, or where dances are conducted under the auspices of religious, governmental, charitable or educational organizations. 
(Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Section 4-408. - Prerequisite to issuance of permit. 
    No license tax shall be assessed by the director of finance and no license shall be issued for a public dance or public dance hall, until the permit provided for in this division has been granted by the council. 
Cross reference- License tax on dance halls, § 11-203. 
Section 4-409. - Application generally. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit under this division shall make application to town council by obtaining and completing an application form to be obtained from the police department. When completed, such application shall be filed with the police department. 
(b)  The application for a permit under this division shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The address where the proposed public dance hall will operate, or the address at which the public dance will be held. 
(2)  The name and address of the applicant who is or who will be the owner of the public dance hall or in charge of the public dance in question. If the owner is not the manager, in addition thereto, the name and address of the manager shall be given. 
(3)  If the owner or operator is a corporation, the application shall set forth the true or equitable owners of the stock of such corporation. 
(4)  A statement as to the type of food to be offered and the facilities to be provided for the preparation and service thereof. 
(5)  The amount of off-street parking space available for patrons. 
(6)  The names and addresses of the owners of the building and their interest in the business, if any. 
(7)  The proposed hours of operation of the business. 
(8)  The proposed hours that dancing will be permitted. 
(9)  Whether a license to serve alcoholic beverages is held or will be acquired. If so, what type of alcoholic beverages. 
(10)  Three (3) character references for the applicant. 
(11)  Any other times, dates or places the applicant may have operated a public dance hall or public dance. 
(12)  A written certification by the zoning administrator that the proposed use of the property is permitted by the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 1, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Section 4-410. - Application fee. 
    The applicant for a permit under this division shall deposit twenty dollars ($20.00) when the application is made, to be used for the cost of investigating the applicant. The deposit shall not be refundable to the applicant under any circumstances. 
Section 4-411. - Investigation of applicant-Generally. 
    The chief of police shall forthwith conduct an investigation of the application, when he or she receives the fully completed application filed under this division and notice that the required deposit has been made. 
(Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Section 4-412. - Same-Certification of results. 
    Upon completion of the investigation provided for in section 4-411, the chief of police shall certify to the town council that he or she has investigated the applicant and, if the findings so warrant, that the applicant is of good moral character and should receive a permit. Should the investigation disclose the applicant to be of bad moral character and not entitled to the permit, the chief of police shall so certify. The criteria for determining an applicant to be of bad moral character includes, but is not limited to, convictions of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude or the possession or sale of, attempted possession or sale of, or conspiracy to possess or sell, a controlled substance, alcohol or firearms; and in the case of an application for a permit to operate a teenage nightclub, in addition to the foregoing, contributing to the delinquency of a minor or any other criminal offense against a juvenile. 
(Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Section 4-413. - Grant or refusal. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the certification provided for in section 4-411, the town council shall, upon recorded vote, grant or refuse the permit applied for under this division. In making its decision, the council may, if it elects to do so, hear evidence and statements of citizens and others as to the suitability of the location of the public dance hall or teenage nightclub, or the place where the public dance is to be held, and as to the fitness of the person who proposes to conduct the same. 
(b)  If a permit is granted under this section, the council may set out such restrictions as it deems necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and particularly the welfare of the youth of the town. 
(c)  The grant or refusal of a permit applied for under this division shall be in the sole discretion of the town council. 
(d)  In the case of an application for a permit to operate a teenage nightclub, no permit shall be granted if any portion of the proposed establishment, including any on-site parking, is located within five hundred (500) feet of any business having a license issued by the alcoholic beverage control board to sell alcoholic beverages for either on-premises or off-premises consumption. 
(Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Section 4-414. - Not transferable. 
    A permit granted under this division shall not be transferable to any other person, nor shall a dance hall permit be transferable to any other location. 
Section 4-415. - Expiration and renewal. 
    Any permit granted under this division shall automatically expire one year after the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked or suspended. The permit may be renewed automatically upon payment of the business license fee unless a suspension pursuant to section 4-100 has been imposed or initiated within the twelve (12) months immediately preceding, in which case the permit may be renewed in the same manner and by the same procedure as the original permit was issued. 
Section 4-416. - Suspension-Generally. 
(a)  The chief of police shall have the authority to suspend, for good cause, as set out in subsection (b) below, any permit issued under this division, by handing the holder thereof a written notice of suspension, which suspension shall be effective twelve (12) hours after delivery to the holder. 
(b)  A permit granted under this division may be suspended by the chief of police for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  If the permit holder is convicted twice in any calendar year of violating chapter 13 of this Code. 
(2)  Upon conviction of the permit holder for violation of the gambling laws of the state. 
(3)  Upon certification and documentation by the chief of police that the premises covered by the permit are detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of the citizens of the town. 
Section 4-417. - Same-Appeal. 
(a)  Upon receiving the notice of suspension provided for in section 4-416, the permit holder may appeal the suspension by filing with the town clerk a written request that the action of the chief of police be reviewed by the dance review committee, which committee shall consist of two (2) members of the council appointed by the mayor. Upon the filing of such request, the suspension of the permit shall be delayed until all matters have been presented to the dance review committee. 
(b)  The dance review committee shall hear and review all matters presented to it under this section within seventy-two (72) hours after the written request is filed with the town clerk to review the action of the chief of police. The committee shall reduce its findings to writing and a copy thereof shall be delivered, by a member of the committee, to the appellant and to the chief of police, within twenty-four (24) hours after the hearing. 
(c)  The decision of the dance review committee on an appeal under this section shall be effective until the next regular meeting of the town council, at which time the council shall render a final decision on the matter. The permit holder and the chief of police shall be entitled to present, at such council meeting, any matters concerning the suspension of the permit. 
Section 4-418. - Entry prohibited to certain persons. 
(a)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall remain in a public dance hall after 10:00 p.m. unless lawfully employed therein. 
(b)  No person nineteen (19) years of age or older who is not the parent or legal guardian of a patron shall enter, or be permitted to enter, a teenage nightclub during hours of operation unless for purposes related to his or her lawful employment; and no person under the age of thirteen (13) years shall enter, or be permitted to enter, a teenage nightclub for any reason. 
(c)  The manager of any public dance hall or teenage nightclub shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, a positive identification check of each person seeking admittance to ensure compliance with this section. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent his or her age in order to gain admittance to a public dance hall or teenage nightclub or for any person to aid, abet or assist in making such false representation. 
(Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Section 4-419. - Special provisions applicable to teenage nightclubs. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply only to teenage nightclubs. 
(1)  No person who has been convicted of any offense set forth in section 4-412 shall be employed in a teenage nightclub. 
(2)  The total number of persons, other than employees, shall not exceed the number of seats at any time. 
(3)  No teenage nightclub shall remain open after 11:30 p.m., except that such establishments may remain open for one (1) additional hour on New Year's Eve. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to permit any person apparently under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance to enter, or remain within, a teenage nightclub. 
(5)  No patron having exited a teenage nightclub shall be permitted to reenter the premises on the same day. 
(6)  At least one (1) police officer, deputy sheriff or state-licensed security officer shall be provided, at the expense of the owner or operator, for every one hundred (100) patrons, or portion thereof, in attendance at any teenage nightclub. 
(Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Section 4-420. - New permit upon change in ownership, management or location. 
    Any change in the ownership of a public dance hall or teenage nightclub shall invalidate the permit for such establishment, unless the town manager consents, in writing, to such change. Any change in the location of a public dance hall or teenage nightclub shall invalidate the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1520, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Agricultural and forestal districts, ch. 3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 5-100. - Definitions. 
    The words and phrases in this section, for the purposes of this Chapter, shall have the meanings set out below: 
    Dangerous animal. Any animal which, because of its physical nature or vicious propensity, is capable of inflicting a serious physical harm or death to humans and which would constitute a danger to human life or property if it were not restrained in a manner required by this chapter. "Dangerous animal" shall not include a domestic cat or a domestic dog. "Dangerous animal" includes, but is not limited to, reptiles, amphibians, birds, marsupials, mammals, insects, and spiders that meet the elements set out in this definition; and Council specifically finds that the following animals, among others, meet the elements set out in this definition and are dangerous animals covered by this chapter: 
Alligator 
Ape 
Badger 
Bear 
Birds (predatory) 
Bobcat 
Cheetah 
Chimpanzee 
Cougar 
Coyote 
Crocodile 
Feral member of the cat family 
Gibbon 
Hyena 
Jaguar 
Leopard 
Lion 
Lynx 
Lizard, with a length of greater than three (3) feet or with a weight of over ten (10) pounds 
Mongoose 
Monkey 
Ocelot 
Orangutan 
Ostrich 
Snake, constrictor, with a length of greater than three (3) feet or with a weight of over fifteen (15) pounds. 
Snake, poisonous 
Skunk 
Tiger 
Warthog 
Wildcat 
Wolverine 
    Private property. Real estate or leasehold estate not owned, possessed or used by the town, the Commonwealth of Virginia, the United States of America or any political subdivision or agency of these governments. 
    Public property. Real estate or leasehold estate, owned or possessed or used by the town, the Commonwealth of Virginia, the United States of America or any political subdivision or agency of these governments. 
    Owner. A person who: 
(1)  has a right of property in an animal; 
(2)  keeps or harbors an animal; 
(3)  has an animal in his or her care; 
(4)  acts as a custodian of an animal; or, 
(5)  any person who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about the premises he or she occupies. 
    Run or go at large. The act of roaming, running or self-hunting off the property of its owner or custodian and not under its owner's or custodian's immediate control. 
    Town manager. The town manager of this town, the chief of police or any town police officer. 
Section 5-101. - Designation of town as bird sanctuary. 
    The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the town is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. Signs stating that the town is a bird sanctuary may be erected in the town, provided that the type of signs and locations thereof are first approved by the town manager. 
Section 5-102. - Hunting, molesting birds, etc. 
    It shall be a class 3 misdemeanor for any person in the town to trap, hunt, wound, shoot or molest in any manner, or attempt to trap, hunt, wound, shoot or molest in any manner, any bird or wild fowl; provided, that if starlings, sparrows, pigeons or similar birds become a nuisance or menace to health or property, a property owner may destroy or order such birds to be destroyed, if no other satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance. 
Cross reference- Use of weapons in hunting, § 14-110. 
State Law reference- Nuisance Bird Law, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-1001 et seq. 
Section 5-103. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Any person who (i) overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, ill-treats, abandons, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates, or kills any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; or (ii) deprives any animal of necessary sustenance, food, drink or shelter; or (iii) willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal; or (iv) carries or causes to be carried in or upon any vehicle, vessel or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal, or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering; or (v) causes any of the above things, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another, shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Prosecution for violations of this subsection shall commence within five years after commission of the offense. Prosecutions of this subsection regarding agricultural animals, as defined in Code of Virginia § 3.1-796.66, shall commence within one year after commission of the offense. 
(b)  Any person who abandons any dog, cat or other domesticated animal in any public place including the right-of-way of any public highway, road or street or on the property of another shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section the word animal shall be construed to include birds and fowl. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.94, 3.1-796.122. 
Section 5-104. - Livestock running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class 3 misdemeanor for any person to permit any cattle or livestock of any kind owned by him or under his control to run at large in the town. Any cattle or livestock not tethered or attended, found on streets or unenclosed property, shall be considered "at large." 
(b)  Any cattle or other livestock found running at large in the town shall be impounded by such officer or employee of the town as may be designated by the town manager for such purpose. The owner of any such animal so impounded shall be required to pay the actual cost of impoundment, shelter, subsistence and care of such animal, but not less than ten dollars ($10.00) per day per head, for each twenty-four (24) hours or fraction thereof that such animal is kept in the pound. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.93:1. 
Section 5-105. - Keeping of hogs. 
(a)  Any person who shall keep a hog in the town, except in an agricultural, forestal, or agricultural or forestal district established by the town council pursuant to chapter 3 of this Code, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. The word "hog" shall include all hogs and pigs regardless of age or size. 
(b)  The town manager shall require the keeper of a hog in violation of this section to remove it from the town. 
State Law reference- Ag. & Forestal, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4312; Authority to regulate the keeping of animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.94:1. 
Section 5-106. - Dangerous animals-Registration. 
(a)  No person shall own a dangerous animal in this town unless and until that person first registers the animal with the town manager and obtains a permit therefor from the town manager. Every person shall annually, each January, re-register the dangerous animal with the town manager, and apply for a renewal of the permit therefor. 
(b)  The fee for the initial and each subsequent registration and permit shall be five dollars ($5.00) to defray part of the town's cost in administering this program. 
(c)  The registration shall include the name, address, and telephone number of the owner or owners; the kind of dangerous animal owned; the location of this animal; the measures utilized to secure the animal on the owner's premises; and the measures utilized to maintain the means of restraint and to care for the dangerous animal. The adequacy or not of these measures shall be determined by the town manager, using these standards: strength, durability, efficacy, and any proven success of such measures. 
(d)  At the time of the initial registration, and at each subsequent January, the owner shall provide to the town manager a certificate of insurance, which shall show that the owner currently maintains liability insurance with respect to the dangerous animal and its ownership. The liability insurance shall be obtained through a firm authorized to conduct insurance business in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The insurance shall afford the owner protection in the amounts of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00 each occurrence and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) annual aggregate, against liability for injury, death, or property damage that may be caused in the town by the dangerous animal. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to sanction or legitimize the keeping of an animal where this practice contravenes the general law of this state or federal law. 
Section 5-107. - Same-Exceptions. 
    The requirements of section 5-106, above, shall not apply to: 
(1)  Ownership of dangerous animals in conjunction with the conduct in the town of a lawful, licensed business; 
(2)  Ownership of dangerous animals in connection with a circus, carnival, wildlife exhibit or educational program, humane society operation, bona fide scientific endeavor or exhibit, public amusement, religious observance, or the like; 
(3)  Ownership of dangerous animals in connection with the work or activity of a licensed wildlife rehabilitator. 
Section 5-108. - Same-Keeping dangerous animals. 
    The owner of a dangerous animal shall: 
(1)  Keep the animal at all times in cages or enclosures of such size and construction or confined in such a manner as to preclude the possibility of escape. Such cages, enclosures, or confinement shall be of such size as to permit the animals reasonable freedom of movement; 
(2)  Keep the cages or enclosures in a clean and sanitary condition at all times; 
(3)  Provide the animal with adequate food, water, shelter, and veterinary care; 
(4)  Keep the animal in a manner so as not to threaten or annoy any person of normal sensitivity; 
(5)  Take adequate safeguards to prevent unauthorized access to the animal; 
(6)  Maintain the means of enclosure or restraint to assure that they are in proper working order. 
Section 5-109. - Same-Notification of death or removal from town. 
    The owner of a dangerous animal, except as provided in section 5-107, shall notify the town manager of the death or removal from the town of the dangerous animal, and shall provide this notice within ten (10) days of the death or removal. 
Section 5-110. - Same-Notification of escape. 
    The owner of a dangerous animal shall notify the town manager immediately upon the escape of the dangerous animal from the owner's premises or from the means of constraints there in use. 
Section 5-111. - Same-Running at large. 
    No person shall permit any dangerous animal owned by him to run at large or to go at large in this town. 
Section 5-112. - Same-Capture, disposal of a dangerous animal running at large. 
    Any dangerous animal found at large shall be killed by order of the town manager unless, after twenty-four hours notice to the owner and opportunity to be heard, it is removed beyond the limits of the town or confined to the owner's premises, as the town manager may direct or unless the hearing reveals some reason why the town manager should not take action against the animal. However, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the town manager from taking immediate steps, including killing a dangerous animal, in emergencies, to protect human life and preserve public safety. In such cases the town manager shall afford to the owner such notice prior to or after these immediate steps as is reasonable and possible in the circumstances. 
Section 5-113. - Violations. 
    Any person who violates any provision of sections 5-106 through 5-112, inclusive, shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
Section 5-114. - Disposition of dead dogs, animals and fowl. 
(a)  The owner of any animal or grown fowl which has died, when he knows of such death, shall forthwith have its body appropriately cremated or buried. If he fails to do so, the town manager shall petition the General District Court for permission to do so, pursuant to Code of Virginia § 18.2-510. The town manager shall be entitled to recover of the owner of every such animal so cremated or buried the actual cost of the cremation or burial, not to exceed seventy-five dollars ($75.00), and of the owner of every fowl so cremated or buried, the actual cost of the cremation or burial, not to exceed five dollars ($5.00), to be recovered in the same manner as officers' fees are recovered, free from all exemptions in favor of the owner. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require the burial or cremation of the whole or portions of any animal or fowl which is to be used for food or in any commercial manner. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.121. 
Section 5-115. - Confinement in case of hydrophobia. 
    Whenever there is sufficient reason to believe that there is a case of hydrophobia in the town, the town council shall adopt an emergency ordinance requiring that all dogs and cats immediately be confined for a reasonable length of time. Upon the issuance of such declaration, all dogs and cats shall be confined in accordance with the terms thereof. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.98. 
Section 5-116. - Destruction of rabid animal. 
    The town manager shall have the power to order the destruction of any animal infected with hydrophobia or of any animal, for which no proof of current rabies vaccination is available, bitten by an animal so infected. Upon such order by the town manager, such animal shall be destroyed. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal subject to destruction hereunder to conceal such animal. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.98. 
Section 5-117. - Feeding of deer. 
(a)  Pursuant to Virginia Code § 29.1-527.2, it shall be unlawful for any person to place, distribute, or allow the placement of food, salt, minerals, or similar substances to feed or attract deer at any time in the town. 
(b)  No person shall continue to place, distribute, or allow the placement of food, salt, mineral, or similar substances for any purpose if the placement of these materials results in the presence of deer. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict agricultural, commercial, noncommercial, or residential plantings (including wildlife food plots); bona fide distribution of food to livestock; or wildlife management activities conducted or authorized by the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries. 
(d)  Any person violating this section shall be liable to the town for a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). Any ticket for a violation shall inform the violator that he or she may avoid a trial by paying this penalty to the town by mail or in person at the office of the director of finance within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of the ticket. 
(e)  If a person charged with a violation does not elect to pay the civil penalty within fourteen (14) calendar days, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
( Ord. No. 1823, § 1, 6-13-17 ) 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Section 5-200. - Leash law. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit the dog to go or be in the town off the premises of the owner, unless the dog is kept secured by a leash, or led by other means of restraint (which may include an electronic leash or training device) not harmful to the dog. The term "other means of restraint" does not include voice control. Any person using an electronic leash or training device has the burden of demonstrating that it is functioning properly. Electronic leashes or training devices may not be used in town parks, including the golf course. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any dog used by law-enforcement agencies, or any dog under contract by law-enforcement agencies. 
(2)  Any person who uses a dog under his or her direct supervision while lawfully hunting, while engaged in a supervised, formal obedience training class or show, or during formally sanctioned field trials. 
(3)  Any dog found or whose owner's premises are located in an agricultural or forestal district. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be liable to the town for a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(d)  Any ticket for a violation shall inform the violator that he or she may avoid a trial by paying this penalty to the town by mail or in person at the office of the director of finance within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of the ticket. 
    If a person charged with a violation does not elect to pay the civil penalty within fourteen (14) calendar days, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1499, § 1, 8-12-08; Ord. No. 1775, § 1, 10-13-15 ) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.95. 
Section 5-201. - Running at large. 
    During all months of the year, it shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to allow the dog to run at large within the town. The Montgomery County Animal Control Warden or any town police officer shall cause any dog found running at large to be caught and confined in the county animal shelter. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.100, 3.1-796.119. 
Section 5-202. - Barking or howling dogs. 
(a)  The harboring or keeping of any dog whose barking or howling creates noise that is plainly audible at least once a minute for ten (10) consecutive minutes (1) inside the confines of the dwelling unit, house or apartment of another or (2) at fifty (50) or more feet from the dog is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful. 
(b)  Citizens affected by a barking dog are requested to contact the dog's owner, prior to contacting the town, to attempt to resolve differences and objections with the owner of the barking dog. 
(c)  Any person annoyed by the barking or howling by a dog in violation of this section may enter a complaint by warrant returnable to the general district court, where the complaint shall be heard as all other complaints under criminal warrants are heard. 
(d)  The town manager on behalf of the town may institute criminal or civil proceedings against any person the manager finds in violation of this section. Citizens may institute their own criminal or civil proceeding to resolve a barking dog problem. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the judge that a dog made noise in violation of this section, the owner or custodian shall be deemed guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(f)  Upon any conviction, the judge may impose community service in lieu of or in addition to a fine. Upon a first conviction, or upon a second conviction within one year of any offense under this section involving the same dog, the judge may order the owner or custodian of the dog to remove it permanently from the town. 
(g)  Upon a third conviction within one year of any offense under this section involving the same dog, in addition to imposing a fine for the violation, the judge shall order the owner or custodian of the dog to remove it permanently from the town within two (2) weeks. Should the owner or custodian fail to comply with such order, the dog shall be seized by the animal warden and placed for adoption outside of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 1, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1657, § 1, 9-11-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1657, § 1, adopted waiting, amended § 5-202 title to read as herein set out. Former § 5-202 title pertained to barking dogs to be controlled; citizen cooperation. 
Section 5-203. - Unlawful to allow dogs to urinate or defecate on public or private property; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog to: 
(1)  Knowingly or willfully allow the dog to urinate or defecate on the private property of other persons without their consent; 
(2)  Knowingly or willfully allow the dog to urinate or defecate on public property, except that defecation by a dog on public property shall not constitute a violation of this section if the owner of the dog immediately removes the material defecated and disposes of it in a safe and sanitary manner. 
Section 5-204. - Dangerous or vicious dogs. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
    Dangerous dog means a canine or canine crossbreed which has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal that is a dog or cat, or killed a companion animal that is a dog or cat. However, when a dog attacks or bites a companion animal that is a dog or cat, the attacking or biting dog shall not be deemed dangerous (1) if no serious physical injury as determined by a licensed veterinarian has occurred to the dog or cat as a result of the attack or bite, (2) if both animals are owned by the same person, (3) if such attack occurs on the property of the attacking or biting dog's owner or custodian, or (4) for other good cause as determined by the court. No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog as a result of biting, attacking, or inflicting injury on a dog or cat while engaged with an owner or custodian as part of lawful hunting or participating in an organized, lawful dog handling event. 
    Vicious dog means a canine or canine crossbreed which has (1) killed a person, (2) inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function, or (3) continued to exhibit the behavior which resulted in a previous finding by a court or, on or before July 1, 2006, by an animal control officer as authorized by local ordinance, that it is a dangerous dog, provided its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
(b)  Any law enforcement officer or animal control officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within the officer's jurisdiction is a dangerous or vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate of the jurisdiction for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. Upon the issuance of a summons, the law enforcement officer shall inform the animal control officer of the location of the dog and the relevant facts pertaining to the officer's belief that the dog is dangerous or vicious. The animal control officer shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The animal control officer may permit the owner or custodian to confine the animal until a decision is made if the animal control officer determines that the owner or custodian can confine the animal in a manner that protects the public safety. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with Virginia Code § 3.2-6562. The court, upon finding the animal to be a dangerous or vicious dog, may order the owner, custodian, or harborer thereof to pay restitution for actual damages to any person injured by the animal or whose companion animal was injured or killed by the animal. The procedure for appeal and trial shall be the same as provided by law for misdemeanors. The town shall be required to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt. 
(c)  No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor is the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed prohibited. No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was (1) committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian, (2) committing, at the time, a willful trespass upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian, or (3) provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal at other times. No police dog which was engaged in the performance of its duties at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous or vicious dog. No animal that, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person, or its owner's or custodian's property, shall be found to be a dangerous or vicious dog. 
(d)  If the owner of an animal found to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section. 
(e)  The owner of any animal found to be a dangerous dog shall, within ten (10) days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the animal control officer for a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. The local animal control officer shall also provide the owner with a uniformly designed tag which identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. All certificates obtained pursuant to this section shall be renewed annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the initial certificate. The animal control officer shall provide a copy of the dangerous dog registration certificate and verification of compliance to the state veterinarian. 
(f)  All dangerous dog registration certificates or renewals thereof obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence: 
(1)  Of the animal's current rabies vaccination, 
(2)  That the animal has been neutered or spayed, and 
(3)  That the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's residence, or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the proper enclosure is constructed. In addition, a certificate or renewal thereof shall not be issued unless the animal's owner presents satisfactory evidence that (1) his or her residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property, and (2) the animal has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation. All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained shall only be issued to persons who present satisfactory evidence that the owner has liability insurance coverage to the value of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) that covers animal bites. The owner may obtain and maintain a bond in surety, in lieu of liability insurance, to the value of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(g)  While on the property of its owner, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors, or in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults, or other animals. The structure shall be designed to provide the animal with shelter from the elements of nature. When off its owner's property, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(h)  The owner of any dog found to be dangerous shall register the animal with the Commonwealth of Virginia Dangerous Dog Registry, as established under Virginia Code § 3.2-6542, within forty-five (45) days of such a finding by a court of competent jurisdiction. The owner shall also promptly notify the local animal control officer of: 
(1)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners; 
(2)  All means necessary to locate the owner and the dog at any time; 
(3)  Any complaints or incidents of attack by the dog upon any person, cat, or dog; 
(4)  Any claims made or lawsuits brought as a result of any attack; 
(5)  Tattoo or chip identification information, or both; 
(6)  Proof of insurance or surety bond; and 
(7)  The death of the dog. 
(i)  After an animal has been found to be a dangerous dog, the animal's owner shall immediately, upon learning of same, notify the local animal control authority if the animal (1) is loose or unconfined; (2) bites a person or attacks another animal; (3) is sold, given away, or dies; or (4) has been moved to a different address. Any owner of a dangerous dog who relocates to a new address shall, within ten (10) days of relocating, provide written notice to the appropriate local animal control authority for the old address from which the animal has moved and the new address to which the animal has been moved. 
(j)  Any owner or custodian of a canine or canine crossbreed or other animal is guilty of the following offenses: 
(1)  A Class 2 misdemeanor if the canine or canine crossbreed previously declared a dangerous dog pursuant to this section, when such declaration arose out of a separate and distinct incident, attacks and injures, or kills a cat or dog that is a companion animal belonging to another person; 
(2)  A Class 1 misdemeanor if the canine or canine crossbreed previously declared a dangerous dog pursuant to this section, when such declaration arose out of a separate and distinct incident, bites a human being or attacks a human being causing bodily injury. 
    The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any animal that, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person, or its owner's or custodian's property, or when the animal is a police dog that is engaged in the performance of its duties at the time of the attack. 
(k)  The owner of any animal that has been found to be a dangerous dog who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this section is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(l)  All fees collected under this section, less the costs incurred by the animal control authority in producing and distributing the certificates and tags required, shall be paid into a special dedicated fund for the purpose of paying the expenses of any training course required under Virginia Code § 3.2-6556. 
(Ord. No. 1244, § 3, 10-2-00; Ord. No. 1418, § 1, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1657, § 1, 9-11-2012) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.93:1. 
Chapter 6 - BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 10; sewers and storm drainage, ch. 18; solid waste, ch. 20; streets and sidewalks, ch. 21; street numbers for buildings, § 21-200 et seq.; water, ch. 24; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 6-100. - Office of building official established; appointment and general powers and duties of building official. 
(a)  The office of building official for the town is hereby established. The building official shall be appointed by the town manager and shall have the powers and perform such duties as may be provided by state law for municipal building inspectors. The building official shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and other chapters of this Code and other ordinances which, by their terms, are subject to the building official's administrative and enforcement responsibility or authority. 
(b)  The building official shall maintain in the building official's office permanent records of: 
(1)  Applications, maps, drawings and other papers submitted to the building official; 
(2)  Permits and certificates issued; 
(3)  Notices and orders given; 
(4)  Decisions made and actions taken; 
(5)  Appeals; 
(6)  All other papers, correspondence, records and other matters pertaining to the office of the building official. 
Section 6-101. - Nonliability of personnel enforcing chapter. 
    Nothing in this chapter or in any code adopted by this chapter shall be construed as imposing upon any town officer or employee duly authorized to administer or enforce the provisions of this chapter any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by a defect in any building construction or other work mentioned herein, or by the installation thereof, nor shall the town government or any official or employee thereof be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized by this chapter or certificates of approval issued by the building official. 
Section 6-102. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of building code appeals, which shall consist of five (5) members, appointed by the town council. The membership of the board shall be established in compliance with the requirements of the current edition of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(b)  The code official, technical assistants, inspectors or other employees of the department of planning and building shall not serve as members of the board of appeals. 
(c)  The town council may appoint two (2) alternate members who shall be called by the board chair to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for board membership. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 2, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 6-103. - Reimbursement for expenses incurred from methamphetamine lab cleanup. 
    As authorized by Virginia Code § 15.2-1716.2, any person convicted of an offense for the manufacture of methamphetamine under Virginia Code § 18.2-248 or 18.2-248.03 shall, at the time of sentencing or in a separate civil action, be liable to the town for restitution of expenses incurred in the cleanup of any methamphetamine lab related to the conviction. The amount charged shall not exceed the actual expenses incurred associated with cleanup, removal or repair of the affected property, or the replacement cost of personal protective equipment used. 
(Ord. No. 1656, § 1, 9-11-2012) 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM STATEWIDE BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq. 

Section 6-200. - Adopted; where filed. 
(a)  For the purpose of ensuring public safety, health and welfare, insofar as they are affected by building construction, to ensure public safety, health and welfare through proper use and continued compliance with minimum standards of building construction, energy conservation, water conservation, and physically handicapped and aged accessibility, and in general, to secure safety to life and property from all hazards incidental to the design, erection, repair, removal, demolition or use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises, that certain regulations the town council hereby adopts the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, 2000 Edition, Part I, General Regulations, and Part II, Construction. All future editions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and all amendments thereto are hereby automatically adopted and incorporated into the Town Code. Such Code shall control all matters concerning the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, removal, demolition, equipment, use, and occupancy of all buildings and structures within the town. Such code is hereby incorporated in and made a part of this section as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall be applicable throughout the town. Two (2) copies of such code shall remain on file in the office of the town clerk and one (1) copy shall remain on file in the office of the building official. 
(b)  For the purpose of ensuring public safety, health and welfare, insofar as they are affected by building construction, to ensure public safety, health and welfare through proper building maintenance, repair, use and continued compliance with minimum standards of building construction, energy conservation, water conservation, and physically handicapped and aged accessibility, certain regulations known as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, 2000 Edition, Part I, General Regulations, and Part III, Maintenance of Existing Structures, Chapter 34, Existing Structures, of the International Building Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the International Residential Code, and all of the codes and standards referenced therein, copies of which are on file in the office of the town clerk and the office of the building official, are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the town. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1-13.39:2 of the Code of Virginia, future amendments to the sections of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, the International Building Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the International Residential Code, and the codes and standards referenced therein are also incorporated by reference herein. (The Town of Blacksburg in accordance with the provisions outlined in Part III of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code elects to apply the provisions of the maintenance of existing structures to industrialized buildings and manufactured homes.) All future editions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and all amendments thereto are hereby automatically adopted and incorporated in the Town Code. 
(Ord. No. 1266, § 1, 3-13-01; Ord. No. 1353, § 1, 2-10-04) 
Section 6-201. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Whenever the building official discovers construction not in conformance with the provisions of the code adopted by this article, he or she shall order all related construction halted until the nonconforming portion is brought into conformance. No occupancy permits shall be issued for buildings built after the adoption of such code which are not in conformance therewith or which do not conform to other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(b)  The building official shall investigate an alleged violation of Chapter 34, "Existing Structures," of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code upon receipt of a complaint. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1, 6-8-99) 
Section 6-202. - Procedure for amendment. 
    The code adopted by this article shall be automatically amended each time an amendment to such code is adopted by the Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development. No formal action is necessary by the town council. 
Section 6-203. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or any other person, firm or corporation to violate any provision of this chapter. Any violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any owner or any other person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the code. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six (6) months of the date of conviction. Each day during which the violation continues after the court-ordered abatement period has ended shall constitute a separate offense. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five (5) years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five (5) to ten (10) years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten (10) days and a fine of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. 
(b)  Any prosecution under this section shall be commenced within two (2) years as provided in Virginia Code § 19.2-8. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 3, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 1244, § 4, 10-2-00) 
State Law reference- Penalty for building code violations, Code of Virginia, § 36-106. 
Section 6-204. - Permit fees; term of validity of permits applied for, not picked up. 
(a)  The fee for permits required by the Code adopted by this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  The fee for a permit for new construction, additions, remodeling of all residential buildings and concurrently built accessory buildings or structures, shall be twenty cents ($0.20) per square foot of total floor space or area to be built, including all floors, basements, garages, carports, decks, and the like. The building official shall make any necessary determination of square footage. If the value of the proposed structure is estimated by the building official as less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and if no inspections are required, no fee shall be charged or collected for the issuance of this building permit. In the latter case, if inspections are required, the building permit fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(2)  The fee for a permit for a driveway curb cut, or water or sewer line replacement, shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(3)  The fee for a permit for a residential swimming pool shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(4)  The fee for a permit for a separately built detached garage or accessory building shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(5)  The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building or the removal of a building or structure from one lot to another, or to a new location on the same lot, shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(6)  The fee for a permit for the partial demolition of a structure or asbestos removal within or on a building or structure shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(7)  The fee for a permit for an attached sign shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(8)  The fee for a permit for a freestanding sign shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(9)  The fee for a permit for both a freestanding and attached sign shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(10)  The fee for a permit for an electrical service addition, upgrade of electrical service, or for an inspection of an electrical service discontinued over thirty (30) days shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(11)  The fee for a permit for new commercial or industrial construction or remodeling or additions shall be three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of fair market value of the proposed structure, not including the value of the land. The building official shall determine fair market value for this purpose. 
(12)  The fee for a permit for setting a mobile home shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(13)  The fee for a permit for a change in mechanical equipment, such as heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment, shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(14)  In any case, the minimum permit fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(15)  The fee for reinspection required of the building official or any town inspector shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each reinspection, payable before the reinspection. 
(16)  The fee for commencing work without a required building permit, to cover the costs of discovery, investigation, stop work, and follow-up, shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), which shall be added to the permit fee. 
(17)  The fee for a moderate or high hazard backflow permit shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). There shall be no fee for a low hazard backflow permit. 
(18)  The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(19)  The fee for a re-issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(20)  The fee for a building permit appeal shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  The town manager shall collect and remit quarterly to the department of housing and community development the fee levied by the board of housing and community development, under statute and regulation of the Commonwealth of Virginia, to support training programs of the Virginia Building Code Academy. This fee shall be applied to the building permit fee and collected as a surcharge. 
(c)  A building permit which has been applied for but not picked up shall be valid for a period of six (6) months beginning with the date that the applicant is notified that the permit is ready. Any building permit not picked up by the applicant within this period shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 1341, § 1, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1360, § 12, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1380, § 12, 4-26-05; Ord. No. 1490, § 1, 5-13-08) 
Cross reference- Site development plan review fee, § 2-411. 
State Law reference- Authority to levy fees to defray cost of enforcement of building code, Code of Virginia, § 36-105. 
Section 6-205. - Applicability of occupancy requirements to places of public assembly. 
(a)  Places of public assembly as defined by the applicable building code, shall be posted in accordance with the applicable section of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. These places of public assembly shall be posted with a legible sign in contrasting colors conspicuously located stating the maximum number of occupants permitted. 
(b)  A person shall not permit overcrowding or admittance of any person beyond the approved number of occupants of any place of public assembly. Upon finding overcrowding conditions or obstruction in aisles, passageways or other means of egress, or upon finding any condition which constitutes a serious menace to life and safety, the town manager or his representative shall cause the performance, presentation, spectacle or entertainment to be stopped until such a condition or obstruction is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 1353, § 2, 2-10-04) 
Section 6-206. - Installation of dead-bolt locks and peepholes in multifamily buildings. 
(a)  Any landlord who rents five (5) or more dwelling units in any one (1) building shall install, upon the written request of tenant and at a cost to the tenant of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per lock and ten dollars ($10.00) per peephole, dead-bolt locks, which meet the requirements of the Uniform Statewide Building Code for new multifamily construction, and peepholes in any exterior swinging entrance door to any such unit; provided, however, that any door having a glass panel shall not require a peephole. 
(b)  Any landlord subject to this section shall have one (1) calendar month from the date of written request by the tenant to comply with this section. 
(c)  Failure of the landlord to comply with this section shall authorize the tenant to proceed with the installation of the deadbolt lock and peephole and deduct no more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a dead-bolt lock and ten dollars ($10.00) for a peephole from the following month's rent. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 55-248.13:1. 
Section 6-207. - Installation of smoke detectors in certain buildings. 
(a)  Smoke detectors are required to be installed in the following structures or buildings constructed prior to the adoption of the Uniform Statewide Building Code: 
(1)  Any multifamily building containing four (4) or more dwelling units; 
(2)  Any hotel or motel regularly used, offered for, or intended to be used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations for one or more persons; and 
(3)  Rooming houses regularly used, offered for, or intended to be used to provide overnight sleeping accommodations and which contain more than four (4) units. 
(b)  Smoke detectors installed pursuant to this section shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and may be either battery-operated or AC-powered units. 
(c)  With respect to multifamily buildings containing four (4) or more dwelling units, the owner of each unit which is rented or leased, at the beginning of each tenancy and at least annually thereafter, shall furnish the tenant with a certificate that all required smoke detectors are present, have been inspected, and are in good working order. 
(d)  Except for smoke detectors located in hallways, stairwells, and other public or common areas, interim testing, repair and maintenance of such smoke detectors shall be the responsibility of the tenant; provided, however, that the owner shall be obligated to service, repair or replace any malfunctioning smoke detectors within five (5) days of receipt of written notice that such smoke detector is in need of service, repair, or replacement. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-922; penalty for false alarm, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212. 
Section 6-208. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Design. Buildings and structures, and all parts thereof, shall be constructed to support safely all loads, including dead loads. 
(b)  Climatic and geographic design criteria. Buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the USBC using the design criteria set forth in the following table. 
(c)  Dead load. The actual weights of materials and construction shall be used for determining dead load with consideration for the dead load of fixed service equipment. 
(d)  Roof load. Roof shall be designed for the snow load indicated in the following table: 
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA 
SUBJECT TO 
DAMAGE FROM SUBJECT TO 
DAMAGE FROM ROOF 
SNOW 
LOAD 
(Pounds per 
square foot) WIND 
PRESSURE 
(pounds per 
square foot) SEISMIC 
CONDITION 
BY ZONE Weathering Frost 
Line 
Depth Termite Decay WINTER 
DESIGN 
TEMP. 
FOR MTG. 
FACILITIES RADON- 
RESISTANT 
CONSTRUCTION 
REQUIRED 30 70 2 Severe 24? Moderate Moderate Yes Yes  
Section 6-209. - Authority to require removal, repair, etc., of buildings and other structures. 
(a)  Owners of real property within the town shall remove, repair or secure any building, wall or any other structure which might endanger the public health or safety of other residents of the town. 
(b)  If an owner fails to do so, the building official may send the owner notice of his or her obligations under this section. Such notice shall be: 
(1)  In writing, mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last known address of the property owner; and 
(2)  Published in a newspaper having general circulation in the locality in accordance with the applicable provisions of Code of Virginia §§ 15.2-1426, 15.2-1427. 
(c)  The town through its own agents or employees may remove, repair or secure any building, wall or any other structure which might endanger the public health or safety of other residents of the town if the owner and lien holder of the property fails to do so within thirty (30) days following the later of the return of the certified mail receipt or newspaper publication. However, if the structure is deemed to pose a significant threat to public safety and such fact is stated in the notice, the town may take action to prevent unauthorized access to the building within seven days of such notice. Repair of the structure may include maintenance work to the exterior of a building to prevent deterioration of the building or adjacent buildings. 
(d)  In the event the town, through its own agents or employees removes, repairs or secures any building, wall or any other structure pursuant to this section, the cost or expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owners of such property and may be collected by the town as taxes and levies are collected. 
(e)  Every charge authorized by this section which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided Code of Virginia (1950), Title 58.1, Chapter 39, Articles 3 and 4, as amended. 
(f)  The remedies provided by this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedy provided by general law or by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1418, § 2, 7-11-06) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-906. 
ARTICLE III. - AIRPORT SAFETY 

Section 6-300. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the Blacksburg Airport Safety Ordinance. 
Section 6-301. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall carry the meanings set out here, unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Airport: Virginia Tech Airport. 
    Airport elevation: The highest point on any usable landing surface expressed in feet above mean sea level. 
    Approach surface: a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface, and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth below in this article. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
    Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones: The airspace zones as set forth below in this article. 
    Conical surface: a surface extending horizontally twenty feet for every one foot vertically from the periphery of the horizontal surface. 
    Hazard to air navigation: An obstruction determined by the Virginia Department of Aviation or the Federal Aviation Administration, using recognized standards, to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of navigable airspace in the commonwealth. 
    Height: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation, unless otherwise specified. 
    Horizontal surface: a horizontal plane one hundred fifty feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
    Nonconformity: Any preexisting structure or natural growth which is inconsistent with the provisions of this article or any amendment to this article. 
    Obstruction: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height, or penetrates any surface or zone floor, set forth below in this article. 
    Permit: a document issued by the Town of Blacksburg allowing a person to begin a building activity in any zone created by this article. 
    Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or governmental entity, including Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. The term includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them. 
    Primary surface: a surface, with a specified width as provided below in this article, longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specifically prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred feet beyond each end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
    Runway: a specified area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft. 
    Structure: Any object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by any person, including but not limited to, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formations, towers, poles, and electric lines of overhead transmission routes, and flag poles. 
    Transitional surfaces: Surfaces which extend outward perpendicular to the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. 
    Vegetation: Any natural growth. 
    Zone: All areas provided for in section 6-302 of this article generally described in three dimensions by reference to ground elevation, vertical distances from the ground elevation, horizontal distances from the runway centerlines and the primary and horizontal surfaces, with the zone floor set at specific vertical limits by the surfaces found in section 6-303 of this article. 
Section 6-302. - Airport safety zones. 
(a)  In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are established certain zones which include all of the area and airspace of the Town of Blacksburg, lying equal to and above the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they may apply to Virginia Tech Airport. These airport safety zones exist in addition to the land use zoning designation and regulations for these areas and do not affect the uses and activities of the land use zones except as provided for in section 6-304 of this article and except where the height of structures allowed by this chapter would be less than those allowed by the zoning ordinance. In this latter case, the height limitations of this chapter would control. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the most restrictive height limitation. These zones are as follows: 
(1)  Airport zone: a zone that is centered about the runway and primary surface, with the floor set by the horizontal surface. 
(2)  Approach zone: a zone that extends away from the runway ends along the extended runway centerline, with the floor set by the approach surfaces. 
(3)  Transitional zone: a zone that fans away perpendicular to the runway centerline and approach surfaces, with the floor set by the transitional surfaces. 
(4)  Conical zone: a zone that circles around the periphery of and outward from the horizontal surface, with the floor set by the conical surface. 
(b)  The source of the specific geometric standards for these zones is to be found in Part 77.25, Subchapter E (Airspace), of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or in successor federal regulations, incorporated by reference. 
(c)  These zones are shown in detail on Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University plan entitled "VPI Airport Master Plan Update", dated "September 85," on file in the office of the town clerk and incorporated by reference. 
Section 6-303. - Airport safety zone height limitations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, in any zone created by this article no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no vegetation shall be allowed to grow to a height, so as to penetrate at any point any referenced surface, known as the floor, of any zone provided for in section 6-302 of this article. 
(b)  The height restrictions, or floors, for the individual zones shall be those planes delineated as surfaces with respect to the Virginia Tech Airport in Part 77.25, Subchapter E (Airspace), of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or in successor federal regulations, incorporated by reference. 
Section 6-304. - Use restrictions. 
    Within the area below the horizontal limits of any zone established by this article, no use may be made of land or water which: 
(1)  Creates electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and airborne aircraft; 
(2)  Diminishes the ability of pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lights; 
(3)  Results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport; 
(4)  Impairs visibility in the vicinity of the airport; 
(5)  Creates the potential for bird strike hazards; or 
(6)  Otherwise endangers or interferes with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of pilots of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
Section 6-305. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  This article shall not require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or vegetation not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this article; interfere with the legal continuance of a nonconforming use; require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this article and diligently pursued; or adversely affect a vested right. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article or of law, residential structures restricted by this article and existing on July 13, 1993, may be maintained, altered, improved, or reconstructed if necessary, to their so existing height. 
Section 6-306. - Permits and exceptions. 
(a)  No structure shall be erected or otherwise established in any zone created by this article unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted by the town, if it is granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose applied for, with sufficient geometric specificity to determine whether the resulting structure would conform to the regulations prescribed in this article. No permit for a structure inconsistent with this article shall be granted, unless an exception has been approved by the town council. 
(b)  Applications for permits shall be filed with the town manager on forms that the town manager may publish for such purpose. Applications for exceptions shall be filed with the town clerk on forms that the town clerk may publish for such purpose. The town council may initiate consideration of an exception or exceptions by its own act. 
(c)  The town manager shall act on any request for a permit within sixty days after its receipt. In so acting, the town manager shall grant the permit if it conforms to this article and other relevant provisions of law, including any exception granted. Otherwise, the town manager shall deny the permit. The town manager may grant a permit with conditions designed to assure compliance with this article or to mitigate unfavorable effects resulting from the permitted activity. 
(d)  Any person affected by the town manager's action on or denial of a permit, may file an appeal to the town council from the decision of the town manager. The appeal shall be made by filing with the town clerk a written notice of appeal, providing sufficient information to enable town council to act, within ten days after the decision appealed from. The town council shall hear and decide by resolution the appeal within sixty days after its filing. In so acting, the town council shall be governed by the same rules set out above covering the town manager's action on a permit. There will be no appeal from the decision of the town council on a permit. Decisions of the town council are final. 
(e)  The town council shall approve, or not, by ordinance all requests or initiatives for exceptions from the terms of this article within six months following the receipt of the request or from its initiation. Failure of the town council to act within that period constitutes denial of the exception. Promptly after receipt of an application or initiative for an exception, the town manager shall share this matter with the Virginia Department of Aviation and with Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. The Department of Aviation shall review the application to determine the possible effect of the requested exception on the operation of air navigation facilities and upon the safe and efficient use of navigable airspace. The Department of Aviation and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University may timely communicate their respective findings to the town council, which shall consider these findings. 
(f)  In acting on an exception, the town council, in exercising its legislative discretion, shall promote and preserve airport safety while protecting, if possible, private property rights of the citizens of the town who may be affected by this article. The town council may grant, grant with conditions designed to assure compliance with this article or to mitigate unfavorable effects resulting from the excepted activity, or deny the exception. There will be no appeal of the decision of the town council on an exception. Decisions of the town council are final. 
(g)  Any exception granted may, if the town deems such action advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure in question to install, operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be deemed necessary by the Federal Aviation Administration, the Virginia Department of Aviation, or the town council. If the town council deems proper and reasonable, this condition may be modified to require the owner of the structure in question to permit the airport owner, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 
Section 6-307. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The town manager shall administer and enforce the regulations prescribed in this article. The town manager shall be vested with the power and means to carry out this article, including a suit for injunction, prosecution, or other legal action, and with other available judicial or non-judicial means. All actions shall be brought in the name of the town. 
(b)  Violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
Section 6-308. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations prescribed in this article and any other regulation applicable to the same subject, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1387, § 1, adopted June 14, 2005, amended art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 1219, § 2, adopted June 8, 1999. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

Section 6-400. - Findings. 
(a)  The town council has found that within the rental inspection district established in section 6-402 of this article each of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  There is a need to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the occupants of dwelling units inside the district described and established in section 6-402 below; 
(2)  The residential rental dwelling units in the district are in need of inspection by the building department to prevent deterioration, taking into account the number, age and condition of the residential dwelling rental units inside the district; and 
(3)  The inspection of residential rental dwelling units inside the district is necessary to maintain safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants and other residents living in the district. 
The town council has further found that, for each of the individual residential rental dwelling unit described in section 6-402 of this article, one (1) of the following conditions exists: 
1.  There is a need to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the occupants of that individual dwelling unit; 
2.  The individual dwelling unit is either blighted or in the process of deteriorating; or 
3.  There is evidence of violations of the Building Code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for tenants living in such individual dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § 1, 6-14-05) 
Section 6-401. - Definitions. 
    The following terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Building code means the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
    Day means a calendar day. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or structure or part thereof that is used for a home or residence by one (1) or more persons who maintain a household. The term does not include a group home. 
    Family means one (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or under approved foster care. 
    Group home means a licensed residential facility in which no more than eight (8) mentally ill, mentally retarded, or developmentally disabled persons reside, with one (1) or more resident counselors or other staff persons. Mental illness and developmental disability shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance. A group home is licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services. 
    Managing agent means any person having the authority, singly or in combination with another, to enter into an agreement for the occupancy of property subject to this article. 
    Multi-family dwelling unit means any single building, lot, or two (2) or more adjacent buildings or lots under common ownership, which contain(s) three (3) or more residential rental dwelling units. The term shall not include mobile homes under common ownership in a mobile home park or subdivision, and such term shall not include single-family dwellings, family homes with accessory apartments, two-family dwellings, or townhouses under common ownership. 
    Occupant means a person who, on a regular basis, spends nights at a residence. A person is considered an occupant regardless of whether he or she spends the majority of nights at a residence, if the times he or she does stay overnight are regular and recurrent. In addition, a person shall be considered an occupant if his or her clothes or other daily living supplies are maintained at the residence. 
    Owner means the person shown on the current real estate assessment books or current real estate assessment records, or the current fee simple title holder of the property if ownership has changed since tax assessment records were last updated. 
    Rent means to lease, sublease, let or otherwise grant for consideration the right to occupy a dwelling unit. 
    Residential rental dwelling unit means a dwelling unit that is leased or rented to one (1) or more tenants. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § 1, 6-14-05) 
Sec. 6-402. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all rental dwelling units within a rental inspection district designated by town council and to individual residential dwelling units outside designated rental inspection districts made subject to this article, as provided by Virginia Code § 36-105.1:1(B)(3). 
(b)  A rental inspection district, as shown on the map labeled "Rental Inspection District 2005" and filed in the town clerk's office on June 14, 2005, is hereby established and made subject to the requirements of this article. Maps detailing this rental inspection district shall be available in the department of planning and building and on the town's website. 
(c)  The following individual rental dwelling units that are outside the rental inspection district are hereby made subject to this article: 
(1)  1503 Tom's Creek Road. 
(2)  600 South Main Street. 
(3)  1101 Redbud Road. 
(d)  Town council may designate additional rental inspection districts or make other individual residential rental dwelling units outside the inspection district subject to this article after notice and a public hearing thereon, as provided by Virginia Code § 36-105.1:1. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § 1, 6-14-05) 
Section 6-403. - Implementation; notification requirement for owners. 
(a)  On or before October 1, 2005, and within sixty (60) days of the transfer of ownership or a change in the managing agent of any residential rental dwelling unit subject to this article, the owner of any dwelling unit within a rental inspection district shall notify the director of planning and building in writing if the dwelling unit is used for residential rental purposes. Thereafter, any owner of a dwelling unit in a rental inspection district shall notify the director of planning and building in writing when the dwelling unit is used for residential rental purposes. Such notice shall be submitted on a form provided by the planning and building department and shall contain the following information: The address and a brief description of the rental dwelling unit; the name, street address and telephone number of the owner of the property; the name, street address and telephone number of the managing agent, if any; the number of people who occupy each dwelling unit, and the family status of the occupants. Such form shall not require the name or social security number of any tenant. 
(b)  If the director of planning and building has reason to believe that an owner has failed to notify the director of a residential rental dwelling unit within a rental inspection district, he or she shall mail a written notice to the owner setting a seven (7) day deadline for compliance. The penalty for the willful failure of an owner of a dwelling unit who is using the dwelling unit for residential rental purposes to comply with the written notification requirement shall be a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). For purposes of this section, notice sent by regular first class mail to the last known address of the owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall be deemed compliance with this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § 1, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 6-404. - Rental certificate of compliance required. 
    No owner or managing agent shall rent or offer to rent a residential rental dwelling unit within a rental inspection district or an individual residential rental dwelling outside a district that is subject to this article without a rental certificate of compliance therefor, issued after a satisfactory inspection of the property by the building official or his or her designee. 
Section 6-405. - Inspections, generally. 
(a)  The building official shall cause an inspection to be made of each rental dwelling unit located within a rental inspection district, within four (4) years of the designation of the district for compliance with the provisions of the building code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such property. The building official is hereby authorized to establish schedules to accomplish the inspection of dwelling units in different areas within the rental inspection district. The building official shall inspect any individual residential rental dwelling unit that is outside a district within ninety (90) days of the date the dwelling unit is made subject to this article. After such inspection, the owner and the managing agent, if any, will be provided with a list of any violations found and the date by which such violations must be corrected. Following the initial inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit subject to this article, the building official may inspect any residential rental dwelling unit in a rental inspection district, not otherwise exempted, annually. 
(b)  Upon a determination that a rental dwelling unit is in compliance with the provisions of the existing structures regulations of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, a rental certificate of compliance shall be issued to the owner. No certificate shall be issued until all inspection fees are paid. The certificate shall be valid for a term of four (4) years. Upon the initial or periodic inspection of a residential rental dwelling unit subject to this article for compliance with the building code, the property shall be exempt from this article's inspection requirements for four (4) years, provided there are no building code violations that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of the residential rental dwelling unit. However, upon the sale of a residential rental dwelling unit, the building department may perform an inspection of the dwelling unit. Residential rental dwelling units shall be exempt from the inspection requirement of this article for four (4) years from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the unit by the department of planning and building. Any inspection exemption granted for a rental dwelling unit prior to July 1, 2005, shall be valid for the period as initially granted, unless revoked as provided by section 6-407. 
(c)  There shall be no fee for the initial inspection required by this article or the first re-inspection. If all violations are not corrected at the time of the first re-inspection, then the fee for the second and any subsequent re-inspection for the original violation shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(d)  The building official, or his or her duly authorized agent, shall have the right to inspect any rental dwelling unit within a rental inspection district or other individual residential dwelling units subject to this article at any reasonable time, in order to carry out an inspection required by this section. The owner, managing agent, occupant, or other person in charge of the premises shall permit the building code official, or his or her duly authorized agent, access to any dwelling unit within a rental inspection district or any individual residential dwelling unit subject to this article for the purpose of conducting an inspection authorized by this article. In the event the building official or his or her authorized agent is denied access to a dwelling unit, he or she may apply for an administrative search warrant in order to gain access to the premises. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit an inspection of any residential rental dwelling unit or individual residential dwelling unit subject to this article for a violation of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, pursuant to a complaint, as required by section 6-201 of this chapter. 
(f)  The owner or managing agent may appeal the building official's determination of a violation of the building code to the Blacksburg Building Code Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § 1, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 6-406. - Initial and periodic inspections of multi-family dwelling units. 
(a)  If a multi-family development has more than ten (10) dwelling units, in the initial and periodic inspections, the building official shall inspect not less than two (2) and not more than ten (10) percent of the dwelling units of that multi-family development, which includes all of the multi-family buildings which are part of that multi-family development. However, no inspection fee shall be charged for more than ten (10) dwelling units. Two (2) family dwellings and multi- family dwelling units with three (3) to nine (9) dwelling units are not exempt from the inspection requirements of this article. 
(b)  The inspected dwelling units of a multi-family development shall be selected by the building official. At the time of inspection, no violations of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall exist. If the building official determines upon inspection of the sampling of dwelling units that there are violations of the Building Code that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions for the tenants of such multi-family dwelling unit, the building official may inspect as many dwelling units as necessary to enforce the Building Code. 
(c)  If the dwelling units that are inspected are in compliance with the provisions and all other applicable codes and ordinances, then a rental certificate of compliance shall be issued as provided by section 6-405(b). 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall serve to exempt the owner, managing agent, or tenant of a multi-family dwelling unit from compliance with all applicable statutes, laws, and ordinances, including the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § 1, 6-14-05) 
Section 6-407. - Revocation of exemption from inspection. 
(a)  The director of planning and building may revoke an inspection exemption granted pursuant to section 6-405(b) upon finding that the residential rental dwelling unit is in violation of the building code during the exemption period. 
(b)  Before revoking an exemption, the director shall notify the owner, managing agent, and tenant of the violation, in writing, via first class mail, specifying the nature of the violation; establishing a deadline for correction of the violation, which shall be no less than seven (7) and no greater than thirty (30) days; and stating that the exemption will be revoked on a date certain unless the building official's determination of the existence of a building code violation is appealed to the Blacksburg Building Code Board of Appeals. The notice shall also set forth the appeal process as herein established. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § 1, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Sec. 6-408. - Appeal. 
(a)  The owner, managing agent or tenant may appeal a notice of revocation based upon the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code to the Blacksburg Board of Building Code Appeals. Any such appeal shall be filed with the department of planning and building within twenty (20) days after the date the notice of violation was served upon the owner or manager, whichever was served first. Section PM-111.0 of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall apply to any such appeal. 
(b)  The inspection exemption shall remain in effect pending the resolution of the appeal by the Blacksburg Building Code Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § 1, 6-14-05; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 6-409. - Violations. 
    Any person willfully failing to comply with the inspection requirements of this article or the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be subject to the penalties established in section 6-203 of this Code, except as specifically provided otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1387, § 1, 6-14-05) 
ARTICLE V. - FIRE PREVENTION 

Section 6-500. - Adopted; where filed. 
    For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations to safeguard life and property and public welfare from the hazards of substances, materials, or devices and from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the use of or occupancy of buildings, structures, sheds, tents, lots or premises, that certain fire prevention code known as the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code/2000 Edition, and the whole thereof, is hereby adopted and incorporated, as fully as if set out at length herein, including all appendices. Copies of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code may be reviewed during regular office hours in the office of the town clerk. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 1-13.39:2 of the Code of Virginia, future amendments to the sections of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, the International Building Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, the International Residential Code, and the codes and standards referenced therein are also incorporated by reference herein. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 4, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 1353, § 3, 2-10-04) 
Section 6-501. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the policy of the town to enforce in its entirety the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, as adopted and as it may be amended by the Commonwealth in future editions. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 4, 8-10-99) 
Section 6-502. - Violations of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, a violation of any provision of the Fire Prevention Code shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 4, 8-10-99) 
Section 6-503. - Conflicts with building code. 
    Whenever there is a conflict between the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, the building code shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 4, 8-10-99) 
Section 6-504. - Office of fire code official established. 
    The office of fire code official for the town is hereby established. The fire code official shall be appointed by the town manager and shall have the powers and perform such duties as may be provided in Section F-106 of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code/1996, as amended from time to time. The fire code official shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and other chapters of this Code and other ordinances, which, by their terms, are subject to the fire code official's administrative and enforcement responsibility or authority. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 4, 8-10-99) 
Section 6-505. - Board of appeals. 
    The Building Code Board of Appeals is hereby also designated as the board of appeals for the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code. Such combined board shall have jurisdiction over all appeals by any person aggrieved by any decision or interpretation of the fire code official under the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 4, 8-10-99) 
ARTICLE VI. - HOMESTAY REGULATIONS 

Section 6-601. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
    Booking transaction means any transaction in which there is a charge to a transient by a host for the occupancy of any dwelling, sleeping, or lodging accommodations. 
    Hosting platform means any person or entity that is not a host but facilitates reservations or collects payments for any booking transaction on behalf of a host through an online digital platform. 
    Guest or transient means a person who occupies a homestay unit. 
    Homestay means the accessory or secondary use of a residential dwelling unit or a portion thereof by a host to provide room or space that is intended for short term transient rental purposes in exchange for a charge for the occupancy. The primary use of the homestay unit shall remain residential. For each booking transaction, all applicable taxes must be collected and remitted to the town as required by chapter 22 by either the host or the associated hosting platform. Such accessory or secondary use shall not create a landlord/tenant relationship. 
    Host means the person who is the primary resident of a homestay unit offered for homestay lodging. In determining compliance with these regulations, the host has the burden of demonstrating that the dwelling unit is his or her primary residence. 
    Primary resident means the owner of the homestay unit who occupies the property as his or her principal place of residence and domicile. 
    Residential dwelling unit means a residence where one (1) or more persons maintain a household. 
    Type A rentals means rentals where the host is present during the homestay and no more than two (2) bedrooms of the homestay unit are rented. 
    Type B rentals means all other rentals, including ones where more than two (2) bedrooms of the homestay unit are rented or the host is not present during the homestay. 
( Ord. No. 1807, § 1, 12-13-16 ) 
Section 6-602. - Registration and other requirements. 
(a)  No host shall operate a homestay unit or advertise a residential property for homestay use without the host first having registered with the department of planning and building. 
(b)  The registration form shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, telephone number, address, and email address of the host. 
(2)  A reminder about the importance of having appropriate levels of insurance that covers the homestay unit, the host and the guests. 
(3)  If the homestay unit shares a common wall or a common driveway with another property owner, proof of written notification to such neighboring property owner(s) prior to filing the registration application. 
(c)  Signs, advertising, or any other display on the property indicating that the homestay unit is being utilized, in whole or in part, as a homestay are not permitted. 
(d)  The host shall register with the finance department to collect and remit the town's transient lodging tax as set forth in chapter 22, article V. 
(e)  A host may only register and operate one (1) residential dwelling unit as a homestay in the town. 
(f)  The registration shall be valid January 1 st (or from whatever date the registration first occurs) through December 31 st of the calendar year, and shall be renewed annually. 
(g)  A valid registration will permit a maximum ninety (90) days of type A and type B rentals in each calendar year. Of these ninety (90) days of rentals, no more than thirty (30) days may be type B rentals. On each lodging tax return form filed with the director of finance, the number of type A and type B rentals shall be listed. 
( Ord. No. 1807, § 1, 12-13-16 ) 
Section 6-603. - Safety. 
(a)  The unit shall have smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors meeting current Underwriters Laboratory standards installed as follows: 
(1)  In all sleeping areas. 
(2)  In every room in the path of the means of egress from the sleeping area to the door leading from the sleeping unit. 
(3)  In each story within the sleeping unit, including basements. 
(b)  Any sleeping area must have one (1) other adequate method of egress beyond the entrance point. 
(c)  As part of the registration process, the host shall certify that the homestay unit meets the requirements of this section. The registration forms shall also provide that, as part of the registration, the host is agreeing to permit inspections of the home (at reasonable times and after notice has been provided) to address complaints. The failure to permit such an inspection is grounds for registration suspension. 
( Ord. No. 1807, § 1, 12-13-16 ) 
Section 6-604. - Use regulations. 
(a)  No recreational vehicles, buses, or trailers shall be parked on the adjoining street or visible on the property in conjunction with the homestay use. 
(b)  The dates for trash and recycling collection shall be posted prominently in the homestay unit. 
(c)  During each stay at the homestay unit, a principal guest shall be designated as the contact person for town officials in the event of safety or behavioral issues at the unit. The host shall provide this information upon request to authorized town officials. 
(d)  The host shall not permit occupancy of a homestay unit for a period of less than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(e)  The name and telephone number of the host or the host's designee shall be conspicuously posted within the homestay unit. The host shall answer calls twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week for the duration of each short term rental to address any problems associated with the homestay unit. 
(f)  The principal guest of a homestay unit shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(g)  The maximum number of adult guests in a homestay unit is limited to six (6). 
( Ord. No. 1807, § 1, 12-13-16 ) 
Section 6-605. - Registration suspension or cancellation. 
(a)  A registration may be suspended or cancelled for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to collect and/or remit the transient occupancy tax. 
(2)  Three (3) or more substantiated complaints (including, but not limited to, parking on grass, noise, excess trash) within a twelve-month period. 
(3)  The failure of any homestay host to maintain his or her principal place of residence or domicile at the dwelling unit used as a limited residential lodging. 
(b)  Before any suspension or cancellation can be effective, a duly designated officer of the town shall give written notice to the homestay host. The notice of suspension or cancellation issued under the provisions of this chapter shall contain: 
(1)  A description of the violations constituting the basis of the suspension or cancellation; 
(2)  If applicable, a statement of acts necessary to correct the violation; and 
(3)  A statement that if no request for a hearing is made within ten (10) days from the date of the notice, the registration will be suspended or cancelled; 
(c)  The notice shall be given to the host by delivering a copy of the notice in person. If the host cannot be found, such notice shall be sent by: 
(1)  Certified mail or e-mail to the addresses in the registration form; and 
(2)  A copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(d)  If requested, a hearing shall be held before a deputy town manager or the deputy manager's designee. It is the burden of the host to demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, why the suspension or cancellation should not go into effect. The decision of the deputy town manager or designee may be appealed to the town council. 
( Ord. No. 1807, § 1, 12-13-16 ) 
Section 6-606. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a homestay without registering as required by this article, after a registration has been suspended or cancelled or in violation of any other requirement of this article; the penalty shall be a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per occurrence. 
( Ord. No. 1807, § 1, 12-13-16 ) 
Chapter 7 - CEMETERIES 
ARTICLE I. - WEST VIEW CEMETERY 

Section 7-100. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, the term "cemetery" means the West View Cemetery owned and maintained by the town. 
Section 7-101. - Rules and regulations adopted. 
    The rules and regulations, entitled "West View Cemetery Rules and Regulations," adopted by the town council by Ordinance No. 408, on August 24, 1976, and all amendments thereto, are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this article to the same extent as if set out herein at length. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to provide places for interment of the dead, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1121; crimes and offenses relating to cemeteries, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-125 et seq.; cemeteries generally, Code of Virginia, § 57-22 et seq.; regulation and inspection of cemeteries, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1111. 
Section 7-102. - General duty of town manager. 
    It shall be the duty of the town manager to provide for the regulation and maintenance of the cemetery. 
Section 7-103. - Documents, records and forms to be kept by manager. 
    The town manager, or his designated representative, shall keep records relating to the regulation and maintenance of the cemetery, including maps of the cemetery with a list of cemetery lots and a list of the names of persons buried therein; deeds for cemetery lots; card records of ownership, location and interments; reports concerning the cemetery trust fund and reports of the cemetery trustee committee; copies of the rules and regulations for the regulation and maintenance of the cemetery; and such other records as the manager may deem convenient. 
Section 7-104. - Caretaker. 
    The town manager, or his designated representative, may appoint some person to act as caretaker of the cemetery, to be paid such salary as the town council shall, from time to time, prescribe. The caretaker so appointed shall devote his full time to the operation and maintenance of the cemetery and shall perform such duties in connection therewith as may be prescribed by the town manager, or his designated representative. 
Section 7-105. - Trustee committee. 
    The town council shall appoint a cemetery trustee committee consisting of not less than three (3) nor more than five (5) legal residents of the town, who shall be either (i) an owner of a lot in the cemetery or who shall have relatives interred therein or (ii) a member of the town council, whose duty it shall be to advise the town council and the town manager on all matters concerning the operation, regulation and maintenance of the cemetery. The committee shall report to the council and the manager annually. The committee shall not have the power to prescribe rules and regulations, its purpose being to assist and advise the council and the manager in the operation, regulation and maintenance of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 1566, § 1, 2-9-2010) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to create committees, boards and commissions, § 3.20. 
Section 7-106. - Lot prices and service charges. 
(a)  The council shall, from time to time, determine the prices of cemetery lots and charges for opening graves and other services, which prices and charges shall be set out in the "West View Cemetery Rules and Regulations." 
(b)  Lots must be paid for within two years from date of application to purchase or before using the lot, whichever is sooner. Title to such lots shall remain in the town until payment is made. If payment is not made in accord with the provisions of the section, the town may sell the lots to third persons without liability to the prospective purchaser. 
(c)  The charge for opening graves, for the purpose of interment or removal of bodies, shall include opening the grave, removal of excess material and refilling and sodding. 
(d)  All fees and charges referred to in this section shall be paid at the finance department in the Municipal Building. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to establish charges for cemetery services, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1121. 
Section 7-107. - Permit for interment. 
    Any funeral director supervising an interment in the cemetery shall secure from the town manager, or his designated representative, a permit prior to making such interment. 
Section 7-108. - Grave receptacles. 
    A receptacle shall be used in each grave in the cemetery, such receptacle to be of a type of material which will not readily deteriorate. No wooden receptacles shall be used. 
Section 7-109. - Perpetual care and maintenance. 
(a)  The town hereby assumes the obligation to care for and maintain all lots in the cemetery and, to that end, hereby authorizes, empowers and directs the mayor and the town clerk to enter into a trust agreement with a corporate trustee, on behalf of the town, and to affix the town's seal thereto, for the purpose of providing funds for the perpetual care and maintenance of the cemetery. The corporate trustee shall be selected and approved by the town council, and eighty (80) percent of the funds received from the sale of lots in the cemetery, and all sums now held in the town cemetery account, shall be placed in the perpetual care trust fund. 
(b)  No income from the perpetual care trust fund shall be expended for any purpose unless the principal of such fund is at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). Until such time as the income from such fund is sufficient to defray the actual expenses of the operation and maintenance of the cemetery, the town assumes the obligation to operate and maintain the cemetery. The entire income from opening and closing graves and performing foundation work, and twenty (20) percent of the income from sales of cemetery lots shall be used for the expenses of operation and maintenance of the cemetery, as aforesaid, and any additional funds needed for the operation and maintenance of the cemetery shall be expended from the general revenues of the town. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the town manager, or whomever the manager may designate, to estimate the annual expenses necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of the cemetery and submit budget requests for such funds. 
(d)  The cemetery corporate trustee chosen by the town council pursuant to this section shall give a complete report of the financial condition of the perpetual care trust fund to the town council, annually in January, prior to the annual budget preparation. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1757, § 1, 2-10-15 ) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to contract for perpetual care of lots and burial spaces, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1121; disposition of property for maintenance and care of cemetery, Code of Virginia, § 57-31, 35. 
Section 7-110. - Violation of article. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
Chapter 8 - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS, GEMS, ETC. 

Section 8-100. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the terms "coin," "dealer," "gems" and "precious metals" shall have the same meaning ascribed to them in section 54.1-4100, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, as such section may from time to time be amended. The term "statement of ownership" shall mean a bill of sale, affidavit of ownership, deed of gift, or other memorandum or evidence of ownership. 
Section 8-101. - Permit required. 
    No person, partnership, firm or corporation shall engage in the activities of a dealer of precious metals as defined in section 54.1-4100 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police. 
Section 8-102. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The chief of police, or his designee, may waive by written notice implementation of any one (1) or more of the provisions of this article, except section 8-111, for particular numismatic, gem or antique exhibitions or craft shows sponsored by nonprofit organizations, provided that the purpose of the exhibitions is nonprofit in nature, notwithstanding the fact that there may be casual purchases and trades made at such exhibitions. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to the sale or purchase of coins. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any bank, branch thereof, trust company, or bank holding company, or any wholly owned subsidiary thereof, engaged in buying and selling gold and silver bullion. 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 54.1-4109. 
Section 8-103. - Application for permit; fee. 
(a)  Applicants for a permit under this article shall file with the chief of police a sworn written application in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the chief of police, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Applicant's full name and any aliases; 
(2)  Applicant's present home address. If any applicant has resided at his or her present address for less than two (2) years, then the applicant's previous home address must also be given; 
(3)  Applicant's date of birth, sex, and social security number; 
(4)  A copy of the applicant's fingerprints; 
(5)  Photograph of applicant; 
(6)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer, if any; if none, the name, address and telephone number of applicant's previous business or employer; 
(7)  The location of the place of business; 
(8)  A statement of whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony or crime involving breach of the peace or danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public, or any municipal ordinance and if so convicted, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
    In the case of firms or corporations, the foregoing information shall be required for the officers and principal stockholders of said firms and corporations. 
(b)  An application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall accompany each application. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
Section 8-104. - Investigation of applicant. 
(a)  Upon receipt of said application, the chief of police shall cause to be made an investigation of the applicant's business responsibility and personal character. 
(b)  If as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, or the applicant is found to have been convicted of a felony or crime involving breach of the peace or danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public within seven (7) years prior to the date of the application, the chief of police shall notify the applicant that the permit has been denied and the reasons therefor. 
(c)  The permit shall be denied if the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under any ordinance similar in substance to the provisions of this chapter. 
Section 8-105. - Issuance of permit. 
    If, as a result of the investigation of the applicant, the business responsibility and personal character of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall issue the permit on the following conditions: 
(1)  The dealer shall enter into a recognizance to the town secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in Virginia, in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in Virginia a letter of credit in favor of the town in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). A single bond upon an employer or principal may be written or a single letter of credit issued to cover all employees and all transactions occurring at a single location. 
(2)  The dealer presents written evidence to the chief of police that all weighing devices used in his business have been inspected and approved by a weights and measures official of the commonwealth. 
Section 8-106. - Expiration of permit; renewal. 
    The permit issued under this article shall be valid for one (1) year from the date issued and may be renewed in the same manner as such permit was initially obtained with an annual permit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
Section 8-107. - Nontransferability and posting of permit. 
    The permit issued under this article shall be valid only for the business at the premises listed on the application and shall not be transferable. The permit shall at all times be posted in public view by the dealer on his business premises. 
Section 8-108. - Permanent location required. 
    If the business of the dealer is not operated without interruption, with Saturdays, Sundays and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the chief of police of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of the dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in the application for a permit. 
Section 8-109. - Records to be kept; copy to be furnished to chief of police; inspection of records. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each purchase of precious metals or gems. The record of each such purchase shall be retained by the dealer for not less than twenty-four (24) months and shall contain the following: 
(1)  A complete description of all precious metals or gems purchased from each seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers, or other identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight or carat of any gem, and the price paid for each item; 
(2)  The date and time of receiving the items purchased; 
(3)  The name, address, date of birth, sex, race, driver's license number, or social security number, and signature of the seller; and 
(4)  A statement of ownership from the seller. 
(b)  Information required by items (1) through (3) of subsection (a) of this section shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer, and a copy thereof shall be mailed or delivered within twenty-four (24) hours of the time of the purchase to the chief of police. 
(c)  Each dealer shall admit to his premises during regular business hours any federal, state or local law enforcement officer and shall permit such law enforcement officer to examine all records required by this article and shall permit such law enforcement officer to examine any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen. 
Section 8-110. - Credentials required from seller. 
    No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an identification issued by a governmental agency with a photograph of the seller thereon, and at least one other corroborating means of identification, and without obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller. 
Section 8-111. - Prohibited purchases. 
(a)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of eighteen (18). 
(b)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such items, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
Section 8-112. - Dealer to retain purchases. 
(a)  The dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of ten (10) calendar days from the date on which a copy of the bill of sale is received by the chief of police. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter, or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the town. 
(b)  If a dealer performs a service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of ten (10) calendar days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. 
Section 8-113. - Examination of merchandise by law enforcement officers. 
    Every person who is a dealer in or in the business of purchasing any of the items enumerated in chapter and every person in the employ of such person shall admit to his premises during business hours any federal, state or local law enforcement officer to examine any item purchased and to search for and to take into possession any article known by him to be missing or known or believed by him to have been stolen. 
Section 8-114. - Record of disposition. 
    Each dealer shall keep and maintain for at least twenty-four (24) months an accurate and legible record of the name and address of the person, firm or corporation to which he sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the waiting period required by section 8-33. This record shall also show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased such item. 
Section 8-115. - Private action on bond or letter of credit. 
    If any person shall be aggrieved by the misconduct of any dealer who has violated the provisions of this article, he may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against such dealer and his surety, provided that recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the judgment, if any, which is unsatisfied by the dealer. 
Section 8-116. - Penalties; first and subsequent offenses. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense, such dealer shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction by any court of a dealer for violation of any provision of this article, the chief of police may revoke the permit to engage in business as a dealer under this article for a period of one full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory upon a second conviction. 
Chapter 9 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Members of council elected from town at large, § 3.03; date of town elections, § 3.04; voters of the town designated § 3.05; vacancy in office of mayor § 3.07; vacancy in office of council member § 3.10. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; mayor and council, § 2-100 et seq. 

Section 9-100. - Election of town council at November general election. 
(a)  Pursuant to Virginia Code § 24.2-222.1 and notwithstanding the provisions of Town Charter § 3.04 and Virginia Code § 24.2-222, the election of members of town council and the mayor shall be held on the general election date in November of odd-numbered years, beginning in November, 2009, and biennially thereafter, in accordance with the following cycles: 
(1)  The election for the town council seats and the office of mayor filled by the council election of May 2006 shall be held on the November 2009 general election date and every four (4) years thereafter; and 
(2)  The election for the town council seats filled by the council election of May 2008 shall be held on the November 2011 general election date and every four (4) years thereafter. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of Virginia Code § 24.2-222.1(D), members of town council elected at a May general election shall have their term of office shortened by six (6) months but shall continue in office until their successors have been elected at the November general election and qualified to serve. 
(Ord. No. 1468, 1-8-08) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 24.2-307. 
Section 9-101. - Voting precincts and polling places. 
    Voting precincts and polling places for town elections, including a central absentee precinct, shall correspond to those established by Montgomery County to serve town residents for general elections. 
(Ord. No. 1394, § 1, 8-9-05; Ord. No. 1468, 1-8-08) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 24.2-308. 
Chapter 10 - EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross references- Building regulations, Ch. 6; street excavations, § 20-501 et seq.; zoning, App. A; subdivisions, App. B. 
Cross reference- Building regulations, ch. 6; sewers and storm drainage, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Authority, Title 10.1, Ch. 5, Art. 4, Code of Virginia; Erosion and Sediment Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-561. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 10-100. - Purpose of chapter; authority. 
(a)  This chapter shall be known as the "Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance of the Town of Blacksburg." The purpose of this chapter is to provide for, both during and following development, the control of erosion and sedimentation, to establish procedures for the administration and enforcement of such controls and to alleviate harmful or damaging effects of on-site erosion and siltation of neighboring downstream properties during and after development. 
(b)  The authority for this chapter is found in Virginia Code, Title 10.1, Chapter 5, Article 4 (§ 10.1-560 et seq.), sometimes referred to in this chapter as "state law." 
(Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Section 10-101. - Chapter intended as adjunct to zoning and subdivision ordinances. 
    It is the intent of the town council that this chapter be an adjunct to the town's subdivision and zoning ordinances wherein such ordinances apply to the development and subdivision of land within the town or to development on previously subdivided land within the town. 
Cross references- Zoning, App. A; Subdivisions, App. B. 
Section 10-102. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
    Administrator shall mean the director of engineering and GIS or his or her designee, including the erosion and sediment control inspector, certified inspector, certified plan reviewer, or certified program administrator. The administrator is designated by the town council to serve as its agent to administer this chapter. 
    Agreement in lieu of a plan shall mean a contract between the town and the owner that specifies conservation measures which must be implemented in the construction of a single-family residence; this contract may be executed by the town in lieu of a formal site plan. 
    Applicant shall mean any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan for approval or requesting the issuance of a permit, when required, authorizing land-disturbing activities to commence. 
    Board shall mean the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board. 
    Certified inspector shall mean an employee or agent of the town who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the Board in the area of project inspection or (ii) is enrolled in the Board's training program for project inspection and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
    Certified plan reviewer shall mean an employee or agent of the town who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the Board in the area of plan review, (ii) is enrolled in the Board's training program for plan review and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment, or (iii) is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Virginia Code, Title 54.1, Chapter 4, Article 1, (§§ 54.1-400 et seq.). 
    Certified program administrator shall mean an employee or agent of the town who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the Board in the area of program administration or (ii) is enrolled in the Board's training program for program administration and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
    Clearing shall mean any activity which removes the vegetative ground cover, including, but not limited to, root mat removal and/or topsoil removal. 
    Completion of land-alteration activities shall mean the completion of activities in the approved plan for the subject property, including adequate permanent stabilization of the disturbed area, plus reasonable evidence that soil erosion is under control. 
    Development shall mean a tract of land developed or to be developed as a single unit under single ownership or unified control that is to be used for any business or industrial purpose or is to contain three (3) or more residential dwelling units. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control plan or plan shall mean a document containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or a group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and water plan inventory and management information with needed interpretations, and a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The "plan" shall contain all major conservation decisions and all information deemed necessary by the administrator to assure that the entire unit or units of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives. 
    Erosion impact area shall mean an area of land not associated with current land-disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less used for residential purposes. 
    Excavating shall mean any digging, scooping or other methods of removing earth materials. 
    Filling shall mean any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials. 
    Governing body shall mean the Town Council of the Town of Blacksburg. 
    Grading shall mean any excavating or filling of earth materials or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
    Land-disturbing activity shall mean any land change that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands in the commonwealth, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, except that the term shall not include: 
(1)  Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work; 
(2)  Individual service connections; 
(3)  Installation, maintenance, or repair of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard surfaced road, street or sidewalk, provided the land-disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard surfaced; 
(4)  Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for land-disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system; 
(5)  Surface or deep mining; 
(6)  Exploration or drilling for oil and gas including the well site, roads, feeder lines and off-site disposal areas; 
(7)  Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, or livestock feedlot operations; including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the Dam Safety Act (Virginia Code, Title 10.1, Chapter 6, Article 2 [§ 10.1-604 et seq.]), ditches, strip cropping, lister farrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which the harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Virginia Code, Title 10.1, Chapter 11, (§ 10.1-1100 et seq.), or is converted to a bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in subsection B of § 10.1-1163. 
(8)  Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, right-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company; 
(9)  Disturbed land areas of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in size; 
(10)  Installation of fence and sign posts of telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; and 
(11)  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and emergency repairs; however, if the land-disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, if the activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
    Land-disturbing permit shall mean a permit issued by the town for clearing, filing, excavating, grading or transporting, or any combination thereof. 
    Local erosion and sediment control program or local control program shall mean an outline of the various methods employed by the town to regulate land-disturbing activities and thereby minimize erosion and sedimentation in compliance with the state program and may include such items as local ordinances, policies and guidelines, technical materials, inspection, enforcement, and evaluation. 
    Natural channel design concepts shall mean the utilization of engineering analysis and fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore, or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating or recreating a stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its banks and allows larger flows to access its bankfull bench and its flood plain. 
    Owner shall mean the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
    Peak flow rate shall mean the maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a particular location. 
    Permittee shall mean the person to whom the permit authorizing land-disturbing activities is issued or the person who certifies that the approved erosion and sediment control plan will be followed. 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town, or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
    Plan approving authority shall mean the town, which has delegated to the administrator the responsibility for determining the adequacy of a plan submitted for land-disturbing activities on a unit or units of lands and for approving plans. 
    Responsible land disturber shall mean an individual from the project or development team who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out a land-disturbing activity covered by an approved plan or agreement in lieu of a plan, who (i) holds a responsible land disturber certificate of competence, (ii) holds a current certificate of competence from the board in the areas of combined administration, program administration, inspection, or plan review, (iii) holds a current contractor certificate of competence for erosion and sediment control, or (iv) is licensed in Virginia as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Virginia Code, Title 54.1, Chapter 4, Article 1 (§ 54.1-400 et seq.). 
    Runoff volume shall mean the volume of water that runs off the land development project from a prescribed storm event. 
    Single-family residence shall mean a noncommercial dwelling that is occupied exclusively by one family. 
    State erosion and sediment control program or state program shall mean the program administered by the Board pursuant to the Code of Virginia, including regulations designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
    Subdivision or subdivide shall carry the same meaning set out in the Subdivision Ordinance, Blacksburg Town Code with necessary changes. 
    Town shall mean the Town of Blacksburg, Virginia. 
    Transporting shall mean any moving of earth materials from one place to another, other than such movement incidental to grading, when such movement results in destroying the vegetative ground cover, either by tracking or the buildup of earth materials to the extent that erosion and sedimentation will result from the soil or earth materials over which such transporting occurs. 
    Water quality volume shall mean the volume equal to the first one-half (1/2) inch of runoff multiplied by the impervious surface of the land development project. 
    To the extent that any definition in this section is inconsistent with definitions contained in state law (Virginia Code § 10.1-604 et seq.) or state regulation (4 VAC 50-30), the state definitions shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1398, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Section 10-103. - Enforcement of chapter; inspection of projects; administrative fees. 
    The administrator will be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and will direct the on-site inspection of each project governed by this chapter. Administrative fees for inspections and other procedures specified by this division shall be established by the town council. A schedule of these fees is available in the department of and engineering and GIS. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 2, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Section 10-104. - Effect of compliance with chapter in action for damages. 
    Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence, in any legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion, siltation or sedimentation, that all requirements of law have been met and the complaining party must show negligence to recover any damages. 
(Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-569(H). 
Section 10-105. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The town manager, or the owner of property that has sustained damage or that is in imminent danger of being damaged, may apply to the appropriate circuit court to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this chapter, without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. However, an owner of property shall not apply for injunctive relief unless (i) the owner has notified in writing the person who has violated the local program, and the town, that a violation of the local program has caused, or creates a probability of causing, damage to the property, and (ii) neither the person who has violated the local program nor the town has taken corrective action within fifteen (15) days to eliminate the conditions that have caused damage, or create the probability of causing damage, to the property. 
(c)  The town may deem violations of this chapter or of a provision of a land-disturbing permit to be civil in nature and assess and collect a civil penalty under this subsection. The civil penalty for one such violation shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) except that the civil penalty for commencement of a land-disturbing activity without an approved plan shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising out of the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties that exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Pursuit of a civil penalty shall be in lieu of criminal prosecution. The following schedule, which is nonexclusive, of specific additional violations, with the prescribed civil penalty, shall also be in force: 
Schedule of Erosion and Sedimentation Control Civil Penalties 
Violation      Civil Penalty 
Failure to properly install perimeter controls ..... $500.00  
Failure to properly install temporary stone construction entrance ..... 500.00  
Sediment or debris transported onto paved public road by vehicular traffic or runoff ..... 500.00  
Failure to install storm drain inlet protection ..... 500.00  
Failure to install storm drain outlet protection ..... 500.00  
Failure to seed and mulch disturbed areas within fourteen days of notice to comply ..... 500.00  
    The town may bring a civil action in the General District or Circuit Court of Montgomery to abate the violation. In any trial for a violation, it shall be the burden of the town to show the liability of the violator by a preponderance of the evidence. An admission or finding of liability shall not be a criminal conviction for any purpose. Any civil penalties assessed by a court shall be paid into the treasury of the town, except that where the violator is the town itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(d)  In addition to any criminal or civil penalties provided under this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be liable to the town in a civil action for damages. 
(e)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this section, any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation. A civil action for such violation or failure may be brought by the town. 
(f)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any regulation or order of the board, or any condition of a permit or any provision of this chapter, the board, the director of the department of conservation and recreation, or the town may provide, in an order issued by the town against such person, for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sum, not to exceed the limit specified in subsection (e) of this section. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under this section. 
(g)  The commonwealth's attorney shall, upon request of the town, take legal action to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The town attorney may also take such legal action, upon request by the administrator. 
(h)  Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence in any legal proceeding for damages caused by erosion, siltation or sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met, and the complaining party must show negligence to recover damages. 
(Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-569. 
Section 10-106. - Land-disturbing permit-Generally. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 10-102 of this chapter, no person shall engage in any land-disturbing activity within the town until such person has acquired a land-disturbing permit, paid the required fees and provided the necessary security, unless the proposed land-disturbing activity is exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The issuance of a land-disturbing permit shall be conditioned upon: 
(1)  An approved erosion and sediment control plan which, or certification of which, shall be presented at the time of application for such permit; 
(2)  Provision of required security; 
(3)  A preconstruction meeting being held with the administrator, at which a design professional, responsible land disturber, owner's representative and general contractor shall be present; 
(4)  The application shall provide a good faith estimate of the time necessary for the completion of the project for which the permit is required, which shall be known as the "construction period." 
(c)  The person engaged in land-disturbing activity shall pay a weekly fee during the construction period for required inspections. The fee shall be paid in advance, based on the length of the construction period. This fee shall be reduced after substantial completion of the project has occurred and land altering activities are complete. If the project has not been completed at the end of the construction period stated in the application, the construction period may be extended upon payment of any additional required fees; provided, however, that an administrative fee may be charged for costs incurred in the third and subsequent extensions. These administrative fees shall be established by the town council, and a copy of the fee schedule shall be available in the department of engineering and GIS. 
(d)  Upon the issuance of the land-disturbing permit, land-disturbing activities shall be limited to the installation of initial erosion and sediment control measures defined in the sequence of construction. Areas to be disturbed shall be defined with construction fencing. 
(e)  A second preconstruction meeting shall occur on the site upon completion of initial erosion and sediment control measures and fencing of areas to be disturbed, prior to any additional site disturbance. The design professional, owner's representative, general contractor, responsible land disturber, and the administrator shall be present at this meeting and the adequacy of the initial measures shall be assessed. The design professional shall certify the adequacy of the critical measures. Any corrections shall be made before any other site construction may proceed. Upon approval of the installation of the initial measures, the site construction may proceed. 
(f)  As used in this section, "design professional" means a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect, or land surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 2, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 1541, § 1, 10-13-09) 
Section 10-107. - Same-Applicant's security. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit under section 10-106, the applicant shall furnish a performance bond, reasonable cash escrow, letter of credit, or any combination thereof, or some other legal arrangement acceptable to the administrator, in an amount equal to the estimated cost, as determined by the administrator, of the conservation measures, to ensure that conservation measures could be taken by the town, at the applicant's expense, should the applicant fail, within the time specified, to initiate or maintain the control measures provided for in the erosion and sedimentation control plan; provided, however, that the administrator may waive the requirement of a performance bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement for individual lots in residential subdivisions. The amount of the bond or other security for performance shall not exceed the total of the estimated cost to initiate and maintain appropriate conservation action based on unit price for new public or private sector construction in town, as well as a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs and inflation, which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the cost of the conservation action. 
(b)  If the town takes such conservation action upon failure by the permittee, the town may collect from the permittee the difference between the cost of restoration and the amount of security, should the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of security held. 
(c)  No building or other permits for activities involving land alteration activities shall be issued by any officer or agency of the town, until the requirements of subsection (a) of this section have been met. 
(d)  Within sixty (60) days of the applicant's documentation that adequate stabilization of the land-disturbing activity has been accomplished, the unexpended or unobligated portion of the cash escrow, letter of credit, or other legal arrangement, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
(e)  The applicant shall maintain any letter of credit, bond or other security arrangement in effect for the duration of the project. An administrative fee shall be charged for the costs incurred in ensuring compliance with this requirement in the event that the security is not renewed or extended more than thirty-five (35) days prior to its expiration date. 
(f)  These requirements are in addition to all other provisions relating to the issuance of permits and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements for such permits. 
(Ord. No. 1388, § 2, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
State Law reference- Authority for subsection (a) and provisions similar to subsection (b), Code of Virginia, § 10.1-565. 
Section 10-108. - Same-Applicant's agreement as to right of entry for inspections; installation of control measures, etc. 
(a)  Each applicant for a permit under section 10-106 shall provide, as part of the permit application form, for the right of entry by the appropriate persons for the purpose of inspection, monitoring and installation, reinstallation or maintenance of erosion and sediment control measures in the event the applicant fails to install or maintain such measures after notice in writing. 
(b)  The responsible land disturber shall record in a log book inspections, observations, certifications, direction to the contractor, and completed site corrections, as well as any other stormwater pollution prevention plan ("SWPPP") requirements, The responsible land disturber shall be responsible for the day-to-day oversight of the site, and shall note in the SWPPP each review of the site as well as correction and maintenance of erosion control measures. The SWPPP log will include a statement for the responsible land disturber to confirm the dates of inspection of site outfalls to assess erosion and sediment control measure effectiveness. The log book shall reflect sufficient inspections by the responsible land disturber to comply with current SWPPP regulation. 
(c)  The administrator will periodically review all sites under construction and will periodically review log books on-site. 
(d)  Failure to maintain the log book available on site for review by the administrator shall be basis for a stop work order. The stop work order shall remain in effect until a current site condition evaluation is completed by the responsible land disturber or a professional engineer, corrective action is completed by the general contractor, reviewed and certified by the responsible land disturber or professional engineer, and accepted by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 1541, § 1, 10-13-09) 
Section 10-109. - Control measures to be undertaken at land owner's expense. 
    All control measures required by the provisions of this chapter and the erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be undertaken at the expense of the owner of the land or his or her agent. 
ARTICLE II. - CONTROL PLAN FOR LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITIES 

Section 10-200. - Submission and approval required; preliminary plan permitted. 
(a)  Except as provided for herein, no person may engage in any land-disturbing activity until such person has submitted to the administrator an erosion and sedimentation control plan for such land-disturbing activity, with certification that the plan will be followed, and such plan has been approved by the administrator. 
(b)  Where the land-disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence, an agreement in lieu of a plan may be substituted for an erosion and sedimentation control plan if the agreement is signed by the town. 
(c)  Prior to submitting the erosion and sedimentation control plan for approval under this article, the applicant may submit a preliminary plan for purposes of discussion and advice. The preliminary plan should not be cluttered with detailed control measures and may contain the following information: 
(1)  Soil boundaries of all major soil types. 
(2)  Approximate limits of clearing and grading. 
(3)  Tentative means of erosion and sediment control. 
(4)  Phasing of development to minimize the area and duration of exposure. 
(5)  Topography of the site. 
(d)  To prevent further erosion, the administrator may require an erosion and sedimentation control plan for any person owning, controlling, or possessing land on which is found an erosion impact area. 
(e)  State agency projects are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance, except as provided for in Virginia Code § 10.1-564. 
(f)  Pursuant to Virginia Code § 10.1-563(D), electric, natural gas and telephone utility companies, interstate and intrastate natural gas pipeline companies and railroad companies shall file general erosion and sediment control specification annually with the Board for review and written comments. The specifications shall apply to: 
1.  Construction, installation or maintenance of electric, natural gas and telephone utility lines, and pipelines; and 
2.  Construction of the tracts, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of the railroad company. 
Individual approval of separate projects within subsections 1 and 2 of this subsection is not necessary when board approved specifications are followed, however, projects included in subsections 1 and 2 must comply with Board approved specifications. Projects not included in subsections 1 and 2 of this subsection shall comply with the requirements of the town's erosion and sediment control program. 
(Ord. No. 1398, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 10.1-563. 
Section 10-201. - Adoption of state regulations. 
(a)  Pursuant to Virginia Code § 10.1-562, the Town of Blacksburg adopts the regulations, references, guidelines, standards and specifications promulgated by the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board for the effective control of soil erosion and sediment deposition to prevent the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other natural resources. These regulations, references guidelines, standards and specifications for erosion and sediment control are included in but not limited to the "Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations," the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, and the Virginia Stormwater Regulations, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  In accordance with Virginia Code § 10.1-561, stream restoration and relocation projects that incorporate natural channel design concepts are not man-made channels and shall be exempt from any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels. Any land-disturbing activity that provides for stormwater management intended to address any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels shall satisfy the flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels if the practices are designed to (i) detain the water quality volume and to release it over forty-eight (48) hours; (ii) detain and release over a 24-hour period the expected rainfall resulting from the one year, 24-hour storm; and (iii) reduce the allowable peak flow rate resulting from the 1.5, 2, and 10-year, 24-hour storms to a level that is less than or equal to the peak flow rate from the site (assuming it was in a good forested condition), achieved through multiplication of the forested peak flow rate by a reduction factor that is equal to the runoff volume from the site when it was in a good forested condition divided by the runoff volume from the site in its proposed condition, and shall be exempt from any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or man-made channels. 
(c)  Pursuant to Virginia Code § 10.1-561.1, an erosion control plan shall not be approved until it is reviewed by a certified plan reviewer. Inspections of land-disturbing activities shall be conducted by a certified inspector. The town's erosion control program shall contain a certified program administrator, a certified plan reviewer, and a certified inspector, who may be the same person. 
(d)  The town council hereby designates the administrator as the plan-approving authority. 
(e)  The program and regulations provided for in this chapter shall be made available for public inspection at the department of engineering and GIS. 
(Ord. No. 1398, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Section 10-202. - Prerequisite to issuance of building and other permits. 
    The officers and agencies of the town authorized to issue building or other permits for activities involving land-disturbing activities shall not issue such permits, unless: 
(a)  the applicant submits with his or her application the approved erosion and sediment control plan, or the agreement in lieu of a plan, as appropriate, or 
(b)  there is certification of such approved plan from the administrator or certification that a plan was submitted and no action was taken within forty-five (45) days, or 
(c)  there is certification from the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board, when applicable, that the plan has been approved. 
    The applicant shall also submit certification that such plan will be followed. 
(Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-565. 
Section 10-203. - Responsibility for preparation and submission. 
(a)  The preparation and submission of an erosion and sediment control plan to the administrator shall be the responsibility of the owner or lessee or the duly authorized agent of either the owner or lessee, of the land upon which the land-alteration activities are to take place. 
(b)  In accordance with the procedure set forth by Virginia Code § 10.1-563(E), any person engaging in the creation and operation of wetland mitigation banks in multiple jurisdictions, that have been approved and are operated in accordance with applicable federal and state guidance, laws, or regulations for the establishment, use, and operation of mitigation banks, pursuant to a permit issued by the Department of Environmental Quality, the Marine Resources Commission, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, may, at the option of that person, file general erosion and sediment control specifications for wetland mitigation banks annually with the Board for review and approval consistent with guidelines established by the Board. 
(Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Section 10-204. - Erosion and sedimentation control plan review fee; payment by applicant. 
(a)  There is established for review of each erosion and sedimentation control plan a fee equal to fifty dollars ($50.00) plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each acre, or part thereof, of disturbed land; provided, however, that such fee shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which does not exceed an amount commensurate with the services rendered, taking into consideration the time, skill, and town's expenses involved. 
(b)  The foregoing fee shall be paid by the applicant at the time the erosion and sedimentation plan is submitted to the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1281, § 1, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Cross reference- Fee for review of site development plan, § 2-411. 
Section 10-205. - Method of submission. 
    The applicant shall submit copies of black or blue line plans with a completed application for a land-alteration permit. The number of required copies shall correspond to the number required for the related development application (e.g., site development plan, subdivision plat or building permit). Said application shall contain: 
(1)  The name, address and phone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the land owner of record. 
(3)  The name, address and phone number of the person holding a certificate of competence issued by the Department of Conservation and Recreation, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the plan. 
(4)  The location of the site, including lot number and tax map number. 
(5)  Other information as may be requested by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 2, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Section 10-206. - Contents-Generally; format; preparation standards. 
(a)  The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall detail those methods and techniques to be utilized in the control of erosion and sedimentation. 
(b)  The erosion and sedimentation control plan and control techniques shall meet the minimum standards outlined in the then current Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations, (VR625-02-00 September 13, 1990), and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, which are incorporated by reference, as these regulations and guidelines may be amended from time to time. In case of conflict between this chapter and the regulations, this chapter shall prevail. The remainder of the regulations and handbook may be used by the administrator as a reference in reviewing and approving erosion and sediment control plans. 
(Ord. No. 1398, § 1, 10-11-05) 
Section 10-207. - Same-Requirements. 
(a)  The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall consist of two (2) parts: 
(1)  A narrative report describing the project and giving the purposes, schedule or phasing of major construction activities, schedule of application of conservation practices, engineering assumptions and calculations for the control measures; and 
(2)  A map or maps of the same scale or a base map with overlays, depicting the topography of the area, the limits for clearing and grading, other proposed alterations of the area, and the location of the control measures and facilities. 
(b)  The plan shall spell out the methods, techniques and procedures to be followed to control accelerated erosion and sedimentation. The plan shall indicate the following: 
(1)  The type, magnitude and location of both existing and anticipated conservation problems. 
(2)  A sequence of construction operations which defines staged implementation of erosion and sediment control measures. 
(3)  The areas to be affected by clearing and grading in each stage of construction. The limits of such areas shall be defined by construction fencing. 
(4)  The areas to be mulched and the areas to be established by temporary or permanent vegetation. 
(5)  The staging of major land-disturbing activities and the timing and sequence of installing the conservation practices and facilities. 
(6)  The location of erosion and sediment control practices in each stage of construction, such as sediment basins, diversions, waterways, storm drains, dikes, terraces, and similar structures when such practices are needed. Erosion and sediment control practices that require calculations shall be identified on the plan and will require written certification by a design professional as to completeness and correctness of installation. 
(7)  The predominant soils and details on topography, drainage and existing vegetation. 
(8)  A tabular summary of the specified erosion and sediment control measures that contains calculations and specification of the measure. 
(9)  Minimum standards 1 through 19 of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations shall be listed on the construction plans with the method of compliance for each, either stated or noted as not being applicable. 
(c)  Such erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be an integral part of any site plan, subdivision plan, stormwater management plan or grading plan otherwise required by the town. 
(Ord. No. 1541, § 1, 10-13-09) 
Section 10-208. - Narrative and maps. 
    The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall consist of the narrative and maps referred to in the preceding sections. The maps shall: 
(1)  Be prepared at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and shall incorporate good engineering practices. 
(2)  Contain all information required in section 10-207 of this chapter, including a graphic scale, north arrow, date, approval signature block and vicinity map. 
(Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Section 10-209. - Guidelines for determination of adequacy; administrator may seek recommendations from other agencies. 
(a)  In determining the adequacy of the plan, the administrator shall be guided by the recommendations contained in Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations. 
(b)  In reviewing the plan, the administrator may seek recommendations and comments from the director of public works, the Skyline Soil and Water Conservation District, the Virginia Department of Transportation, the health department and such other agencies as are deemed to have some responsibility in this area. 
Section 10-210. - Approval or disapproval. 
(a)  A plan submitted under this article shall be approved in writing within forty-five (45) days from receipt thereof, if (i) such plan meets the requirements of the town erosion and sediment control program and (ii) the person responsible for carrying out the plan certifies that he or she will properly perform the control measures included in the plan and conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  If the plan is disapproved within forty-five (45) days from receipt thereof, the administrator shall specify in writing such modifications, terms and conditions as will permit approval of the plan and communicate these requirements to the applicant. 
(c)  If no action is taken by the administrator within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a plan, the plan shall be deemed approved. 
(d)  Certification of plan approval as provided for by preceding subsections (a) or (c) shall be transmitted to the town official reviewing the related development application (e.g., site development plan, subdivision plat or building permit) to permit its review and approval within the times permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-563. 
Section 10-211. - Changing approved plan. 
    An approved plan may be changed: 
(1)  Where inspection reveals the inadequacy of the plan to accomplish the erosion and sediment control objectives of the plan. 
(2)  When the person responsible for carrying out the approved plan finds that, because of changed circumstances or for other reasons, the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and when the proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of the local control program, are agreed upon by the administrator and the person responsible for carrying out the plan. 
(3)  When it is necessary to coordinate the erosion and sediment control plan with other plans or activities such as revised subdivision plan, site plan, road construction and the like. 
(4)  Where the minimum standards of the plan are not being met by the measures specified in the approved plan. In that case, the administrator shall require such modifications as he or she deems necessary to meet these standards. 
(5)  The administrator may waive or modify any of the standards that are deemed to be too restrictive for site conditions by granting a variance. A variance may be granted under the following conditions: 
(i)  At the time of plan submission, an applicant may request a variance, which shall become part of the approved erosion and sediment control plan. The applicant shall explain the reasons for requesting variances in writing. Specific variances that are allowed by the administrator shall be documented in the plan, along with the basis for granting the variance request(s). 
(ii)  During construction, the person responsible for implementing the approved plan may request a variance in writing from the administrator. The administrator shall respond in writing, either approving or disapproving such request. The basis for granting the request shall be documented in the plan. If the administrator does not approve a variance within ten (10) days of receipt of the request, the request shall be considered disapproved. Following disapproval, the applicant may resubmit a variance request with additional documentation. 
(Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-563. 
Section 10-212. - Submittal to state commission rather than administrator. 
    Where land-disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of the town control program and one (1) or more other local control programs, the erosion and sedimentation control plan may, at the option of the applicant, be submitted to the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board for review and approval, rather than submission to each jurisdiction concerned. If the applicant chooses to submit his or her plan to the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board, rather than the local jurisdictions, he or she shall notify, by certified mail, the administrator of his or her intention at the same time of submittal. 
Section 10-213. - Enforcement; stop work order. 
(a)  (i)  The town shall provide for periodic inspections of the land-disturbing activity during or immediately following the initial installation of erosion and sediment controls, and at least once in every two-week period, within forty-eight (48) hours following any runoff producing storm event, and at the completion of the project prior to the release of any performance bond, in accordance with § 4VAC50-30-60 of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations. 
The town shall also require designation of a responsible land disturber prior to land-disturbing activity who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land-disturbing activity. 
(ii)  The town may require monitoring and reports from the responsible land disturber, to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sediment. The owner, permittee, or responsible land disturber shall be given notice of the inspection. The person responsible for carrying out the plan will maintain records of these inspections and maintenance, to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
(iii)  If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the owner, permittee or responsible land disturber by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or in the plan certification, or by delivery at the site of the land-disturbing activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. 
(iv)  Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the permit may be revoked and the owner, permittee or responsible land disturber shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties provided by this chapter. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the administrator's sworn complaint of a substantial violation of the terms of the plan or of this chapter, the town manager may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified above, issue an order requiring that all or a part of the land-disturbing activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken or, if land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan as provided in this chapter, requiring that all of the land-disturbing activities be stopped until an approved plan or any required permits are obtained. 
(c)  Where the alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in water within the watershed of the town, or where the land-disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan or any required permits, such an order may be issued without regard to whether the alleged violator has been issued a notice to comply as specified above. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after alleged violator has failed to comply with such a notice to comply. 
(d)  The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for a period of seven (7) days from the date of service pending application by the town or the alleged violator for appropriate relief to the circuit court of the jurisdiction where the violation was alleged to have occurred. 
(e)  If the alleged violator has not obtained an approved plan or any required permits within seven (7) days from the date of service of the order, the administrator on behalf of the town may issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work on the site, other than control measures, be stopped until an approved plan and any required permits have been obtained. Such an order shall be served on the owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or the land records of the town or of Montgomery County. 
(f)  Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey the town manager's order may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the Circuit Court of Montgomery County to obey the order, by injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy. 
(g)  Upon completion of the corrective action, the order shall immediately be lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the town manager from taking any other enforcement action against the alleged violator, specified in this chapter or elsewhere in this Code. 
(h)  Any applicant under the provision of this chapter who is aggrieved by any action of the town or its agent in disapproving plans submitted pursuant to this chapter shall have the right to apply for and receive a review of such action by the town council, provided an appeal is filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the action. Any applicant who seeks an appeal hearing before the town council shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled town council public hearing, provided that the town council and other involved parties have at least thirty (30) days prior notice. In reviewing the administrator's actions, the town council shall consider evidence and opinions presented by the aggrieved applicant or the applicant's agent. After considering the evidence and opinions, the town council may affirm, reverse or modify the action. The town council's decision shall be final, subject only to review by the Circuit Court of Montgomery County. 
(i)  Appeals of the decision of the town council made pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to review by the Circuit Court of Montgomery County, provided an appeal is filed within thirty (30) days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land-disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 3, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 1398, § 1, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 1462, § 1, 11-13-07) 
Chapter 11 - LICENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 11-100. - Application of chapter. 
    The following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within the Town. Whenever a license is required by this ordinance, and whenever a license fee, or license tax on any business, employment or profession, is imposed by this ordinance, it shall be unlawful to engage in such business, employment or profession without first obtaining the required license and paying the license fee or tax. 
Section 11-101. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, unless otherwise required by the context: 
    Affiliated group means: 
(1)  One or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includable corporation if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least eighty percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other includable corporations; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least eighty percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other includable corporations. As used in this subdivision, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "includable corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least eighty percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least eighty percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation, and 
b.  More than fifty percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than fifty percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
    When one or more of the includable corporations, including the common parent corporation is a non-stock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this subdivision shall refer to the non-stock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
    Amount in dispute, when used with respect to taxes due or assessed, means the amount specifically identified in the administrative appeal or application for judicial review as disputed by the party filing such appeal or application. 
    Amusement operator means any person, firm or corporation selling, leasing, renting or otherwise furnishing or providing a coin-operated amusement machine in the town. Such term shall not include a person owning less than three such machines and operating such machines on property owned or leased by such person. 
    Appealable event means an increase in the assessment of a local license tax payable by a taxpayer, the denial of a refund, or the assessment of a local license tax where none previously was assessed, arising out of the director of finance's (i) examination of records, financial statements, books of account, or other information for the purpose of determining the correctness of an assessment; (ii) determination regarding the rate or classification applicable to the licensable business; (iii) assessment of a local license tax when no return has been filed by the taxpayer; or (iv) denial of an application for correction of erroneous assessment attendant to the filing of an amended application for license. 
    Arts, crafts, and farm produce sellers means any person who sells or offers for sale in person or by employees arts items, crafts items, ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, fish, oysters, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm products, grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale. 
    Assessment means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the director of finance or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the director of finance or his or her employee, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
    Assessor or assessing official means the Director of Finance of the Town of Blacksburg. 
    Base year means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of § 58.1-3715. A new business does not have a "base year," and the first year's tax shall be based upon an estimate of gross receipts the business will receive between the date of beginning business and the end of the then current license year. 
    Broker shall mean an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis. 
    Business means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one (1) business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: (i) advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or (ii) filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
    Commodity shall mean staples such as wool, cotton, etc. which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures. 
    Contractor shall have the meaning prescribed in § 58.1-3714 of the Code of Virginia, as amended, whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract. The rules of taxation set forth in Virginia Code § 58.1-3715 shall apply to contractors doing business in Blacksburg. 
    Dealer for purposes of this chapter shall mean any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for such person's own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he or she buys or sells securities for his or her own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
    Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for thirty (30) consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis; and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
    Direct seller means any person who: 
(1)  Engages in the trade or business of selling or soliciting the sale of consumer products primarily in private residences and maintains no public location for the conduct of such business; and 
(2)  Receives remuneration for such activities, with substantially all of such remuneration being directly related to sale or other sales-oriented services rather than to the number of hours worked; and 
(3)  Performs such activities pursuant to a written contract between such person and the person for whom the activities are performed and such contract provides that such person will not be treated as an employee with respect to such activities for federal tax purposes. 
    Financial services means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing, and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities and other investments and shall include the service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise provided for in this ordinance. Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation, the following: 
    Buying installment receivables 
    Chattel mortgage financing 
    Consumer financing 
    Credit card services 
    Credit Unions 
    Factors 
    Financing accounts receivable 
    Industrial loan companies 
    Installment financing 
    Inventory financing 
    Loan or mortgage brokers 
    Loan or mortgage companies 
    Safety deposit box companies 
    Security and commodity brokers and services 
    Stockbroker 
    Working capital financing 
    Frivolous means a finding, based on specific facts, that the party asserting the appeal is unlikely to prevail upon the merits because the appeal is (i) not well grounded in fact; (ii) not warranted by existing law or a good faith argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law; (iii) interposed for an improper purpose, such as to harass, to cause unnecessary delay in the payment of tax or a refund, or to create needless cost from the litigation; or (iv) otherwise frivolous. 
    Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions Section 11-402 of this Chapter. 
    Itinerant merchant shall mean any person who engages in, does, or transacts any temporary or transient business in the town and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, occupies any location for a period of less than one (1) year. 
    Itinerant photographer means any person, partnership or corporation having no regularly established place of business in the town, who provides services consisting of the taking of pictures or the making of pictorial reproductions in the town. This term shall include every employee, agent or canvasser for such person, partnership or corporation. This term shall not apply to (i) amateur photographers who expose, develop and finish their own work and do not receive compensation for such work or for performing any of the processes of photograph; (ii) coin-operated photography machines; or (iii) photographers providing service in the course of their employment by newspapers, magazines or television stations. 
    Jeopardize by delay means a finding, based on specific facts, that a taxpayer desires to (i) depart quickly from the locality; (ii) remove his property therefrom; (iii) conceal himself or his property; or (iv) do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
    License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
    Peddler means any person who shall carry from place to place any goods, wares or merchandise and offer to sell or barter the same, or actually sell or barter the same. 
    Person means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association. Such term shall include any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof carrying on or continuing a business, profession, trade or occupation, but shall not include a court-appointed trustee, receiver or personal representative, in the liquidation of assets for immediate distribution, or a sergeant or sheriff or any deputy, selling under authority of process or writ of a court or justice. 
    Personal services means rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or professional service" under this ordinance, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this ordinance unless exempted from local license tax by Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Professional services means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the Virginia Department of Taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to § 58.1-3701 of the Code of Virginia. The Department shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
    Public service corporations means any company furnishing telephone, telegraph, water, heat, light and power to an ultimate consumer in the town. 
    Purchases shall mean all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. Such merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
    Real estate services shall mean rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent or broker and providing a real estate service, unless the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this ordinance, and such services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
    Appraisers of real estate. 
    Escrow agents, real estate. 
    Fiduciaries, real estate. 
    Lessors of real property. 
    Real estate agents, brokers and managers. 
    Real estate selling agents. 
    Rental agents for real estate. 
    Retailer or retail merchant shall mean any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. 
    Security for purposes of this ordinance shall have the same meaning as in the Securities Act (§ 13.1-501 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities. 
    Services shall mean things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares, or merchandise. 
    Tax commissioner shall mean the Chief Executive Officer of the Virginia Department of Taxation or his or her delegate. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale merchant shall mean any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial, government and industrial users which because of the quantity, price, or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 5, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 1392, § 1, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
ARTICLE II. - TAX IMPOSED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Taxation, ch. 22. 

Section 11-200. - License requirement. 
(a)  Every person engaged in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively hereinafter "a business") as defined in this ordinance, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license for each such business if (i) such person maintains a definite place of business in the town, (ii) such person does not maintain a definite office anywhere but does maintain an abode in the town, which abode for the purposes of this chapter shall be deemed a definite place of business, or (iii) there is no definite place of business but such person operates amusement machines, is engaged as a peddler or itinerant merchant, carnival or circus as specified in §§ 58.1-3717, 3718, or 3728, respectively of the Code of Virginia, or is a contractor subject to § 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, or is a public service corporation subject to § 58.1-3731 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license on or before March 1 of the license year. Each person starting a business or moving a business to town shall apply for a license prior to beginning business. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the director of finance. 
(c)  The tax is due on March 1 of the license year, and shall be paid with the application. The basis for the tax shall be the gross receipts for the business' base year. 
Section 11-201. - Exemptions from fee and tax. 
    In addition to those businesses enumerated in Virginia Code § 58.1-3703, the following types of business are exempt from the license fee and tax: 
(1)  Direct sellers exempt from fee only; tax will be assessed on total annual sales in excess of four thousand dollars ($4,000.00). 
(2)  Arts, crafts, and farm produce sellers. 
(3)  A volunteer fire department, a volunteer rescue squad or a nonprofit organization operating a community center, swimming pool, tennis court or other educational, cultural, recreational or athletic facilities and facilities for the welfare of the residents of the area. 
Section 11-202. - License fee. 
    Every person doing business as a retailer, contractor, business service, or professional service, with annual gross receipts of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or less shall pay an annual license fee. 
    The amount of the fee shall be determined by the following table: 
GROSS RECEIPTS RANGE 
_____Fee Retailer Contractor Business 
Service Professional 
Services _____$30 $     0-15,000 $     0-30,000 $     0-13,040 $     0-8,100  $35 $15,001-20,000 $30,001-40,000 $13,041-17,400 $ 8,101-10,800 $40 $20,001-25,000 $40,001-45,000 $17,401-21,700 $10,801-13,500 $50 $25,001-50,000 $45,001-50,000 $21,701-50,000 $13,500-50,000 _____ 
Section 11-203. - License tax. 
(a)  In lieu of the license fee specified in Section 11-202 above, and except as may be otherwise provided in §§ 58.1-3712, 58.1-3712.1 and 58.1-3713 of the Code of Virginia, every person or business with annual gross receipts of more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall be assessed and required to pay annually a license tax on all the gross receipts of such persons includable as provided in this ordinance at a rate set forth below for the class of enterprise listed: 
(1)  For contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale, ten cents ($0.10) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts; provided each contractor shall submit with its application a written certification that such contractor is in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 8 of Title 65.2 and will remain in compliance with such provisions at all times during the effective period of any such business license. The director of finance shall forward such signed certification to the Virginia Workers' Compensation Commission. Any person who knowingly presents or causes to be presented to the governing body a false certificate shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(2)  For retailers, twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts; 
(3)  For financial, real estate and professional services, thirty-seven cents ($0.37) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts; 
(4)  For repair, personal and business services and all other businesses and occupations not specifically listed or exempted in this section or otherwise by law, twenty-three cents ($0.23) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts; 
(5)  For cable television service, thirty-six cents ($0.36) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts; 
(6)  For amusement operators: 
Ten or more coin-operated amusement machines: $200.00 
Three (3) to nine (9) coin-operated amusement machines: $20.00 per machine 
(b)  Any person, firm, or corporation designated as the principal or prime contractor receiving identifiable federal appropriations for research and development services as defined in section 31.205-18(a) of the Federal Acquisition Regulation in the areas of (i) computer and electronic systems, (ii) computer software, (iii) applied sciences, (iv) economic and social sciences, and (v) electronic and physical sciences shall be subject to a license tax rate not to exceed three cents ($0.03) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of such federal funds received in payment of such contracts upon documentation provided by such person, firm or corporation to the director of finance confirming the applicability of this subsection. 
(c)  All wholesale merchants shall pay an annual license tax equal to five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of purchases, but not less than thirty dollars ($30.00). Where a merchant conducts both a wholesale and a retail business, that person may elect to pay separate license taxes on the wholesale and retail parts of the business; provided, however, that any wholesale merchant who desires to do a retail business as well, may elect to do so under a retailer's license by paying the license taxes as a retailer on both the retail and wholesale business. 
(d)  The annual license tax for persons dispensing or selling beer and wine, either or both, within the town is as follows: 
(1)  Retail on-premises beer only ..... $25.00 
(2)  Retail on-premises wine and beer ..... 37.50 
(3)  Retail off-premises wine and beer ..... 37.50 
(4)  Retail on and off-premises wine and beer ..... 75.00 
(e)  Caterers and restaurants holding a state mixed beverage license, including restaurants located on the premises of and operated by hotels and motels: 
(1)  Restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for up to 100 persons ..... $200.00 
(2)  Restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 100 but not more than 150 persons ..... 350.00 
(3)  Restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 150 persons ..... 500.00 
(4)  A private, nonprofit club operating a restaurant located on the premises of such club ..... 200.00 
(5)  Caterer ..... 500.00 
(f)  The license tax for carnivals, circuses and speedways shall be forty-five dollars ($45.00) for each performance held in the town, but not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) total; 
(g)  The license tax for itinerant merchants shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year which shall not be refundable or prorated. A sub-category of itinerant merchants is hereby established for mobile food vendors, as that term is defined by [appendix A,] § 2103, who sell prepared food. The license tax rate for such mobile food vendors shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. Payment must be in the form of cashier's check, or cash. 
(h)  The license tax for peddlers shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per year; 
(i)  The license tax for itinerant photographers shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) per year; 
(j)  The license tax for public service corporations shall be one-half (1/2) percent of gross receipts accruing from sales to the ultimate consumer in the town; 
(k)  The license tax for direct sellers as defined in § 58.1-3719.1 of the Code of Virginia with total annual sales in excess of four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) shall be twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of total annual retail sales or five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of total annual wholesale sales, whichever is applicable; 
(l)  For the privilege of engaging in any profession, occupation or business assessable with a license tax under the state law, and not enumerated in this article, the license tax assessable and collectible by the town shall be the same as that assessed by the state. 
(Ord. No. 1244, § 5, 10-2-00; Ord. No. 1726, § 1, 6-10-14 ; Ord. No. 1780, § 1, 1-12-16 ) 
Section 11-204. - Display or carrying of license. 
(a)  The license form or sign issued to show payment of the license taxes imposed by any section of this chapter shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at the regular place of business of the licensee and shall be produced by the licensee on the request of any authorized enforcement officer of the town. 
(b)  Any licensee who maintains no regular place of business shall carry, on or about his person, the license form or sign issued to show payment of the license tax, which license form or sign shall be produced by the licensee on request of any authorized enforcement officer of the town. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, no license which directly or indirectly discloses volume of business shall be required to be displayed publicly. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND VIOLATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Section 11-300. - Extension of time. 
    The director of finance may grant an extension of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, in which to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause. The extension shall be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
Section 11-301. - Penalties. 
    A penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax shall be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the director of finance if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the director of finance determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the director of finance, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the director of finance is not paid within thirty (30) days the director of finance may impose a ten (10) percent late payment penalty. The penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them, if the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that the taxpayer acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond the taxpayer's control. 
    "Acted responsibly" means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
    "Events beyond the taxpayer's control" include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the director of finance, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when the taxpayer provided the erroneous information. 
    "History of noncompliance" means the late filing of the license application or late payment in the preceding tax year, except tax year 1996. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
Section 11-302. - Interest. 
    Interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the director of finance is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any tax paid under this ordinance from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. 
    No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year, or at the conclusion of a new business' first year of business. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than thirty (30) days from (i) the date of the payment that created the refund, or (ii) the due date of the tax, whichever is later. 
Section 11-303. - Violations of chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful and constitute a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Unless otherwise provided, any such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 11-304. - Record keeping and audits. 
    Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the director of finance to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the director of finance to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the director of finance in order to allow the director of finance to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within the Town. The director of finance shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside the Town, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the director of finance's office upon demand. 
Section 11-305. - Assessment and payment of additional tax. 
    Whenever the director of finance shall ascertain that any person shall be assessed with any additional license tax pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, the director of finance shall assess such person, in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, with such additional license tax as may be due. If such additional assessment is not paid within thirty (30) days, a penalty shall be imposed and interest shall accrue thereon from the first date following the due date until payment. Interest shall be computed at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum for the first year of delinquency. Interest for the second and subsequent years of such delinquency shall be computed at the rate of interest established pursuant to Section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. Penalties shall be computed on the basis of ten (10) percent of the tax due, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax due. 
Section 11-306. - Written rulings. 
    Any taxpayer or authorized representative of a taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of the tax to a specific situation from the director of finance. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all facts relevant to the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or (ii) the director of finance notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 1, 7-12-05) 
Section 11-307. - Limitations and extensions. 
(a)  Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this ordinance, both the director of finance and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
(b)  Notwithstanding § 58.1-3903 of the Code of Virginia, for tax year 1997 and subsequent tax years, the director of finance shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six (6) preceding years. 
(c)  The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in § 58.1-3940 of the Code of Virginia, two (2) years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this subdivision, two (2) years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to subsection 11-308 or 11-309 of this ordinance, or two (2) years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to § 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
Section 11-308. - Appeals to director of finance. 
(a)  Any person assessed with a licensing tax under this ordinance as the result of an appealable event may file an administrative appeal of the assessment within one (1) year from the last day of the tax year for which such assessment is made, or within one (1) year from the date of the appealable event, whichever is later, with the director of finance. The appeal must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, the tax period, the remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The director of finance may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the appeal. The assessment placed at issue in the appeal shall be deemed prima facie correct. The director of finance shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a written determination to the taxpayer setting forth the facts and arguments in support of his or her decision. 
(b)  Every assessment made by the finance director pursuant to an appealable event shall include or be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to file an administrative appeal and the specific procedures to be followed in the town, the name and address to which the appeal should be directed, an explanation of the required content of the appeal, and the deadline for filing the appeal. 
(c)  Provided a timely and complete administrative appeal is filed, collection activity with respect to the amount in dispute shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the director of finance, unless the director determines (i) that collection would be jeopardized by delay as defined in section 11-101; (ii) that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time; or (iii) that the appeal is frivolous as defined in section 11-101. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of subsection 11-302 of this chapter, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. 
(d)  Any taxpayer whose administrative appeal to the director of finance has been pending for more than one year without the issuance of a final determination may, upon not less than thirty (30) days' written notice to the director of finance, elect to treat the appeal as denied and appeal the assessment to the Tax Commissioner in accordance with the provisions of section 11-309. The Tax Commissioner shall not consider an appeal filed pursuant to the provisions of this section if the Tax Commissioner finds that the absence of a final determination on the part of the director of finance was caused by the willful failure or refusal of the taxpayer to provide information requested and reasonably needed by the director to make the determination. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 1, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
Section 11-309. - Appeal to tax commissioner. 
(a)  Any person assessed with a license tax under this chapter as a result of a determination, upon an administrative appeal to the director of finance that is adverse to the position asserted by the taxpayer in such appeal may appeal pursuant to section 11-308, such assessment to the tax commissioner within ninety (90) days of the determination by the director of finance. The appeal shall be in such form as the tax commissioner may prescribe and the taxpayer shall serve a copy of the appeal upon the director of finance. The tax commissioner shall permit the director of finance to participate in the proceedings, and shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within ninety (90) days of receipt of the taxpayer's appeal, unless the taxpayer and the director of finance are notified that a longer period will be required. The appeal shall proceed in the same manner as an application pursuant to § 58.1-1821 of the Code of Virginia, and the Tax Commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to § 58.1-1822 of the Code of Virginia. 
(b)  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the tax commissioner, collection activity with respect to the amount in dispute shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the director of finance determines (i) that collection would be jeopardized by delay; (ii) that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time; or (iii) that the appeal is frivolous as defined in section 11-101. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 11-302, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The requirement that collection activity be suspended shall cease unless an appeal pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section is filed and served on the necessary parties within thirty (30) days of the service of notice of intent to file such appeal. 
(c)  Promptly upon receipt of the final determination of the tax commissioner with respect to an appeal pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subsection, the director of finance shall take those steps necessary to calculate the amount of tax owed by or refund due to the taxpayer consistent with the tax commissioner's determination and shall provide that information to the taxpayer. 
(1)  If the determination of the tax commissioner sets forth a specific amount of tax due, the director of finance shall certify the amount and issue a bill to the taxpayer for such amount due, together with interest accrued and penalty within thirty (30) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner. 
(2)  If the determination of the tax commissioner sets forth a specific amount of refund due, the director of finance shall certify the amount and issue a payment to the taxpayer for such amount due, together with interest accrued pursuant to this section, within thirty (30) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner. 
(3)  If the determination of the tax commissioner does not set forth a specific amount of tax due, or otherwise requires the director of finance to undertake a new or revised assessment that will result in an obligation to pay a tax that has not previously been paid in full, the director of finance shall promptly commence the steps necessary to undertake such new or revised assessment, and provide the same to the taxpayer within sixty (60) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, or within sixty (60) days after receipt from the taxpayer of any additional information requested or reasonably required under the determination of the tax commissioner, whichever is later. The director of finance shall certify the new assessment and issue a bill to the taxpayer for the amount due, together with interest accrued and penalty within thirty (30) days of the date of the new assessment. 
(4)  If the determination of the tax commissioner does not set forth a specific amount of refund due, or otherwise requires the director of finance to undertake a new or revised assessment that will result in an obligation on the part of the town to make a refund of taxes previously paid, the director of finance shall promptly commence the steps necessary to undertake such new or revised assessment, and provide the same to the taxpayer within sixty (60) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, or within sixty (60) days after receipt from the taxpayer of any additional information requested or reasonably required under the determination of the tax commissioner, whichever is later. The director of finance shall certify the new assessment and issue a refund to the taxpayer for the amount of tax due, together with interest accrued, within thirty (30) days of the date of the new assessment. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 1, 7-12-05) 
Sec. 11-310. - Judicial review of determination of tax commissioner. 
(a)  Following the issuance of a final determination of the tax commissioner pursuant section 11-309(a), the taxpayer or the director of finance may apply to the appropriate circuit court for judicial review of the determination, or any part thereof, pursuant to § 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia. In any such proceeding for judicial review of a determination of the tax commissioner, the burden shall be on the party challenging the determination of the tax commissioner, or any part thereof, to show that the ruling of the tax commissioner is erroneous with respect to the part challenged. Neither the tax commissioner nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the tax commissioner has ruled on it. 
(b)  Suspension of payment of disputed amount of tax due upon taxpayer's notice of intent to initiate judicial review. 
(1)  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an application for judicial review, pursuant to § 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia, of a determination of the tax commissioner pursuant to section 11-309(a), and upon payment of the amount of the tax that is not in dispute together with any penalty and interest then due with respect to such undisputed portion of the tax, the director of finance shall further suspend collection activity while the court retains jurisdiction unless the court, upon appropriate motion after notice and an opportunity to be heard, determines that (i) the taxpayer's application for judicial review is frivolous, as defined in this section; (ii) collection would be jeopardized by delay, as defined in this section; or (iii) suspension of collection would cause substantial economic hardship to the town. For purposes of determining whether substantial economic hardship to the town would arise from a suspension of collection activity, the court shall consider the cumulative effect of then-pending appeals filed within the town by different taxpayers that allege common claims or theories of relief. 
(2)  Upon a determination that the appeal is frivolous, that collection may be jeopardized by delay, or that suspension of collection would result in substantial economic hardship to the town, the court may require the taxpayer to pay the amount in dispute or a portion thereof, or to provide surety for payment of the amount in dispute in a form acceptable to the court. 
(3)  No suspension of collection activity shall be required if the application for judicial review fails to identify with particularity the amount in dispute. 
(4)  The requirement that collection activity be suspended shall cease unless an application for judicial review pursuant to § 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia, is filed and served on the necessary parties within thirty (30) days of the service of the notice of intent to file such application. 
(5)  The suspension of collection activity authorized by this subsection shall not be applicable to any appeal of a local license tax that is initiated by the direct filing of an action pursuant to § 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia, without prior exhaustion of the appeals provided by sections 11-308 and 11-309. 
(c)  Suspension of payment of disputed amount of refund due upon town's notice of intent to initiate judicial review. 
(1)  Payment of any refund determined to be due pursuant to the determination of the tax commissioner of an appeal pursuant to section 11-309(a) shall be suspended if the town serves upon the taxpayer, within sixty (60) days of the date of the determination of the tax commissioner, a notice of intent to file an application for judicial review of the tax commissioner's determination pursuant to § 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia, and pays the amount of the refund not in dispute, including tax and accrued interest. Payment of such refund shall remain suspended while the court retains jurisdiction unless the court, upon appropriate motion after notice and an opportunity to be heard, determines that the town's application for judicial review is frivolous, as defined in this section. 
(2)  No suspension of refund activity shall be permitted if the town's application for judicial review fails to identify with particularity the amount in dispute. 
(3)  The suspension of the obligation to make a refund shall cease unless an application for judicial review pursuant to § 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia is filed and served on the necessary parties within thirty (30) days of the service of the notice of intent to file such application. 
(d)  Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 11-302, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. 
(Ord. No. 1392, § 1, 7-12-05) 
ARTICLE IV. - GROSS RECEIPTS 

Section 11-400. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Except as to public service corporations, whenever the tax imposed by this ordinance is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within the Town. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one (1) or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the contractor's services are performed, or if the contractor's services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the contractor's services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of § 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia. 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two (2) or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality. 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed. 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(b)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one (1) definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule [and the affected jurisdictions are unable to reach an apportionment agreement], except as to circumstances set forth in § 58.1-3709 of the Code of Virginia, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to the Town solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
(c)  Agreements. The director of finance may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of Virginia concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one (1) or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than one hundred (100) percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the director of finance shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
Section 11-401. - Calculation of gross receipts. 
    The calculation of gross receipts, for the purposes of this chapter shall be on either a cash or accrual basis, as determined by the accounting system of the taxpayer. 
Section 11-402. - Exclusions and deductions from "gross receipts." 
(a)  General Rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. 
(b)  The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
(1)  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the Commonwealth or any county, city or town for the Virginia retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels. 
(2)  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business). 
(3)  Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer. 
(4)  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
(5)  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
(6)  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
(7)  Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
(8)  Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
(c)  The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable: 
(1)  Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a United States federal or state government entity provided that such property was purchased within two (2) years of the sale to said entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state or federal government entity. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property an not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a state or federal government entity in accordance with the original contract obligation. 
(2)  Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or foreign country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon income. 
(d)  The gross receipts of real estate brokers shall not include amounts received by any broker which arise from real estate sales transactions to the extent that such amounts are paid to a real estate agent as a commission on any real estate sales transaction and the agent is subject to the business license tax on such receipts. The broker claiming the exclusion shall identify on its license application each agent to whom the excluded receipts have been paid, and the jurisdiction in the Commonwealth of Virginia to which the agent is subject to business license taxes. 
Section 11-403. - Exclusion from gross receipts; staffing firms. 
(a)  Gross receipts for license tax purposes under this chapter shall not include employee benefits paid by a staffing firm to, or for the benefit of, any contract employee for the period of time that the contract employee is actually employed for the use of the client company pursuant to the terms of a PEO services contract or temporary help services contract. The taxable gross receipts of a staffing firm shall include any administrative fees received by such firm from a client company, whether on a fee-for-service basis or as a percentage of total receipts from the client company. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section: 
    Client company means a person, as defined in § 1-13.19, that enters into a contract with a staffing firm by which the staffing firm, for a fee, provides PEO services or temporary help services. 
    Contract employee means an employee performing services under a PEO services contract or temporary help services contract. 
    Employee benefits means wages, salaries, payroll taxes, payroll deductions, workers' compensation costs, benefits, and similar expenses. 
    PEO services or professional employer organization services means an arrangement whereby a staffing firm assumes employer responsibility for payroll, benefits, and other human resources functions with respect to employees of a client company with no restrictions or limitations on the duration of employment. 
    PEO services contract means a contract pursuant to which a staffing firm provides PEO services for a client company. 
    Staffing firm means a person, as defined in § 1-13.19, that provides PEO services or temporary help services. 
    Temporary help services means an arrangement whereby a staffing firm temporarily assigns employees to support or supplement a client company's workforce. 
    Temporary help services contract means a contract pursuant to which a staffing firm provides temporary help services for a client company. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 11-500. - Estimates for determining tax for beginners. 
(a)  Every person beginning a business, profession, trade or occupation which is subject to a license tax based in whole or in part on gross receipts or gross expenditures shall estimate the amount of gross receipts such person will receive or the gross expenditures such person will incur between the date of beginning business and the end of the then current license year. The license tax for the then current license year shall be computed on such estimate. 
(b)  Whenever a license tax is computed on the estimated gross receipts or gross expenditures, any erroneous estimate shall be subject to correction and the director of finance shall assess such person, after the end of that license year, with any additional license tax determined to be due. Also, such person shall, at the same time, correct the estimate for the then current license year until a full year of operation shall have been completed. In case of an overestimate, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a credit upon the license tax payable the following year or a refund. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
Section 11-501. - Separate license for each place of business. 
    A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business. A person engaged in two (2) or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one (1) license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: (i) each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of the Town; (ii) all of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and (iii) the taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the director of finance may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
Section 11-502. - Compliance with zoning regulations and payment of other taxes prerequisite to issuance of license. 
    The director of finance shall not issue a license for conducting any business, profession, trade or occupation at a location where the conduct of such business, profession, trade or occupation is prohibited by the zoning regulations of the town. All such licenses shall be subject to verification to ascertain compliance with the zoning regulations. Failure to comply with such regulations shall be just cause for refusal to issue a license or immediate revocation thereof by the director of finance. 
Section 11-503. - Chapter gives no right to obstruct public places or commit or maintain nuisance. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as giving the right to any person to obstruct sidewalks, streets or other public places, or to commit or maintain a nuisance. 
Section 11-504. - License deemed personal privilege; transfer. 
(a)  Every license issued under this chapter shall be deemed to confer a personal privilege to transact, carry on or conduct the business, profession, trade or occupation in the town, and such privilege shall not be exercised except by the person licensed. The transfer of such license, except as authorized in this section, shall be invalid and shall not relieve the transferee from the obligation of procuring a license in accord with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  A license issued under this chapter shall be transferable, except where provided otherwise, only where the business for which the license was issued has been sold or disposed of, but is to be continued by the purchaser or transferee at the same or at some other location within the town. In no case shall the license transfer be legal or valid unless and until notice in writing is given to the director of finance. Such notice shall contain the name, trade name, if any, and the address of the proposed transferee, the proposed new location, if any, and the time of the proposed transfer. Failure to notify the director of finance of the transfer of the license, within thirty (30) days after such transfer, shall invalidate such license. The director of finance shall give written approval of the transfer, if such transfer is approved. 
(c)  If the transferor's license for the current license year has been based on an estimate of gross receipts or gross expenditures, the transferor shall reveal the gross receipts or gross expenditures for the period the transferor was in business during the current license year. If the accumulation of gross receipts by transfer shall exceed the original estimate, the transferee shall be required to amend the license by an estimate of the gross receipts or gross expenditures the transferee will incur between the day of beginning business and the end of the current license year. 
(d)  The director of finance shall collect ten dollars ($10.00) for each license transfer, which sum shall be used to pay administrative costs incurred by such transfer. 
(e)  The director of finance shall keep a record of all license transfers. 
(f)  No person shall transfer or attempt to transfer a license contrary to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
Section 11-505. - Proration of Alcoholic Beverage and Mixed Drink Tax. 
    Every tax for privilege of selling alcoholic beverages and/or mixed drinks shall be charged on a quarterly basis for the unexpired portion of a license tax year. In no case shall proration reduce the cost of the license below the minimum tax as prescribed by this chapter. 
Section 11-506. - Refund of tax. 
(a)  The director of finance is empowered to certify, after an audit of the gross receipts or expenditure records of the taxpayer, any refund that may be due either because of an overassessment of license taxes against the individual or because such person overestimated anticipated gross receipts or gross expenditures, or because such person, prior to the end of the expiration of the license tax year, has ceased to engage in the business for which the license tax was paid. Upon such certification, the director of finance shall make the required refund. 
(b)  Refunds allowable under this section shall be calculated according to the following formulae: 
(1)  Overassessment of license taxes: Any overassessment shall be refunded with interest. 
(2)  Overestimation of anticipated gross receipts or gross expenditures: Recompute taxes payable on the basis of actual gross receipts or actual gross expenditures. The resulting amount shall be subtracted from the original assessed amount. The difference shall equal the amount to be refunded. 
(3)  Person ceases to engage in business prior to the end of the license tax year: Divide assessed amount of license tax by twelve (12) months; the resulting amount shall be multiplied by the number of months remaining in the license tax year. This shall be the amount to be refunded; provided that, when such license is based on estimated gross receipts or gross expenditures, the tax due for current year shall be computed on actual gross receipts or gross expenditures to the date of cessation of business. The difference shall equal the amount to be refunded or assessed, but in no case shall the refund reduce the tax below the minimum annual tax or the annual license fee. 
Section 11-507. - Excess business license tax collected by motor vehicle dealers. 
    When a motor vehicle dealer collects excess business license tax from a purchaser, such dealer shall exercise due diligence to refund such tax to the purchaser within one hundred twenty (120) days of discovering such overpayment, and such dealer shall produce evidence of such refund to the director of finance upon request. Any amounts that are not refunded to purchasers shall be remitted to the director of finance as additional business license tax. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 6, 8-10-99) 
Chapter 12 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Parades and other outdoor assemblies, ch. 15; public safety, ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, ch. 21; vehicles for hire, ch. 23. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 12-100. - Definitions. 
    All definitions of words and phrases contained in Virginia Code § 46.2-100 shall apply to such words and phrases, when used in this chapter, unless clearly indicated to the contrary. 
Section 12-101. - Adoption of state law. 
    Pursuant to the authority of Virginia Code (1950) § 46.2-1313, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in Virginia Code, Title 46.2, and all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in Virginia Code, Title 16.1, Chapter 11, Article 9, except those provisions and requirements, the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, can have no application to or within the town, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference and made applicable within the town. References to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other public ways within the town. Such provisions and requirements, as may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted with necessary changes and made a part hereof as fully as though set forth at length herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person, within the town, to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any such provision; provided, however, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under the Code of Virginia. 
Section 12-101.1. - Bicycle contraflow lanes. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of town code section 12-101 and Virginia Code § 46.2-806, bicycle traffic is permitted on bicycle contraflow lanes marked and signed in accord with the provisions of the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways as adopted by the Federal Highway Administration and the Commonwealth Transportation Board. 
( Ord. No. 1741, § 1, 10-14-14 ) 
Section 12-102. - Ratification of existing traffic-control devices. 
    All traffic-control signs, signal, markings and devices lawfully in place, immediately prior to the effective date of this Code, pursuant to the authority of town council, are hereby continued in full force and effect for the purposes for which they were, respectively, erected, painted, marked, or installed, and it shall continue to be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with the notice or directive given by any such traffic-control sign, signal, marking or device, except pursuant to a directive given by a police officer. 
Section 12-103. - Authority of firefighters to direct traffic. 
    Members of the fire department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at or in the immediate vicinity of a fire and, while so acting, shall have all the authority of police officers. 
Section 12-104. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
Section 12-105. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
    No person shall get on or get off any vehicle while is in motion. 
Section 12-106. - Riding bicycle or moped without using handlebars. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle or moped upon any street without having his or her hands upon the handlebars. 
Section 12-106.1. - Safety equipment required, moped operators and passengers. 
(a)  Every person operating a moped on a public street or highway of the town shall wear a face shield, safety glasses or goggles approved by the superintendent of state police, or shall have the moped equipped with safety glass or a windshield at all times while operating it; and any operator and any passengers thereon, if any, shall wear protective helmets of a type approved by the superintendent of the state police. 
(b)  Any person who knowingly violates this section shall be guilty of a traffic infraction and shall be subject to a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 1497, § 1, 8-12-08) 
Section 12-107. - Bicycle trails and operation of other vehicles thereon. 
(a)  The use of off-street bicycle trails by any person operating a vehicle other than a bicycle is prohibited. The prohibition of this subsection shall not apply to public vehicles entering off-street bicycle trails for maintenance, rescue, fire or police patrol purposes. 
(b)  The use of off-street bicycle trails by persons guiding, accompanying or riding animals of any kind is prohibited; provided, any person may guide or accompany a dog or cat on a leash. Any person who brings a dog or cat on an off-street bicycle trail must immediately remove any deposit made by the animal. 
(c)  Whenever a person rides a bicycle on a bicycle route, he or she shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian or bicycle. 
Section 12-108. - Bicycle helmets. 
(a)  Every person fourteen (14) years of age or younger shall wear a protective helmet that at least meets the Consumer Product Safety Commission standard, whenever that person is riding or being carried on a bicycle on any highway, sidewalk, or bikeway in this town. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). However, such fine shall be suspended (i) for first-time violators and (ii) for violators who, subsequent to the violation but prior to imposition of the fine, purchase helmets of the type required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § 2, 7-13-04) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1368, § 6, adopted July 13, 2004, provided for an effective date of July 1, 2004. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 46.2-906.1, Authority to require helmets. 
Section 12-109. - Tail gates on vehicles to be kept closed; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, trailer or other vehicle equipped with a tail gate to lower or open the tail gate thereon, or to suffer or permit such tail gate to be lowered or opened, except during the time the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded, and except during the time the load on the vehicle necessitates a lowered or opened tail gate as a support for the load. It shall be the duty of the operator of any such vehicle to see that the tail gate on such vehicle is kept closed or raised, except during the times hereinbefore specified. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for each offense. janet 
Section 12-110. - Reduction of weight limits for vehicles. 
(a)  The town manager may decrease the weight limits prescribed in Virginia Code, Title 46.2, Chapter 10, Article 17, for a total period not to exceed ninety (90) days in any calendar year, when an engineering study discloses that operation over highways or streets within the town, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions, will seriously damage such highways or streets unless such weights are reduced. 
(b)  In all instances where the limits for weight have been reduced pursuant to this section, signs stating the weight permitted on such highway or street shall be erected at each end of the section of highway or street affected and no such reduced limits shall be effective until such signs have been posted. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle or combination of vehicles over or upon any highway, street or section thereof within the town when the weight exceeds the maximum posted by the authority of the town pursuant to this section. 
(d)  A violation of this section is a Class 2 misdemeanor. The vehicle or combination of vehicles involved in such violation may be held upon an order of the court until all fines and costs have been satisfied. 
(e)  Any officer authorized to enforce the law under this section, having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful, is authorized to weigh the same. The officer may, and upon demand of the driver shall, require the vehicle to proceed to the location of the nearest loadometer. Any operator who fails or refuses to drive his vehicle to such loadometer upon the request and direction of the officer so to do shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), which penalty shall be in addition to any other penalties prescribed for exceeding the maximum weight permitted or for any other violation. Should the officer find that the weight of any vehicle and its load is greater than that permitted by this section, he may require the driver to unload, a the nearest place where the property unloaded may be stored or transferred to another vehicle, such portion of the load as may be necessary to decrease the gross weight of the vehicle to the maximum therefor permitted by this section. Any property so unloaded shall be stored or cared for by the owner or operator of the overweight vehicle at the risk of such owner or operator. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1104. 
Section 12-111. - Authority of police to move vehicle involved in accident. 
    Whenever a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer involved in an accident is so located as to impede the orderly flow of traffic, the police may (i) have the vehicle removed to a storage area for safekeeping and shall report the removal to the department of motor vehicles and to the owner of the vehicle as promptly as possible or, (ii) at no cost to the owner or operator remove the motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer to some point in the vicinity where it will not impede the flow of traffic. If the vehicle is removed to a storage area under clause (i) the owner shall pay to the parties entitled thereto all costs incidental to it removal and storage. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1212. 
Section 12-112. - Reimbursement for expenses incurred from emergency responses. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the following provisions shall, at the time of sentencing or in a separate civil action, be liable to the town or any responding volunteer fire or rescue squad, or both, for restitution of reasonable expenses incurred by the town for responding law enforcement, firefighting, rescue and emergency services, or by any volunteer fire or rescue squad, or by any combination of the foregoing, when providing an appropriate emergency response to any accident or incident related to such violation. Further, any person so convicted shall, at the time of sentencing or in a separate civil action, be liable to the town or to any responding volunteer rescue squad, or both, for restitution of reasonable expenses incurred by the town when issuing any related arrest warrant or summons, including the expense incurred by any volunteer fire or rescue squad, or by any combination of the foregoing. 
(1)  The provisions of Virginia Code § 18.2-36.1, 18.2-51.4, 18.2-266. 18.2-266.1, 29.1-738, 29.1-738.02 or 46.2-341.24, when such operation of motor vehicle, engine, train or watercraft while so impaired is the proximate cause of the accident or incident; 
(2)  The provisions of Virginia Code Title 46.2, Chapter 8, Article 7 (§ 46.2-852 et seq.) relating to reckless driving, when such reckless driving is the proximate cause of the accident or incident; 
(3)  The provisions of Virginia Code Title 46.2, Chapter 3, Article 1 (§ 46.2-300 et seq.) relating to driving without a license or driving with a suspended or revoked license; and 
(4)  The provisions of Virginia Code § 46.2-894 relating to improperly leaving the scene of an accident. 
(b)  Personal liability under this section for reasonable expenses of an appropriate emergency response pursuant to subsection (a) shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in the aggregate for a particular accident, arrest or incident. In determining the "reasonable expenses" a flat fee of three hundred and fifty dollars ($350.00) may be billed, or a minute-by-minute accounting of the actual cost incurred may be billed. 
(c)  As used in this section, "appropriate emergency response" includes all cost of providing law-enforcement, fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical services. 
(d)  The court may order as restitution the reasonable expenses incurred by the town for responding law enforcement, fire fighting, rescue and emergency medical services. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not preempt or limit any remedy available to the commonwealth, the Town of Blacksburg, or to any volunteer rescue squad to recover the reasonable expenses of an emergency response to an accident or incident not involving impaired driving, operation of a vehicle or other conduct as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 4, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 1368, § 3, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 1418, § 3, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1582, § 1, 8-10-2010; Ord. No. 1591, § 1, 10-12-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1582, § 1, adopted Aug. 10, 2010, amended § 12-112 title to read as herein set out. Former § 12-112 title pertained to civil liability for expense of emergency response to accidence caused by person driving while intoxicated and other traffic incidents. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1716. 
Section 12-113. - Penalty for violations of chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, and unless otherwise stated, such violations shall constitute traffic infractions punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 1458, § 1, 9-11-07) 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL VEHICLE LICENSE 

Section 12-200. - Levy and amount of license tax. 
(a)  For the periods set out below, there is hereby levied, subject to applicable provisions of the state law, a local vehicle license tax on each motor vehicle that is normally garaged, stored, or parked in the town. Every person who owns, or has in his or her custody or control, a motor vehicle that is normally garaged, stored or parked in the town shall be subject to pay this tax, as provided in this article. If it cannot be determined where this personal property is normally garaged, stored, or parked, or if the owner is a student attending an institution of higher education, the situs for such taxation shall be the domicile of the owner. In each case where the tax applies under this article, the owner of the motor vehicle shall be liable to the town for the local vehicle license tax. 
(b)  The amount of the license tax levied by this section shall be as follows: 
Tax Amount 1. For private passenger cars and motor homes $25.00 2. For taxicabs and other for hire automobiles weighing 4,000 pounds or less  29.50 3. For taxicabs and other for hire automobiles weighing more than 4,000 pounds  34.50 4. For motorcycles  12.50  
(c)  The amount of the license tax levied by this section on trucks, pickup trucks, and panel trucks, and on other motor vehicles not taxed under subsection (b) above, shall be based on the weight of the vehicles as follows: 
Gross Weight Tax Amount Up to 10,000 pounds $25.00 10,001 to 25,000 pounds  35.00 25,001 to 40,000 pounds 175.00 40,001 to 55,000 pounds 350.00 55,001 to 70,000 pounds 700.00 70,001 to 80,000 pounds 837.50  
(d)  The local vehicle license tax required by this article shall not be applicable to motor vehicles owned by persons establishing residence within the town after the first day of any license year, provided that payment of a similar license tax or fee was paid to the county, city or town from which the new resident moved and satisfactory evidence of such payment is provided the finance director. 
(Ord. No. 1244, § 6, 10-2-00; Ord. No. 1360, § 14, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1442, § 1, 3-13-07; Ord. No. 1489(Amd.), § 1, 4-8-08; Ord. No. 1554, § 1, 12-8-09) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752. 
Section 12-201. - Exemptions from article. 
    This article shall not apply to any person who, by state or federal law, is exempted from the provisions of this article, including but not limited to Virginia Code § 46.2-755. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 46.2-755. 
Section 12-202. - License tax for certain motor vehicles owned by members of the Virginia National Guard, the Blacksburg Volunteer Fire Department and Blacksburg Volunteer Rescue Squad, deputy sheriffs, police officers, and volunteer police chaplains. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 12-200, where a passenger car, pickup or panel truck is owned by a member of the Virginia National Guard and has been issued a Virginia National Guard license plate pursuant to the provisions of Virginia Code § 46.2-744, the license tax levied by this article shall be as follows: 
Tax Amount 1. For passenger cars, and for pickup or panel trucks weighing four thousand (4,000) pounds or less $12.50 2. For pickup or panel trucks weighing in excess of four thousand (4,000) pounds  17.25  
(b)  No license tax shall be charged for one (1) vehicle owned by an active member of the Blacksburg Volunteer Fire Department or the Blacksburg Volunteer Rescue Squad. Such volunteer shall submit appropriate documentation to the director of finance that the person is an active member. Each such volunteer, at the time the license tax is exempted, shall agree to notify the director of finance if and when such volunteer becomes inactive. The chiefs of the volunteer fire department and rescue squad shall submit to the director of finance the names of members who become inactive. 
(c)  No license tax shall be charged for one (1) vehicle owned by a deputy sheriff, police officer, or officer of the Virginia State Police. The finance director may require appropriate identification to document such person's law enforcement status. 
(d)  No license tax shall be charged for one (1) vehicle owned by a volunteer police chaplain. The finance director may require appropriate identification to document such person's volunteer police chaplain status. 
(Ord. No. 1360, § 14, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1442, § 1, 3-13-07; Ord. No. 1469, § 1, 1-8-08) 
Section 12-203. - When tax due and payable. 
(a)  Except as modified by section 12-203.1, the license tax computed shall become due and payable on or before January 1 of each calendar year, and the license term shall be for the corresponding calendar year. The director of finance shall bill for the license tax required by this article at least thirty (30) days prior to the start of the license term. 
(b)  If a nonresident of this state procures a state license, or under the motor vehicle laws of the state should procure one for a vehicle subject to this article, then in either event, such person shall immediately apply for and procure a town license and pay therefor the tax prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Purchasers of new or used motor vehicles, trailers, or semitrailers shall be allowed a grace period of ten (10) days, beginning with the date of purchase, during which to pay the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1442, § 1, 3-13-07; Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1489(Amd.), § 1, 4-8-08) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752(l). 
Section 12-203.1. - Transition provisions. 
(a)  During the period between June 15, 2008 and December 31, 2009, the term of the local vehicle license shall be for eighteen (18) months. 
(b)  During the transition period, the amount of the prorated license shall be as follows: 
[Description] [Amount] 1. For private passenger cars and motor homes. $ 37.50 2. For taxicabs and other for hire automobiles weighing four thousand (4,000) pounds or less. 39.50 3. For taxicabs and other for hire automobiles weighing more than four thousand (4,000) pounds. 44.50 4. For motorcycles. 18.75 5. For a one- or two-wheel trailer of a cradle, flatbed or open pickup type which has a body width not greater than the width of the motor vehicle to which it is attached, which is pulled by a passenger car, station wagon, or by a pickup or panel truck having an actual gross vehicle weight not exceeding five thousand (5,000) pounds, and used for carrying property not exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds, and for all trailers designed exclusively to carry boats. 7.50 6. For trailers, other than those described in subparagraph 5. above, having a gross weight not exceeding four thousand (4,000) pounds. 28.50 7. For trailers, other than those described in subparagraph 5. above, having a gross weight of more than four thousand (4,000) pounds. 38.25  
(c)  The amount of the license tax levied by this section on trucks, pickup trucks, and panel trucks, and on other motor vehicles and semitrailers not taxed under subsection (b) above, for the periods so indicated, shall be based on the weight of the vehicles as follows: 
Gross Weight [Amount] Up to 10,000 pounds $ 37.50 10,001 to 25,000 pounds 50.50 25,001 to 40,000 pounds 175.00 40,001 to 55,000 pounds 350.00 55,001 to 70,000 pounds 700.00 70,001 to 80,000 pounds 837.50  
(Ord. No. 1489(Amd.), § 1, 4-8-08) 
Section 12-204. - Failure to procure town motor vehicle license; penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer to fail to obtain the local license required by this article. Any such violation shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1489(Amd.), § 1, 4-8-08) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752(G). 
Section 12-205. - Refund of tax. 
(a)  The owner of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer for which a license has been obtained under the provisions of this article, may apply for and be entitled to a refund in accordance with the terms and schedule set out in this subsection. Upon the filing of a statement that such motor vehicle will no longer be used by the owner, or that such motor vehicle will no longer be normally garaged, stored, or parked in the town, and upon presentation of the paid receipt for the license, the owner of such property may apply for and be entitled to a refund in accordance with the following schedule: 
Date of Refund Application Amount of License Tax 
to be Refunded 
(Percentage) Transition Period:    June 15 through September 15 83    September 16 through December 15 67    December 16 through March 15 50    March 16 through June 15 33    June 16 through September 15 17    September 16 through December 31 No refund available After Transition Period:    January 15 through March 15 75    March 16 through June 15 50    June 15 through September 15 25    September 16 through December 31 No refund available  
(b)  A refund check for a person entitled to a refund under this section shall be mailed to the applicant within two (2) weeks of the date of application. 
(c)  No refund shall be made under this section for any license tax between September 16, 2009 and December 31, 2009 during the transition period and, after the transition period, between the dates of September 16 through December 31 of each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1442, § 1, 3-13-07; Ord. No. 1489(Amd.), § 1, 4-8-08) 
Section 12-206. - Applicant to display state registration card. 
    Each applicant for a license under this article shall display the current year state motor vehicle registration card for the vehicle to be licensed, for the information of the director of finance. 
Section 12-207. - Agreement with department of motor vehicles concerning unpaid local vehicle license fees. 
    The finance director is authorized to enter into an agreement with the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles whereby the commissioner will refuse to issue or renew any vehicle registration of any applicant therefore who owes to the town any local vehicle license fees or parking citations issued to residents of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1489(Amd.), § 1, 4-8-08) 
Sections 12-208-12-211. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1489(Amd.), § 2, adopted Apr. 8, 2008, repealed §§ 12-208-12-211, which pertained to wrongful use of decal, duplicate decals, transfer, and false affidavits under section 12-209 or 12-210. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Section 12-212. - Term and expiration. 
    The license provided for in this article shall be for a one-year term and expire on June 15 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1442, § 1, 3-13-07) 
Section 12-213. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1489(Amd.), § 2, adopted Apr. 8, 2008, repealed § 12-213, which pertained to presumption upon finding unlicensed vehicle within town. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY 

Section 12-301. - Stop and yield intersections. 
    The town manager may designate intersections at which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way and may cause to be erected appropriate signs or markers at such intersections. 
Section 12-302. - One-way streets. 
    Whenever the town council designates certain streets as one-way streets, upon which vehicles are required to proceed only in a certain designated direction, the town manager shall place "one-way street" signs having arrows indicting the direction in which vehicles are required to proceed, at the entrances to such streets, and it shall then be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to enter or to proceed upon any such street except in the required direction. 
Section 12-303. - Identification of vehicles in funeral processions; right-of-way. 
(a)  All motor vehicles participating in a funeral procession when proceeding to any place of burial, shall display illuminated head lamps thereon and such other identification as the chief of police may prescribe. 
(b)  Funeral processions traveling under police or sheriff's escort shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles, except fire apparatus, ambulances and police vehicles at any street or highway intersection within the town and may proceed through a stop street or signalized intersection with proper caution and safety. 
State Law reference- § 46.2-828 
Section 12-304. - Driving through funeral or other processions; manner of driving in funeral processions. 
(a)  No operator of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles, persons or animals comprising a funeral or other authorized procession, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(b)  Each driver in a funeral procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as is practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practicable and safe. 
State Law reference- § 46.2-828 
Section 12-305. - Driving on street where fire department assembled to fight fire. 
    It shall be unlawful, without the authority of the officer in command, for any person to drive a vehicle or ride through the streets in which the fire department assembles for the purpose of extinguishing a fire. 
Section 12-306. - Limitation on backing. 
    The operator of a vehicle in the town shall not back such vehicle unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
Section 12-307. - Blocking intersections or crosswalks. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space beyond such intersection or crosswalk in the direction in which such vehicle is proceeding to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
Section 12-308. - Truck routes. 
    Whenever the town council designates certain streets to be used by trucks passing through the town, the town manager shall place "truck route" signs along such streets, and it shall then be unlawful for the driver of any truck passing through the town to proceed along any street not so designated as a truck route, except in cases of emergency or to load or unload cargo. 
State Law reference- Local regulation of trucks and carriers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1304. 
Section 12-309. - Speed limits; town manager to designate. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, those speed limits set forth in Virginia Code (1950) Title 46.2 Subtitle III, Chapter 8, Article 8, as amended, shall apply in this town. It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle in excess of any speed limit established as provided in this section, if such speed limit is clearly indicated by markers or signs. 
(b)  There shall be a 15-mile-per-hour speed limit on that part of College Avenue from Main Street to Otey Street and on that part of Otey Street from College Avenue to Roanoke Street, and on that part of Turner Street between Giles Road and Northview Drive. 
(c)  There shall be a 15-mile-per-hour speed limit on Huntington Lane. 
(d)  There shall be a 25-mile-per-hour speed limit on Fairview Drive. 
(e)  There shall be a 40-mile-per-hour speed limit on Price's Fork Road from Old Glade Road west to the western town limits. 
(f)  There shall be a 35-mile-per-hour speed limit on South Main Street from Ellett Road to the southern town limits. 
(g)  There shall be a 30-mile-per-hour speed limit on Mt. Tabor Road from North Main Street to the northern town limits. 
(h)  The maximum school zone speed limits on the streets near the following elementary schools shall be as set forth below: 
(i)  Near Margaret Beeks Elementary School, the maximum school zone speed limit shall be (a) 15 mph on Airport Road from a school speed zone sign located 550 feet north from the Margaret Beeks Elementary School property to a school speed zone sign located 550 feet to the south of the property and (b) 15 mph on Country Club Drive SW from a school speed zone sign located 600' to the northeast of the Margaret Beeks Elementary School property to the intersection of Country Club Drive SW with Airport Road, as shown on Exhibit A, "Margaret Beeks Elementary School 15 MPH Speed Zone Signs." 
(ii)  Near Harding Avenue Elementary, the maximum school zone speed limit shall be (a) 15 mph on Harding Avenue from a school speed zone sign located 320 feet southwest of the Harding Avenue Elementary School property to a school speed zone sign located 620 feet to the northeast of the property and (b) 15 mph on Owen Street from a school speed zone sign located 525 feet to the southeast of the Harding Avenue Elementary School property to a school speed zone sign located on Owen Street 550 feet from the property, as shown on Exhibit B, "Harding Avenue Elementary School 15 MPH Speed Zone Signs." 
(iii)  Near Gilbert Linkous Elementary, the maximum school zone speed limit shall be (a) 15 mph on Watson Lane from its intersection with Toms Creek Road to a school speed zone sign located 520 feet from the Gilbert Linkous Elementary School property and (b) 20 mph on Toms Creek Road from a school speed zone sign located 600 feet north of Gilbert Linkous Elementary School property to a school speed zone sign located 600 feet south of the property, as shown on Exhibit C, "Gilbert Linkous Elementary School 15 MPH Speed Zone Signs. 
    The above-referenced exhibits (Exhibits A, B and C) are attached to this section and incorporated by reference. 
    As provided by Virginia Code § 46.2-873 (f), the maximum school zone speed limits established in this sub-section were requested by the Montgomery County School Board in a resolution adopted June 18, 2013, then approved by the town council by this section. 
(i)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the town manager may increase or decrease the speed limit on any street within the town, provided such increase or decrease in speed shall be based upon an engineering and traffic investigation, and provided such speed limit is clearly indicated by markers or signs. 
(j)  The town manager may reduce for a temporary period not to exceed sixty (60) days, without such engineering and traffic investigation, the speed limit on any portion of any street within the town on which work is being done or where the street is under construction or repair. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 1, 6-13-00; Ord. No. 1542, § 1, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 1670 , § 1, 8-13-13) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301, et seq. 
Section 12-310. - Streets closed to certain trucks. 
(a)  Trucks, as defined by Virginia Code § 46.2-100, are prohibited from using the following town streets: 
1.  Southgate Drive, from Airport Road to the boundary of the Virginia Tech campus (500 through 700 blocks). 
2.  Draper Road, from Country Club Drive to Miller Street (1200 through 500 blocks). 
3.  Preston Avenue, from Airport Road to Miller Street (900 through 500 blocks). 
4.  Grissom Lane, from Country Club to Nellie's Cave Road (1300 through 1600 blocks). 
5.  Roanoke Street, from Owens Street to Orchard View Lane (600 through 700 blocks). 
6.  Orchard View Lane, from Roanoke Street to Harding Avenue (100 through 200 blocks). 
(b)  The streets listed in subsection (a) of this section may be used by trucks only for the purpose of receiving loads or making deliveries on that street, or when use of such street is the only safe means of access to another nearby street. 
(c)  This section shall have no application to pickup trucks, which are defined by Virginia Code § 46.2-100 as "any motor vehicle designed for the transportation of property with a registered gross weight of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds or less." 
(d)  This section shall not regulate any vehicle that is being used for official business by (i) any fire, rescue or town department, (ii) the Government of the Commonwealth of Virginia, or (iii) the Government of the United States. 
(e)  Violations of this section shall be punishable as traffic offenses, as provided by section 12-113. 
(Ord. No. 1452, § 1, 7-10-07) 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Section 12-400. - Parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle, except in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within twenty (20) feet from the intersection of curblines or, if none, then within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection of highways. 
(7)  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by official signs or markings. 
(9)  Within fifteen (15) feet in either direction of the entrance to a fire station, or within fifteen (15) feet of the entrance to a building housing rescue squad equipment or ambulances, provided such buildings are plainly designated. 
(10)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic. 
(11)  On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(12)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or highway. 
(13)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking or where the curbs are painted yellow. 
(14)  In any public alley. Here, public alley shall mean a public right-of-way through the middle of a block to give access to the rear of lots or buildings. 
(15)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a driveway entrance. 
(16)  In a non-metered space in excess of the posted time limit. 
(17)  In the front yard of a residence. 
(18)  On the left-hand side of the roadway of a two-way street. The provisions of this subsection exclude those town vehicles operated by town employees executing official duties that require repeated vehicle exit and entry. 
(b)  No person other than a police officer shall move a vehicle into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(c)  The chief of police is authorized by order in writing supporting use of this procedure to cause the removal of any motor vehicle found on the public streets, including public alleys, unattended by its owner or operator and improperly parked in such a way as to constitute a violation of law and in such a way as to cause traffic hazard or impediment. If such power is employed, the chief of police shall cause such motor vehicle to be removed for safekeeping to a storage garage or other area and the chief of police or his designee shall immediately thereafter cause the order of such removal to be filed among the public records of the police department. 
(d)  Immediately after such removal, the chief of police shall notify the motor vehicle owner, as provided for in sections 12-701 through 12-703 of this Code, the provisions of which shall apply mutatis mutandis to removal, storage and disposition of motor vehicles under this section, except no sale or disposition of a motor vehicle shall take place less than forty (40) days after notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1244, § 7, 10-2-00; Ord. No. 1628, § 1, 11-8-11) 
State Law reference- Parking in front of driveways, near fire hydrants, etc., Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1211; General authority of town to regulate parking, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Section 12-401. - Parking prohibited in reserved spaces of publicly owned parking lots. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to park a vehicle in a properly marked reserved parking space of a publicly owned parking lot. Proper marking is a sign at least nine (9) inches in width and twelve (12) inches in height, which reads "Reserved Parking Ticket and Towing Enforced." The sign height shall be at least eighty (80) inches from grade to the bottom of the sign. The face of the sign shall be composed of reflectorized porcelain steel with beaded text or equal. Any vehicle which is not removed from the parking space within one-half (1/2) hour of being ticketed for a violation of this section is subject to being towed from the space, at the order of the Blacksburg Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 1238, § 1, 5-9-00) 
Section 12-402. - Town manager's authority to erect parking signs. 
    The town manager is authorized to erect, remove, maintain, or alter official signs which govern the type, manner, location, and duration of, or which prohibit or allow, vehicular parking on public streets, other public areas of the town, and on other land owned or controlled by the town. Any such action shall be in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
Section 12-403. - Parking for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any motor vehicle, house trailer, camping trailer, trailer designated for the transportation of any freight or goods or livestock, or any other trailer or apparatus of any kind whatsoever designated to be attached to or pulled by a motor vehicle, to remain in the same location on any street in the town for a longer period of time than twenty-four (24) hours. 
Section 12-404. - Limitation on parking of vehicle containing livestock. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle containing livestock on any street for more than one-half (1/2) hour. A vehicle shall be considered parked for one-half (1/2) hour if it is not moved at least one (1) block within that period. 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 5. 
Section 12-405. - Town owned parking facilities. 
(a)  The town manager, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to issue licenses or permits to provide for the private use of parking spaces in town owned parking facilities. The manager or designee shall develop written policies for the efficient use of town owned parking facilities that promote the general welfare and economy of the town. In particular, licenses or permits in spaces in downtown parking facilities shall be issued in a manner that will facilitate the growth and prosperity of the downtown. These policies, once approved by the town manager, will govern the issuance of licenses and permits, the cost of such licenses or permits, and the general operation of the parking facilities. 
(b)  Application for all such parking space licenses or permits shall be made on forms provided by the town. The issuance of such licenses or permits shall be conditioned upon the licensee or permittee complying with all applicable policies, regulations, ordinances or laws; violation of any of such policies, regulations, ordinances or laws may result in revocation of a license or permit. 
(c)  The manager or designee may promulgate additional written regulations as necessary for the safe and orderly operation of the parking facilities. The manager or designee may also arrange for vehicles without a valid parking space license or permit to be towed from town parking facilities. 
(d)  The decision of whether to grant a parking space license or permit shall be exclusively that of the town manager or the manager's designee, based on adopted policies and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 1713, § 1, 2-11-14 ) 
Section 12-406. - Parking regulations to facilitate removal of snow. 
(a)  Whenever there shall be an accumulation of one (1) or more inches of snow upon any street in the town, the chief of police shall have the power to regulate parking upon the streets or any property under town ownership or control in a manner which will facilitate the removal of snow from such streets and property and to prohibit parking on one (1) or both sides of such streets and to alternate parking on either side of such streets until the snow has been removed from the street or property where parking is so regulated. 
(b)  Whenever there shall be an accumulation of snow hereinabove provided, the chief of police shall also have the power to move, by towing or other means, any parked vehicle obstructing or interfering with the process of snow removal. Such removal shall be carried out only after notice is given by posting at least two (2) signs in conspicuous places on or near the street or public property to be cleared. Such signs shall state the time and date when snow removal will occur, by which time the vehicles shall be removed. Posting of signs shall occur no later than 3:00 p.m. which shall be at least six (6) hours before snow removal occurs. 
(c)  Whenever there shall be an accumulation of snow as hereinabove provided, Main Street, between College Avenue and Airport Road, shall be a snow emergency route where parking is prohibited during and for twenty-four (24) hours after each snowfall or until the snow is cleared. The route shall be indicated by the placement of permanent signs which shall state "Snow Emergency Route-No Parking or Impeding Traffic Flow During Emergency-Towing Enforced." 
(d)  Any person parking a motor vehicle in a place restricted by the chief of police as hereinabove provided, or any person who allows a motor vehicle in his custody or under his control to remain parked in a restricted area, after notice as hereinabove provided, shall be guilty of a violation of this section. In addition to any penalty imposed, such person shall be liable for the cost of towing or removal. 
State Law reference- Regulation of operation of vehicles in snow, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1302. 
Section 12-407. - Washing, greasing, etc., vehicle on street or sidewalk. 
    No person shall wash, polish or grease a vehicle upon a street or sidewalk, nor shall the owner of a vehicle permit it to be washed, polished or greased upon a street or, sidewalk. 
Section 12-408. - Backing to curbs. 
    No vehicle shall be backed up to a curb, except during the time actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise therefrom. 
Section 12-409. - Manner of using loading zones. 
    Where a loading and unloading zone has been set apart by the town council, the following regulations shall apply with respect to the use of such areas: 
(1)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, in any place marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. All delivery vehicles other than regular delivery trucks using such loading zones shall be identified by the owner's or company's name in letters three inches high on both sides of the vehicle. 
(2)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily in a space marked as a curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers or bundles when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or is about to enter such loading space. 
Section 12-410. - Manner of using bus stops and taxicab stands. 
    Where a bus stop or taxicab stand has been set apart by the town manager, the following regulations shall apply as to the use thereof. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
Section 12-411. - General regulations governing private property. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any private lot or lot area without the express or implied consent of the owner thereof. Whenever signs or markings have been erected on any lot or lot area, contiguous or adjacent to a street, thoroughfare or alley, indicating that no vehicles are permitted to stand or park thereon, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle across any curb or lot line or over any driveway from a street or alley into such lot or area for the purpose of standing or parking such vehicle, or for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in such lot or lot area. 
Section 12-412. - Establishment, marking, etc., of fire lanes and parking therein. 
(a)  There shall be fire lanes established at all shopping centers and areas subject to congestion within the boundaries of the town, such areas to be designated by the chief of police. Fire lanes shall not be less than ten feet in width and run the length of the frontage of the building or any side where access to the building has been provided. Fire lanes should be indicated by a solid yellow line painted on the pavement and running the full length of the building and located not less than ten feet from the frontage of the building. 
(b)  Fire lanes shall be marked or posted with signs in such numbers and at such locations as recommended by the police chief, reading as follows: "No Parking-Fire Zone." Said signs shall be authorized by the chief of police and installed by the town. When signs are so installed, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in such fire lane. 
(c)  Enforcement of this section by the police department shall be effected by placement of parking violation tickets on all vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this section or by removal of such vehicles from fire lanes. The chief of police, with the assistance of the fire chief, shall inspect buildings and premises and fire lanes as often as may be necessary to insure that such buildings, premises or fire lanes are free from parked or abandoned vehicles so that fire department vehicles and other emergency vehicles can operate without hindrance and building occupants have free egress in the event of fire or emergency. 
Section 12-413. - Parking in spaces reserved for persons with disabilities; issuance of summons by law enforcement personnel, other uniformed personnel and certain security guards; reciprocity; removal of vehicle not displaying disabled parking license plates or placards. 
(a)  No vehicles other than those displaying disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards, or temporary removable windshield placards issued under Virginia Code § 46.2-1241, or DV disabled parking license plates issued under Virginia Code § 46.2-739, shall park in any parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities. No person without a disability that limits or impairs his or her ability to walk shall park a vehicle with disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards, temporary removable windshield placards, or DV disabled parking license plates issued under Virginia Code § 46.2-739, subsection B, in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk except when transporting a disabled person in the vehicle. 
(b)  Organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards and temporary removable windshield placards shall be displayed in such a manner that they may be viewed from the front and rear of the vehicle and be hanging from the rearview mirror of a vehicle utilizing a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk. When there is no rearview mirror, the placard shall be displayed on the vehicle's dashboard. No placard shall be displayed from the rearview mirror while a vehicle is in motion. 
(c)  Parking a vehicle in a space reserved for persons with disabilities in violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A summons or parking ticket for the offense may be issued by town law-enforcement officers and other uniformed personnel employed by the town to enforce parking regulations of this section without the necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner of the private parking area. 
(d)  Parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk shall be identified by above grade signs, regardless of whether identification of such spaces by above grade signs was required when any particular space was reserved for use by persons with disabilities. All such signs shall have the bottom edge of the sign no lower than four (4) feet nor higher than seven (7) feet above the parking surface and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Virginia Code § 36-99.11 and the Uniform Statewide Building Code. However, no violation of this section shall be dismissed for a property owner's failure to comply strictly with the requirements for disabled parking signs set forth in Virginia Code § 36-99.11, provided the space is clearly distinguishable as a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk. 
(e)  Disabled parking license plates, permanent removable windshield placards, temporary removable windshield placards and DV disabled parking license plates issued by other states and countries for the purpose of identifying vehicles permitted to use parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk shall be accorded all rights and privileges accorded vehicles displaying such devices in this town. 
(f)  The owner or duly authorized agent of the owner of a parking space property designated and clearly marked as reserved for use by persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk may have any vehicle not displaying disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards, temporary removable windshield placards, or DV disabled parking license plates, removed from the parking space and stored. The owner of a vehicle which has been removed and stored may regain possession of the vehicle on payment to the person or persons who removed and stored the vehicle of all reasonable costs incidental to the removal and storage. The owner of the vehicle, on notice to the owner or duly authorized agent of the owner of the parking space, may also petition the Montgomery County, General District Court for an immediate determination as to whether the removal of the vehicle was lawful. If the court finds that the removal was unlawful, the court shall direct the owner of the parking space to pay the costs incidental to the removal and storage of the vehicle and return the vehicle to its owner. 
(g)  In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons, parking ticket, citation, or warrant was parked in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Virginia Code Title 46.2, Chapter 6, §§ 46.2-600 et seq., shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation. 
( Ord. No. 1765, § 1, 6-9-15, eff. 8-1-15 ) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1237. 
Section 12-414. - Penalty for parking violations; ticketing procedure; contest of citations. 
(a)  When voluntarily paid in accord with the provisions of subsection (c) below, the penalty for parking violations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Parking at a meter on which the time has expired: Thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(2)  Parking in a nonmetered area in excess of the posted time limit: Thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(3)  Parking on a yellow line: Thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(4)  Improper parking: Thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(5)  Parking in a fire lane: Fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(6)  Parking in a reserved parking space of a publicly owned parking lot: Thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(7)  All other parking violations for which no penalty is specifically imposed: Thirty-five dollars ($35.00). 
(b)  For any parking violation under this section and under subsection 12-413(c) not paid within twenty-five (25) calendar days following the date of the citation, the penalty shall increase by fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(c)  Each police officer or uniformed employee of the police department charged with the duty of enforcing this article shall take the registration number of any vehicle found parked in violation of any provision of this article and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its owner. Such officer or employee shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a ticket stub, with an envelope attached thereto, in a form provided by the town manager, instructing the owner of the vehicle that the owner may, to avoid prosecution for a traffic infraction, within twenty-five (25) calendar days following the date of the citation, place funds to pay the penalty indicated in subsection (a) above in the envelope and deposit it in one (1) of the courtesy collection boxes installed on certain of the parking standards, or pay this penalty to the town at the office of the director of finance. The ticket stub made by such officer or employee shall be kept in the police department. 
(d)  Upon failure of any such owner, within the above time limit, to pay the penalty, as aforesaid, the town manager shall send to such owner a law enforcement notice advising him or her of the violation and warning him or her that, in the event the increased penalty is not paid within five (5) days of receipt of such notice, the town manager or the manager's designee shall cause a summons to be issued against the person to be charged with the offense and shall certify in writing such parking citation to the clerk of the county general district court. Any owner who fails to comply with the terms of such notice shall be subject to the penalty provided for in Section 12-113 of this chapter. 
(e)  Any motor vehicle ticketed for parking at a meter on which time has expired or for parking in a nonmetered area in excess of the posted time limit shall receive successive tickets as follows: 
a.  A second ticket shall be given one (1) hour after the first ticket. 
b.  A third ticket shall be given one (1) hour after the second ticket. 
c.  Subsequent tickets, if issued, shall be given at the expiration of one (1) hour from the last ticket issued. 
(f)  Any person who desires to contest a parking citation may, within twenty-five (25) calendar days following the date of the citation, present the citation to the police department, which shall certify it on an appropriate form to the general district court. The police department may review citations submitted during this time period and dismiss tickets clearly written in error. This administrative review is limited to the following scenarios: 
(1)  Malfunctioning parking meter; 
(2)  Fallen or misplaced permit or placard; 
(3)  Missing, illegible, ambiguous or incorrectly worded sign; 
(4)  Stolen or lost license plate; 
(5)  Sign or other parking prohibition installed subsequent to parking; 
(6)  Disabled vehicle; 
(7)  Medical emergency; 
(8)  Owner deceased. 
(g)  Pursuant to Virginia Code § 46.2-752(J), the director of finance may enter into an agreement with the commissioner of the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles in which the commissioner will refuse to issue or renew any vehicle registration of any person who owes the town for any unpaid local vehicle license fees or parking citations. 
(Ord. No. 1314, § 6, 10-8-02; Ord. No. 1343, § 1, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1506, § 1, 11-11-08; Ord. No. 1519, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1765, § 1, 6-9-15, eff. 8-1-15 ) 
Section 12-415. - Presumption in prosecution for parking violations. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any parking regulation contained in this article, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons or warrant was parked in violation of such regulation, together with proof that the defendant was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Virginia Code § 46.2-600 et seq., shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Section 12-416. - Removal or immobilization of vehicles with multiple parking violations. 
(a)  Whenever there is found any motor vehicle parked upon the public streets or highways or public grounds of this town against which motor vehicle there are three (3) or more outstanding unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices issued by this town, such vehicle may, by towing or otherwise, be removed or conveyed to a place in the town designated by the chief of police for the temporary storage of such vehicle, or such vehicle may be immobilized in such a manner as to prevent its removal or operation except by authorized officers or members of the police department. The removal, conveyance or immobilization of the vehicle shall be by, or under the direction of, an officer or member of the police department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the officer or member of the police department removing or immobilizing such motor vehicle, or under whose direction such motor vehicle is removed or immobilized, to inform as soon as practical the owner of the removed or immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violation notices, for which or on account of which, such vehicle was removed or immobilized. In any case involving immobilization of a vehicle pursuant to this section, there shall be placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, a notice warning that such vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage thereto. 
(c)  The owner of an immobilized vehicle, or other duly authorized person, shall be allowed not less than twenty-four (24) hours from the time of immobilization to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle. Failure to repossess or secure the release of the vehicle within this time period may result in the removal of such vehicle to a storage area for safekeeping under the direction of a police officer or member of the police department. 
(d)  The owner of such removed or immobilized motor vehicle, or other duly authorized person, shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of the vehicle by payment of outstanding parking violation notices for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized and by payment of all reasonable costs incidental to the immobilization, removal and storage of the vehicle, and the efforts to locate the owner of the vehicle. 
(e)  Should such owner fail or refuse to pay such fines and costs, or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown and unascertainable, the town may proceed to sell the vehicle in accordance with the following procedure. The town manager shall cause a diligent search to be made for the whereabouts and identity of the owner and shall provide notice of the sale to the owner at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the division of motor vehicles in Virginia against the motor vehicle. After holding the motor vehicle for forty (40) days following notice to the owner at his last known address and following reasonable notice of the sale of the vehicle, which notice may include posting or publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, the town manager may sell the motor vehicle at public auction to the highest bidder. The proceeds from the sale shall be forwarded by the town manager to the director of finance, provided, that if the value of the motor vehicle be determined by three (3) disinterested dealers or garage men to be less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), the motor vehicle may be disposed of by private sale or junked. The director of finance shall pay from the proceeds of sale the cost of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens and notice of sale, and the balance of such funds shall be held by him for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. If no claim has been made by the owner for the proceeds of such sale, the remaining funds may be deposited to the general fund or any special fund of the town. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the town within three (3) years from the date of such sale and if timely application is made therefor, the town shall pay the same to the owner without interest or other charges. No claim shall be made nor shall any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after three (3) years from the date of such sale. 
Cross reference- Removal of abandoned vehicles, § 12-701. 
Sec. 12-417. - Towing trespassing vehicles from private parking lots/areas-Fair warning to drivers. 
(a)  (1)  In general, the subject of towing trespassing vehicles is governed by Virginia Code § 46.2-131 and the regulations established by the Virginia Board of Towing and Recovery Operators. The provisions of this division supplement state regulation, as permitted by Virginia Code § 46.2-1232. 
(2)  In any instance in which a person authorized by Virginia Code § 46.2-1231 removes by towing or otherwise a trespassing vehicle from his or her parking lot, parking area, or parking space in a parking lot, the action will be lawful and a towing charge imposed only if the parking lot, parking area, or parking space in a parking lot is posted with a sign or signs as required by this division. 
(b)  This division establishes minimum standards designed to provide fair warning to drivers. However, in every instance, a clear and conspicuous sign, clearly visible and readable from each and every entrance, is required. In any specific circumstance where compliance with the minimum standards set forth below will not, in fact, provide a clear and conspicuous warning to all drivers, then additional signage is required. 
(Ord. No. 1267, § 2, 4-10-01; Ord. No. 1522, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 12-418. - Sign requirements. 
(a)  At a minimum, the owner shall post at least one (1) sign at each entrance to the lot or area from a public right-of-way, meeting the following standards: 
(1)  Minimum size of text area of sign: Eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. 
(2)  Minimum size of lettering: One and one-half (11/2) inches. 
(3)  Height at bottom of sign: Four (4) feet to seven (7) feet above grade. 
(4)  Color of sign: Red print against a white, reflective background. 
The words, "towing enforced" or "24 hour towing enforced" shall be in reverse color scheme. 
(5)  Wording: 
a.  The wording of the sign shall clearly communicate all restrictions governing the parking area, such as that the lot or area is private or reserved parking, that no parking is allowed if appropriate, or that parking is prohibited in specified areas, such as unpaved areas. Either the words "towing enforced" or the towing enforced icon shall appear on the sign. 
b.  The sign shall also include either the nonemergency number of the police department or the telephone number of the responsible tow truck service. For any parking lot where trespassing vehicles are towed on a 24-hour basis, the sign shall clearly state "24-hour towing enforced". 
c.  Every sign shall state the maximum rate of a towing charge permitted by Virginia Code § 46.2-1231, not including storage charges. For example, "Maximum towing charge $150, not including storage charges." 
d.  The tow truck service may use a separate, nonreflective black and white sign or signs attached below the sign required by subsection (a)(5)a.; any such sign or signs shall have at least one-inch letters to display the telephone number and maximum towing rate information required by subsections (a)(5)b. and c. 
(b)  (1)  Where a parking lot or area contains both spaces that are available for public parking and reserved spaces, the owner of the lot or area shall clearly identify each reserved space. 
(2)  At least one (1) above-grade sign, meeting the requirements set forth above, shall be posted at the entrance to or within the parking lot or area, in a position conspicuous to every driver entering an area where reserved parking spaces exist. 
(3)  Each reserved space shall be so designated by either an above-grade sign or by wording painted in six-inch or larger lettering with white or yellow paint on the surface of the space. The sign or lettering shall identify the person or class of persons for whom the space is reserved, for example, "reserved for Store A's customers", "residents only", or "guests only". In any case where lettering on the pavement is used, the lettering shall be maintained so that it is clearly legible. 
(4)  No vehicle shall be towed from a space without above-grade signage if snow, vegetation or some other material obstructs the driver's view of the wording painted on the surface. 
(5)  The pavement lines delineating each reserved parking space shall be clearly different in color from the lines delineating the parking spaces available for public parking. The pavement lines must clearly depict the boundaries of the area in which parking is permitted; however, wheel stops or parking chocks may be used to indicate the end of a parking space. 
(c)  Additional signage, including area signs, is required when, due to the angle of the entrance sign, the grade of the road compared to the grade of the lot or area, the angle of the entrance driveway, or other circumstances, the entrance sign is not clearly visible to all drivers entering the parking lot/area from a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1, 3-9-99; Ord. No. 1267, § 1, 4-10-01; Ord. No. 1522, § 1, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 1-12-10) 
Section 12-419. - Towing trespassing vehicles from private parking lots. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any tow truck service or operator to tow or otherwise remove a vehicle from any private parking lot or parking area, without the owner's permission, unless the lot or area is properly signed in accordance with Virginia Code § 46.2-1231, as well as the more specific requirements of this division. 
(b)  If the owner or custodian of any vehicle not authorized to be parked in a private parking area returns after a tow truck service has arrived but before the vehicle actually has been towed, he or she may reclaim the vehicle whether or not it is fully hooked up to the tow truck, and it shall be unlawful for the tow truck service or operator to refuse to release the vehicle. However, if the vehicle has been hooked up, or is in the process of being hooked up, the tow truck operator may charge a drop fee not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00) before releasing the vehicle or discontinuing the towing process. The process of hooking up shall be defined as (i) the removal and/or unreeling of any towing equipment from the tow truck after the truck is positioned to effect the tow, whether or not the equipment has been attached to the vehicle, or (ii) the lowering of a hydraulically-operated lift in preparation for loading the vehicle after the tow truck is positioned to effect the tow. 
(c)  If the owner or custodian is unable or refuses to pay the fee set forth in subsection (b) above, the vehicle may be towed and the tow truck service may charge its basic fee for the tow. Whenever a vehicle is towed under these circumstances, the tow truck operator shall permit the owner or custodian to remove personal items from the vehicle prior to the tow. 
(d)  No tow truck operator shall request payment of the fee set forth in subsection (b) above or tow any vehicle thereafter if the charge is not paid unless he or she shall first provide to the owner or custodian of the vehicle a copy of the rights and responsibilities statement set forth below. The tow truck operator, upon receiving such payment, shall provide to the owner or custodian a legible receipt containing the name of the towing service, the date, time and place of vehicle release, and the initials of the tow truck operator. A copy of the receipt shall be retained by the tow truck service for a period of one (1) year and shall be made available for inspection by town police during the normal business hours of the tow truck service. 
(e)  Payment of the fee set forth in subsection (b) above shall be allowed to be made by any method accepted by the tow truck service or operator in satisfaction of towing charges. For the payment of any towing or storage charges, the tow truck service shall accept cash, insurance company checks, certified checks, money orders, at least one (1) of two (2) commonly used, nationally recognized credit cards, or additional methods of payment approved by the Virginia Board of Towing and Recovery Operators. The tow truck service or operator shall not be obligated to accept payments of more than ten dollars ($10.00) in coins. When a credit card is offered as payment, the vehicle owner or custodian shall comply with all credit card regulations. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, if a police officer determines that a vehicle is needed as evidence in a criminal matter, or concludes that, based upon surrounding circumstances, the failure to release a vehicle is likely to result in a disturbance of the public peace and good order, such officer may order release of the vehicle without immediate payment by the owner or custodian of the fee set forth in subsection (b) above; provided, however, that nothing herein shall preclude a tow truck service or operator from civilly pursuing payment of such fee at a later date from the owner or custodian of the vehicle. 
(g)  Unless a new meaning is required by the context, the following terms, as used in this division, shall have the meaning hereinafter ascribed to them: 
    Custodian: Any person who is in possession and control of a vehicle, whether or not such person is the registered owner of the vehicle. A person who is in possession of the ignition key to a vehicle, and who is also in possession of a valid driver's license, shall be deemed to be the "custodian" of such vehicle. 
    Operator: Any person operating a tow truck for a tow truck service. 
    Owner: Shall include the operator or lessee of any parking lot/area, or the authorized agent of the person having control of the premises. 
    Tow: Means moving a vehicle with a tow truck for any distance after the vehicle has been fully secured by the tow truck operator. 
    Tow truck service: A person or business engaged in any business which provides the services of one (1) or more tow trucks for hire or use to tow, transport or move motor vehicles on or from public streets or on or from private property by way of public streets. 
(h)  The provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1231 or successor section shall be operative within the town, as clarified by this section. 
(i)  The "rights and responsibilities statement" referred to in subparagraph (d) above shall be printed legibly and read as follows: 
    "Rights and Responsibilities of the Owner or Custodian of a Trespassing Vehicle As Established by Blacksburg Town Code § 12-419. 
1.  A private parking lot must have a sign clearly stating that trespassing vehicles will be towed, and the sign must be posted at each entrance to the parking lot. 
2.  A trespassing vehicle in a properly signed parking lot may be towed without the owner's consent. 
3.  If you reclaim your vehicle before it is actually towed, the tow truck operator must release your vehicle to you. 
4.  However, if the tow truck operator has: 
a.  Removed or unreeled towing equipment from the tow truck after the tow truck is positioned to effect the tow, or 
b.  Lowered a hydraulic lift to prepare to tow your vehicle after the tow truck is positioned to effect the tow, or 
c.  Hooked up your vehicle to the tow truck then you must pay a maximum fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in order to reclaim your vehicle. If you cannot pay this fee, then the tow truck operator is authorized to tow your vehicle. You may remove your personal belongings from the vehicle before it is towed away. 
5.  The tow truck operator must accept payment of the twenty-five dollars ($25.00) fee in any form which would be accepted for a full tow. 
6.  If you are able to pay the twenty-five dollars ($25.00) fee, then the tow truck operator must give you a receipt showing the name of the towing company, the date, time and place of your vehicle release, and the initials of the tow truck driver." 
(Ord. No. 1522, § 1, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 1-12-10) 
Section 12-420. - Applicability of division. 
(a)  The provisions of this division shall apply only to tow truck services that tow vehicles on or from privately owned lots or property at the request of the owner of such lot or property and without the consent of the owner of the vehicle towed. 
(b)  As provided by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1232, in the event that a vehicle is towed from a location in Blacksburg and stored in or released from a location in another locality, the terms of this division shall apply. This division shall not apply to official public safety vehicles (police, sheriff, fire or public health) or where a vehicle because of a wreck or other emergency is parked or left temporarily on the property of another. 
(Ord. No. 1522, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 12-421. - Violations of division. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this division. Each day that a continuing violation of the provisions of any section of this division occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided, any person violating any section of this division shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1522, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 12-422. - Identification of tow trucks. 
    All tow trucks operated by a tow truck service shall display the name, address and telephone number of the owner thereof on both sides of the tow truck on permanently mounted signs or painted directly on the body of the truck in letters large enough to be readily legible. It shall be unlawful to operate a tow truck displaying an incorrect name or address, or a telephone number which is incorrect or not in service. 
(Ord. No. 1522, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 12-423. - Requirements for storage yard. 
(a)  At the storage yard of each tow truck service, there shall be a sign prominently displayed specifying towing and storage rates. Such sign shall be at least twenty-four (24) inches in width and height. As used in this division, "tow truck service storage yard" means any property, including the premises of any service station, upon which vehicles are stored that have been towed from privately owned lots or property at the request of the owner, lessee or agent of such lot or property and without the consent of the owner of the vehicle towed. 
(b)  If an attendant is not on duty twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, to return vehicles upon the payment of towing and storage charges, the sign provided for in subsection (a) hereof shall also contain a telephone number where the owner, manager or representative of the tow truck service storage yard may be reached for information concerning charges and retrieval of a towed vehicle. 
(c)  Each tow truck service storage yard shall provide reasonable security and protection for all vehicles towed, including illumination of the storage area during hours of darkness, and including a fence enclosing the storage yard if an attendant or security guard is not on duty twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. 
(d)  During the hours of darkness, the operator shall provide either (i) an area sufficiently illuminated or (ii) sufficient portable lighting equipment to enable an owner to inspect a vehicle prior to removing it from the storage yard. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to operate any tow truck service storage yard or to deposit, impound or store any towed vehicle herein, unless the yard is in full compliance with the sign, security and lighting requirements of this division and with all applicable zoning regulations and licensing requirements and use permits, established by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1522, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 12-424. - Tow truck service operator's log; documentation of reasons for tow. 
(a)  Tow truck service operators shall, within thirty (30) minutes of vehicle hook up, complete a record of the make, model, year and vehicle identification number, if known, of the vehicle, its license number and state of issuance, the time, date and place of removal, and the name of the tow truck operator who made the tow. Such record shall be retained by the tow truck service for not less than twelve (12) months and shall be available for inspection by town police during normal business hours of the tow truck service, including any time that a vehicle is being impounded or reclaimed. Failure to keep and retain such a record or omitting to make a true and complete entry for each vehicle towed, or failure to surrender such record to any police officer upon request shall be unlawful. 
(b)  The towing and recovery operator performing the tow shall make and retain photographs or video recordings and, to the extent available, other documentary evidence substantiating the reasons for the removal. 
(c)  Photographs taken to comply with this section shall be digital or instant. Any person whose vehicle is towed pursuant to this article shall be entitled to view such photographs or video recordings, subject to reasonable charges, during normal business hours of the tow truck service. 
(Ord. No. 1522, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 12-425. - Miscellaneous prohibited acts by tow truck service or operator. 
    Except when acting as an agent in the legal repossession of a vehicle, it shall be unlawful for any tow truck service or operator to: 
(1)  Tow or otherwise move a vehicle from any area or portion of a public street without either the consent of the owner or custodian of the vehicle or authorization from a police officer or other designated official of the town. 
(2)  Block the movement of or tow or otherwise move a vehicle from any private road, driveway or any other privately owned land or property within the town without the consent of the owner or custodian thereof, unless: 
a.  The vehicle is parked in a designated parking space of a decal-controlled parking area and is not displaying a decal or other form of authorization issued by the owner, lessee or agent of such parking area; 
b.  The vehicle is parked in a designated parking space of a non-decal-controlled parking area during any period when the business(es) serviced by the parking is (are) open, and the tow truck operator obtains the written consent of the owner, lessee or agent of such parking area prior to towing the vehicle; or 
c.  The vehicle is parked in a non-decal-controlled parking area during any period when the business(es) serviced by the parking area is (are) closed, and towing is enforced twenty four (24) hours a day by such business(es); or 
d.  The vehicle is parked on any portion of a parking area in such manner as to block ingress or egress to the parking area, or to block access to a dumpster or properly marked service or delivery area, or is otherwise parked in a portion of the parking area that is not specifically designated, by lines, curbs or similar markings, as an area for the parking of vehicles. 
As used in this subsection, decal-controlled parking area means a parking area in which parking is limited to vehicles on which a decal, sign, placard or similar authorization issued by the owner, lessee or agent of the parking area is conspicuously displayed. 
No vehicle shall be towed pursuant to subsection a., b., c., or d. unless there is a written contract between the tow truck service and the owner, lessee or agent of the parking area to remove all unauthorized vehicles from the parking area, the tow truck operator has a copy of such contract on file at the town truck office and available for inspection by the police department, and the owner, lessee or agent has complied with all of the signage requirements set forth in section 12-418. 
(3)  Block any vehicle, other than when on the property of the tow truck service, to prevent the movement thereof by its owner or custodian who has appeared prior to the vehicle being hooked up and desires to move the vehicle. 
(4)  Tow or otherwise move a vehicle from any place in the town utilizing a wrecker or tow truck that is not insured as required by state law or regulation. 
(5)  Provide false information to any police dispatcher concerning any vehicle towed. 
(6)  Move any vehicle to any intermediate place of storage, or to any location other than to the registered secure storage yard of a tow truck service, unless specifically requested by the owner or custodian of said vehicle. 
(7)  Assess or collect any charge or fee in excess of, or in addition to, the charges and fees authorized by this article. 
(8)  Fail to provide a monetary receipt, for each and every fee collected, as required by subsection 12-419(d). 
(Ord. No. 1522, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 12-426. - Severability. 
    If any part or section of this division is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining parts or sections. 
(Ord. No. 1561, § 1, 1-12-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1561, § 1, adopted Jan. 12, 2010, deleted former § 12-426, and enacted a new § 12-426 as set out herein. Former § 12-426 pertained to written authorization required. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING METERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of town with respect to parking meters, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 

Section 12-500. - General duties of town manager with respect to meters and pay stations. 
(a)  The town manager is authorized to provide for the installation or placing of parking meters at those locations in the town the manager may deem appropriate, and the regulation, control, operation, and use thereof in accordance with the provisions of this division, and to maintain such meters in good working condition. The town manager is authorized to erect, remove, maintain, or alter official signs which govern the type, manner, location, and duration of, or which prohibit or allow vehicular parking on public streets, other public areas of the town, and on other land owned or controlled by the town. Any such action shall be in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  The town manager is also authorized to install or place parking pay stations, which are automated parking meters that manage multiple parking spaces. As used in this division, a reference to a "parking meter" shall also mean a "parking pay station" or "pay station" unless otherwise indicated by the context. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1765, § 1, 6-9-15, eff. 8-1-15 ) 
Section 12-501. - Location; required signal; etc. 
(a)  Parking meters installed pursuant to this division shall be placed upon the curbing immediately adjacent to individual parking spaces which are designated as provided in this division. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such a manner as to show or display a signal that the parking space assigned to it is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter shall be installed and set to display, upon deposit of a coin of the United States of America therein or other authorized forms of payment, a signal indicating the legal parking time for the time allotted for such coin for the parking space upon which such meter is placed. Each meter shall be so arranged that upon the expiration of such parking limit, or the portion thereof for which the necessary payment has been made, it will indicate by mechanical operation and proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired. 
(b)  Parking pay stations installed pursuant to this division shall be placed upon the curb alongside of or next to individual parking places within a block. Parking pay stations may also be placed in town parking lots to manage parking spaces. Each parking pay station shall print a receipt that indicates the legal time permitted for use of any parking space regulated by the pay station upon the deposit of a coin or by other form of authorized payment. The printed parking pay station receipt will indicate when the parking period expires. 
( Ord. No. 1765, § 1, 6-9-15, eff. 8-1-15 ) 
Section 12-502. - Marking and use of metered spaces. 
(a)  The town manager or the manager's designated officers or employees shall place lines or markings on the curb, street, lot, or pavement to designate the parking space for which each meter is to be used. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in the spaces referred to in this section except within the lines and markings so established. 
(c)  When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be alongside of and nearest to the parking meter. When a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of such vehicle directed at and nearest to such meter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any peddler, itinerant merchant or any other person to use any metered parking space to display, offer, buy, sell or otherwise exchange for value any item, including but not limited to any and all goods, wares, flowers, prepared or unprepared food or any other product from any table or stand, or from any motor vehicle, trailer, cart, wagon or push cart. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any metered parking space for any purpose except parking a registered motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 1765, § 1, 6-9-15, eff. 8-1-15 ) 
Section 12-503. - Deposit of coin required, overtime parking generally. 
(a)  When any vehicle shall be parked in any space next to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit, cause to be deposited, or assure the deposit of, one (1) or more coins of the United States of America or make payment through another authorized means of payment in such parking meter, calculated on the basis of one dollar ($1.00) per hour. The parking space may then be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period prescribed as the parking time allowed in such zone, or the portion thereof for which the necessary payment has been made, but not to exceed the overall time limit provided in this article. If such vehicle shall remain in such parking space beyond the parking limit prescribed for such parking space, then upon the expiration of the parking limits, or the portion thereof for which the necessary coin or coins have been deposited or other authorized payment made, the parking meters shall display a sign or signal showing illegal parking. In that event, the vehicle parked in such parking space shall be considered as parked overtime. The parking of a vehicle overtime in any such space shall be a violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to remain or to be parked in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter managed by a pay station while such meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking space or if the time period for which parking has been paid has otherwise expired. 
(Ord. No. 1314, § 7, 10-8-02; Ord. No. 1765, § 1, 6-9-15, eff. 8-1-15 ) 
Section 12-503.1. - Maximum legal parking time; deposit of coin or other authorized payment for purpose of extending period for legal parking. 
(a)  The maximum period of legal parking time for all on street metered parking spaces and metered parking spaces in the Market Square Park Parking Lot, which is located at the corner of the 100 block of Draper Road NW and the 100 block of West Roanoke Street, shall be two (2) hours. The maximum period of legal parking time for metered parking spaces for the Progress Street Parking Lot, which is located off the 200 block of Progress Street NE, and the Church Street Parking Lot, which is located off the 100 block of Church Street NE, shall be four (4) hours. The period of lawful parking time shall be posted on all parking meters. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, in a parking meter any coin or coins, or other authorized payments, for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking space, as posted on the parking meter. 
(c)  This section is intended and shall be construed as follows: The period of legal parking time, at any one (1) time, is posted on the parking meter controlling the parking space. No owner or operator shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle to park in such space longer than the time posted, even though another coin is inserted in the meter or another authorized form of payment is made, and every such person failing to remove the vehicle from such space at the expiration of the posted time shall be in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1543, § 1, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 1765, § 1, 6-9-15, eff. 8-1-15 ) 
Section 12-504. - When section 12-503 effective. 
(a)  The provisions of section 12-503 shall apply between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on all streets, public areas, or public parking lots, as determined by the town manager, Monday through Saturday. 
(b)  The provisions of section 12-503 shall not apply on legal holidays. 
( Ord. No. 1765, § 1, 6-9-15, eff. 8-1-15 ) 
Section 12-505. - Waiver of the provisions of section 12-503 by town manager. 
(a)  The town manager may, after providing written notice to town council, waive the provisions of section 12-503, with respect to any or all designated streets or public areas of the town, for such period of time as he or she determines. 
(b)  Where the provisions of section 12-503 are waived, signs or notices advising the public of such waiver shall be conspicuously posted for the streets or areas so affected. 
( Ord. No. 1705, § 1, 1-14-14 ) 
Section 12-506. - Use of space, without deposit, for loading or unloading delivery vehicles or receiving or discharging passengers. 
    Operators of delivery vehicles may use, without making the deposit required by section 12-503, any parking meter space during the actual loading and unloading of such delivery vehicles. Operators of passenger vehicles, commercial or private, may use, without making such deposit, a parking meter space for the purpose of promptly receiving or discharging a passenger. 
Section 12-507. - Injuring, defacing, etc., meters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. A violation of this section shall constitute a Class I misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Tampering with parking meter with intent to steal therefrom, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-152. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT PARKING ZONES 

Section 12-600. - Intent and purpose. 
    The town council finds and declares that the provisions of this division are enacted for the following reasons: 
(a)  To reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of streets within residential districts for vehicles parked by persons not residing within the residential districts; 
(b)  To protect these residential districts from polluted air, excessive noise, and refuse caused by the entry of such vehicles; 
(c)  To protect the residents of these residential districts from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences; 
(d)  To preserve the character of these districts as residential districts; 
(e)  To promote efficiency in the maintenance of streets in these residential districts in a clean and safe condition; 
(f)  To preserve the value of the property in these residential districts; 
(g)  To promote traffic safety and the safety of children and other pedestrians in these residential districts; 
(h)  To forestall dangers arising from the blocking of emergency vehicles, both in reaching victims and in transporting them to hospitals; 
(i)  To facilitate the movement of traffic in the event of accidents and other disasters; and 
(j)  To promote the peace, comfort, convenience and welfare of all inhabitants of the town. 
Section 12-601. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them herein: 
    Curbside parking space: Twenty (20) linear feet of curb, exclusive of those portions of the curb where parking, apart from the provisions of this division, is not permitted. 
    Resident: A person who customarily resides or maintains a place of abode within a zone established pursuant to this division, or who owns realty abutting on a street or way in such a zone and upon which a place of human habitation is located. 
    Residential permit parking zone: A residential zone where curbside parking on public highways or streets is prohibited, unless the vehicle properly displays a parking permit authorized by this division. 
    Residential zone: A contiguous or nearly contiguous area containing public highways or streets or parts thereof primarily abutted by residential property or residential and nonbusiness property (such as schools, parks and churches). 
Section 12-602. - Designation of residential permit parking zone. 
(a)  Upon the town manager's own initiative or upon a petition signed by a majority of the residents in an area proposed to be designated as a residential permit parking zone, the manager may designate a residential zone or portion thereof as a residential permit parking zone pursuant to the procedures established herein provided that such area meets the standards of this section. 
(b)  Prior to designating any residential zone as a residential permit parking zone, the town manager shall hold a public hearing after due notice of such hearing has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. Such notice shall be published at least twelve (12) days prior to such public hearing and shall clearly state the purpose, time and location of the public hearing, and the location and boundaries of the proposed residential permit parking zone. During such public hearing, any interested person shall be entitled to appear, to be heard and to submit a written statement for the record. A record of all oral and written statements by all interested persons shall be made by the town clerk and maintained in the town clerk's office. 
(c)  Within fifteen (15) days following the completion of the public hearing, the town manager shall cause to be conducted, on a weekday between 7:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m., a block-by block survey of the proposed residential permit parking zone. 
(d)  Subsequent to completion of the public hearing and survey as set forth herein, the town manager may designate a residential zone or portion thereof provided that: 
(1)  As a result of such survey it is found that: 
a.  The total number of curbside parking spaces occupied by vehicles equals or exceeds seventy-five (75) percent of the number of curbside parking spaces on the public highways and streets of the proposed, or existing, residential permit parking zone; and 
b.  The total number of curbside parking spaces occupied by vehicles whose operators do not reside within the proposed, or existing, residential permit parking zone equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of curbside parking spaces occupied by vehicles. 
(2)  The residents of the proposed residential permit parking zone or portion thereof have experienced difficulty or inability to obtain adequate curbside parking adjacent to or near their residences because of widespread use of available curbside parking spaces by nonresident motorists. 
(3)  There is a likelihood of alleviating, by use of the residential permit parking system established by this division, the problem of nonavailability of parking spaces for the resident motorists of said proposed residential permit parking zone. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
Section 12-602.5. - Designation of limited residential permit parking zones. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to reduce the impact of commuting Virginia Tech students and employees who park in neighborhoods near campus and limit parking availability for residents. The town council finds that this parking by commuters can harm neighborhoods and decrease quality of life, and that it should be regulated as authorized by Virginia Code § 46.2-1230. 
(b)  The town council hereby establishes a limited permit parking zone, which encompasses areas located within one-half-mile of the Virginia Tech campus. The specific boundaries of the approved zone shall be available on a map maintained in the town manager's office. 
(c)  Within this zone, the town manager is authorized to implement parking restrictions on a block by block basis, based on findings by the manager or the manager's designee that on days when Virginia Tech is in session, at least twenty-five (25) percent of the vehicles parked on the streets between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. are registered to persons who do not live on the street or nearby. The manager or designee shall notify all residences in the area that parking restrictions are being considered. Resident concerns about proposed parking restrictions are another factor to be considered. However, all citizen requests for permit parking will continue to go through the process set forth in section 12-602. 
(d)  In a limited residential permit parking zone, the parking restrictions shall be limited to eight (8) continuous hours or less. 
(e)  After the town manager acts to implement limited residential permit parking restrictions for a block, notice of the effective date and parking permit applications shall be delivered to all residences on the block. All of the operational requirements of this division shall apply to limited residential parking issuance, terms, renewals and fees. 
( Ord. No. 1838, § 1, 8-8-17 ) 
Section 12-603. - Authorized continuance of previously established zones. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 12-602, the town manager is hereby authorized and empowered, but not required, to establish and to continue in effect those residential permit parking zones established by council prior to April 13, 1982, without complying with the public hearing and survey requirements of section 12-602. 
Section 12-604. - Posting of residential permit parking signs. 
    Parking signs shall be erected in each designated residential permit parking zone so as to inform an ordinarily observant person that curbside parking on public highways and streets in such zone is prohibited unless the vehicle properly displays a current parking permit issued pursuant to this division. 
Section 12-605. - Notice to residents of designation of residential permit parking zone. 
(a)  Upon the town manager's designation of a residential zone, or portion thereof, as a residential permit parking zone, the town manager shall cause to be mailed to every residence within such designated residential permit parking zone, the following documents: 
(1)  Notice of designation which shall inform the residents in the designated zone of: 
a.  The existence, exact location and designation of the residential permit parking zone; 
b.  The parking restrictions applicable to all vehicles in curbside parking spaces along the public highways and streets in such zone; and 
c.  The procedures to obtain a residential, visitor, business or guest parking permit. 
(2)  Application for residential parking permit on which the applicant is to provide the following information for each vehicle to receive a residential parking permit: 
a.  The name and residential address of the owner of the vehicle; 
b.  The name, residential address, and driver's license number of the principal operator of the vehicle; 
c.  The make model, license plate number and registration number of the vehicle; and 
d.  The signature of the applicant for such residential parking permit. 
Section 12-606. - Permit fee; issuance of permit. 
(a)  There shall be no fee for the first two (2) permits issued for a single residence. The fee for additional permits shall be five dollars ($5.00). No more than four (4) parking permits shall be issued per year per residence. 
(b)  Upon the submission of a completed and validated residential parking permit application and fulfillment of all applicable provisions of this division controlling issuance, renewal or transfer of residential parking permits the applicant shall receive one (1) residential parking permit for the vehicle described in the application. Such permit shall be securely affixed to the vehicle pursuant to regulations promulgated by the town manager. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued if either the registration or operator's license shows an address not within a designated residential permit parking area, unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Town Manager or the Manager's designee that he or she is, in fact, a resident of such area, which may be done by property ownership records or rental agreements. 
(d)  The applicant for, and holder of, the residential parking permit shall be the owner or principal operator of the vehicle for which the parking permit is issued. An applicant for a permit shall present his or her motor vehicle registration and operator's license with the application. 
(e)  A residential parking permit shall be issued only for a vehicle displaying valid state license plates, unless such vehicle is exempted by law from obtaining such plates. 
(f)  Any person who, with fraudulent intent, alters, forges or counterfeits any permit issued under the provisions of this division or who uses any permit knowing it to have been altered, forged, or falsified, shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. The owner of a vehicle who operates it while it displays an altered or forged permit shall be presumed to have knowledge of the alteration or forgery. 
(Ord. No. 1360, § 15, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1809, 1-10-17 ) 
Section 12-607. - Term and renewal of permit; revocation upon holder's termination of residence in area. 
(a)  A permit issued under this division shall expire on June fifteenth of each year. Such permit shall be renewable upon the application and payment of fee as required by the original issuance of a permit. 
(b)  Termination of residence within an area covered by permit issued under this division by the holder of such permit shall automatically revoke such permit. 
(c)  No person shall use any permit issued under this division after it has expired or after it has been automatically revoked as provided in this section. 
Section 12-608. - Permit personal to holder. 
    A parking permit issued pursuant to this division shall be personal to the holder thereof and shall be nonassignable and nontransferable. Such holder shall not permit the use of such permit by any other person. 
Section 12-609. - Effect of permit. 
    A permit issued under this division shall be valid only in the permit parking zone specified therein and only for the specifically described vehicle listed on the application for said permit. Proper display of such permit will permit the parking of said vehicle in the specified residential permit parking zone in accordance with the regulations promulgated by the town manager. A permit issued under this division shall be valid only in the residential permit parking zone for which it is issued. 
Section 12-610. - Permit required. 
    No vehicle shall be parked upon any public highway or street within any residential permit parking zone established pursuant to this division unless there is displayed on such vehicle a current parking permit issued pursuant to this division. 
Section 12-611. - Visitors' permits; temporary permits; business permits. 
(a)  Upon application of any resident, the town manager shall cause to be issued a visitor's parking permit to the resident for a visitor's vehicle. The permit may only be used by persons who do not reside in the permit parking area. Such permit shall be limited to the particular permit parking zone for which issued. The cost for one (1) annual visitor parking permit shall be two dollars ($2.00). An additional visitor's permit may be obtained for ten dollars ($10.00). No more than two (2) visitor's permits shall be issued to any residence. 
(b)  Upon application of any resident, the town manager shall cause to be issued a temporary parking permit to the resident for the guest's vehicle. Such permit shall be limited to the particular permit parking zone for which issued and shall be valid for a period not to exceed one (1) day. Use of temporary parking permits may be restricted to designated streets or portions thereof within the residential permit parking zone. The number of permits so issued shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the number of curbside parking spaces in the permit parking zone or portion thereof for which issued. 
(c)  Upon the application of any resident and any person doing business with such resident, the town manager shall cause to be issued a business parking permit to the resident for the vehicle of the person doing business with the resident. Such permit shall cost ten dollars ($10.00) and be limited to the particular permit parking zone for which issued and shall be valid for a period not exceeding the estimated time, as shown on the application, required to complete the business transaction or thirty (30) days, whichever is less. 
(d)  The parking restrictions imposed by this division shall not apply to any clearly marked delivery or service vehicle when used to make deliveries or provide service to residences within a residential permit parking zone, provided that the parking of such vehicle does not exceed four (4) hours in duration on any given day. The parking of such vehicle within such zone for more than four (4) hours on any given day will require a business parking permit pursuant to subsection (c). 
(Ord. No. 1623, § 1, 10-11-11; Ord. No. 1809, 1-10-17 ) 
Section 12-612. - Withdrawal of designation of residential permit parking zone. 
(a)  Upon the town manager's own initiative or upon a petition signed by a majority of the residents in a residential permit parking zone requesting the withdrawal of the designation of such areas as a residential permit parking zone, the manager shall hold a public hearing on such matter after due notice of such hearing has been published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. Such notice shall be published at least twelve (12) days prior to such public hearing and shall clearly state the purpose, time and location of the public hearing and the location and boundaries of the existing residential permit parking zone. 
(b)  The public hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of section 12-602(b) and a record shall be made of such hearing in accord with the requirements of that section. 
(c)  Within fifteen (15) days following the completion of the public hearing, the town manager shall cause a block-by-block survey to be conducted of the existing residential permit parking zone in accord with the provisions of section 12-602(c). 
(d)  Subsequent to completion of the public hearing and survey as set forth herein, the town manager may decide to withdraw the designation of residential permit parking zone from such residential zone or portion thereof, if such zone or portion thereof fails to meet the requirements of section 12-602(d). 
(e)  Upon the town manager's decision to withdraw the designation of an existing residential permit parking zone or portion thereof, the manager shall cause to be mailed to every residence within the existing residential permit parking zone a notice of the withdrawal of said designation. Said notice shall specify the effective date of the withdrawal of the designation which date shall be not less than fourteen (14) days after the date of mailing of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
Section 12-613. - Regulations. 
(a)  The town manager is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this division for the efficient administration and control of parking within the residential permit parking zones as may be established pursuant to this division which rules and regulations may include, but need not be limited to, the following matters: 
(1)  The content and form of all applications for residential, visitor, guest and business parking permits. 
(2)  The format, display and method of issuance of permits to be issued pursuant to this division. 
(3)  The notification to be given to residents of the zones, before implementation of the permit requirements and the standards for posting of signs or notices to indicate to the public the areas and times for which permits are required. 
(4)  The procedures to be utilized during the public hearings set forth in sections 12-602(b) and 12-612(a). 
(5)  The format and procedures to be utilized in the block-by-block surveys to be conducted pursuant to sections 12-602(c) and 12-612(c). 
(6)  The hours during which parking in such zones shall be permitted only by vehicles displaying permits pursuant to this division. 
(b)  All rules and regulations promulgated under subsection (a) of this section shall be filed in the office of the town clerk. 
Section 12-614. - Violations; penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this division. Except as otherwise provided, any person violating the foregoing provisions of this division shall be subject to a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such violation; provided, however that any person parking in a residential permit parking zone in violation of this division shall be subject to the penalty as set forth in section 12-414. 
( Ord. No. 1809, 1-10-17 ) 
DIVISION 4. - TEMPORARY PARKING FACILITIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1309, § 1, adopted Aug. 13, 2002, amended ch. 2, art. IV, providing for the inclusion of a new div. 4 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

Section 12-650. - Intent and purpose. 
    Throughout the year, Blacksburg is the site of special events that draw thousands of visitors to town. These events include, for example, Virginia Tech home football games and graduation ceremonies. On these occasions, the normal parking facilities of the town and the university are inadequate for the volume of automobiles parked in town. Overflow parking occurs on neighborhood streets, on private reserved parking lots, and on private property that may be inappropriate for the purpose. The overflow parking creates problems such as noise, trash, traffic, and the towing of illegally parked vehicles. This in turn results in a strain on the affected neighborhoods and disgruntled visitors. 
    It is the intent of this division to provide for appropriate areas for overflow parking for special events, for the protection of residential neighborhoods, and for the convenience of visitors to town. 
(Ord. No. 1309, § 1, 8-13-02) 
Section 12-651. - Definitions. 
    "Owner" is the person who holds the recorded title to any parcel of land. 
    "Owner's agent" is a person who holds written authority to represent the owner with respect to the application for a temporary parking facility permit. 
    "Reasonable expenses" are those costs incurred by the town in abating any permit condition violation, including the actual cost paid by the town for the clean up, and a 20 percent administration fee. 
    "Temporary parking facility" is a paved site for surface parking, within a residential zoning district which provides 100 or more parking spaces, or an unpaved site for surface parking within the R&D Zoning District which provides 200 or more parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 1309, § 1, 8-13-02) 
Section 12-652. - Authority to authorize temporary parking facilities. 
    The town council may grant an application to designate appropriate parking facilities for special event parking. When there is insufficient time for town council to act on an application, the town manager is authorized to grant an application which meets the standards and conditions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1309, § 1, 8-13-02) 
Section 12-653. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a temporary parking facility without a permit granted by the town council or the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 1309, § 1, 8-13-02) 
Section 12-654. - Application process. 
    The owner or owner's authorized agent of any property may submit an application for a temporary parking facility permit to the town clerk, no fewer than ten days prior to the first day that the permit will be in use. The application shall be signed by the owner or owner's authorized agent, and it shall demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this division. One application may be used to authorize use of the facility for multiple events. 
(Ord. No. 1309, § 1, 8-13-02) 
Section 12-655. - Application contents. 
(a)  The application shall set forth the dates for which the temporary parking facility permit is requested. 
(b)  The application shall provide the name, address, and telephone number of a single responsible person. This person shall be responsible for the facilities' compliance with the terms of this division. 
(c)  The applicant shall submit a map indicating the typical routes that visitors will take to reach the parking facility, including the number and location of residential areas affected by the traffic. 
(d)  The applicant shall submit a plan indicating the typical routes and means which visitors will take to reach the special event from the temporary parking facility. 
(e)  The applicant shall submit a trash management plan, indicating the number, size, and location of trash cans at the temporary parking facility, and including a schedule for trash collection. 
(f)  The applicant shall submit a bathroom plan, indicating the number and location of bathrooms that will be made available to persons using the temporary parking facility. 
(g)  The applicant shall submit a signage plan, demonstrating the number, size, and location of signs that it will use to direct visitors to the facility. 
(Ord. No. 1309, § 1, 8-13-02) 
Section 12-656. - Standards. 
    The town council or the town manager may grant a permit for a temporary parking facility which meets the following standards: 
(a)  A named person shall be in charge of the temporary parking facility at all times prior to, during, and after the special event. 
(b)  The site may be used as a temporary parking facility no more than twelve (12) days each twelve (12) calendar months. 
(c)  The temporary parking facility shall be established as a parking facility accessory to a permitted principal use of the property. This division does not authorize the development of new parking facilities for special event use only. 
(d)  The temporary parking facility shall contain a minimum of one hundred (100) parking spaces, (two hundred (200) spaces if the facility is not paved) whose dimensions and layout shall meet the standards of the Blacksburg Zoning Ordinance, Appendix A of the Town Code. 
(e)  The temporary parking facility shall not create an undue traffic burden upon affected residential neighborhoods. 
(f)  The operation of the temporary parking facility shall not create a public nuisance. This prohibition applies broadly, and includes a nuisance involving noise, trash, traffic, public drunkenness, disorderly conduct, and urination or defecation in public. 
(Ord. No. 1309, § 1, 8-13-02) 
Section 12-657. - Permit contents. 
    The temporary parking facility permit shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The dates for which the permit is issued. 
(b)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person who shall be in charge of the temporary parking facility. 
(c)  The location of the temporary parking facility. 
(d)  A statement, signed by the applicant, granting the town permission to enter the site to inspect it for compliance with the standards of this division. 
(e)  A statement, signed by the applicant, authorizing the town to perform site clean-up as required to meet the standards of this division, and agreeing to reimburse the town for its reasonable expenses if clean-up is required. 
(f)  Such other information as the town council or town manager shall find necessary to enforce this division. 
(Ord. No. 1309, § 1, 8-13-02) 
Section 12-658. - Permit revocation. 
    A temporary parking facility permit shall not be considered a property right of the holder. It is always subject to revocation by the town council, in its sound discretion, upon a finding that the standards of the permit or of this division are not met. Prior to revoking the permit, council shall notify the holder of the alleged violation, and permit the holder an opportunity to respond. 
(Ord. No. 1309, § 1, 8-13-02) 
DIVISION 5. - PARKING GARAGE FEES 

Sec. 12-660. - Fees on home football game days. 
    There is hereby established and imposed a parking fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per space in the Kent Square Parking Garage on Virginia Tech home football game days, beginning at 12:01 a.m., through 12:00 p.m. and a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per space for other events determined by town council to be special events. 
(Ord. No. 1360, § 16, 4-27-04) 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Open storage of inoperative vehicles in certain zoning districts, § 14-107. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to adopt ordinance similar to this article, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200, et seq. 

Section 12-700. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle: A motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or part thereof that: 
(1)  Is inoperable and is left unattended on public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours; or 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours; or 
(3)  Has remained for more than forty-eight (48) hours on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property, regardless of whether it was brought onto the private property with the consent of the owner or person in control of the private property. 
    Demolisher: Any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer into processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck or dismantle such vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1503, § 1, 10-14-08) 
Section 12-701. - Authority to impound; notice of impoundment. 
(a)  The chief of police may take into custody any abandoned motor vehicle found within the town and may dispose of it in accordance with this article. The chief of police shall notify immediately, but in no case more than fifteen (15) days from the removal, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of record of the motor vehicle and all persons having a record security interest therein, that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall state that the vehicle has been taken into custody and shall afford any person notified an opportunity for an informal hearing before the town manager or his designee on the propriety of the removal and custody by the town of the motor vehicle, with the burden of proof being on the town. The notice shall (i) describe the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned or improperly parked motor vehicle; (ii) set forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held; and (iii) inform the owner and any person having a security interest in the motor vehicle of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle within three (3) weeks after the date of the notice, upon payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges associated with the taking of the vehicle into town custody. 
The notice shall state that the failure of persons notified to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver of such right and an implied consent to the sale of the motor vehicle at a public auction. The notice shall further state, that, should the town manager or his designee at any informal hearing held find that the town's removal or custody of the vehicle is improper or otherwise inconsistent with the regulations set forth in this chapter, the town shall immediately return possession of the motor vehicle to the owner or other person having lawful right thereto, obtaining a receipt therefor; and the town shall itself pay all towing, storage and custody charges with respect to the motor vehicle and shall refrain from prosecuting the owner or occupant for any traffic violation that served as the basis for the removal and storage of the vehicle. 
(b)  If the records of the state division of motor vehicles contain no address for the owner and no address of any person shown by such records to have a security interest in the motor vehicle, or if the identity and addresses of the owner and all persons having security interests cannot be determined with reasonable certainty, notice by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the town shall be sufficient to meet all the requirements of notice pursuant to this section as to any person who cannot be notified pursuant to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. Such notice by publication may contain multiple listings of abandoned motor vehicles and, in any case, shall be made within fifteen (15) days from the date of the removal of the motor vehicle by the town. Such notice shall contain the same contents as the notice required by mail. 
(c)  The consequences and fact of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor vehicle shall be set forth in a notice given in accordance with and pursuant to this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2.1202. 
Section 12-702. - Sale of vehicle at public auction. 
(a)  If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided for in section 12-701, the chief of police shall, notwithstanding the provisions of Virginia Code § 46.2-617 or any provision of this Code or other ordinance, sell the abandoned motor vehicle at public auction. The purchaser of the motor vehicle shall take title to the motor vehicle free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership of others, shall receive a sales receipt at the auction and shall be entitled to, upon application therefor pursuant to Virginia Code § 46.2-1203, a certificate of title and registration card therefor. 
(b)  The sales receipt referred to in subsection (a) above shall be sufficient title only for purposes of transferring the vehicle to a demolisher for demolition, wrecking or dismantling, and in such case no further titling of the vehicle shall be necessary. 
(c)  From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, the town, or whosoever may be authorized to conduct the sale, shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle which resulted from placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody, and the cost of giving notice or any publication. Any remainder from the proceeds of such a sale shall be held for the owner of the abandoned motor vehicle or any person having security interests therein, as their interests may appear, for ninety (90) days, and then shall be deposited in the town treasury. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2.1203. 
Section 12-703. - Disposition of inoperable vehicles. 
    When an abandoned motor vehicle is taken into custody pursuant to this division and such vehicle is, in the opinion of the chief of police, inoperable and by virtue of its condition, cannot be feasibly restored to operable condition, such vehicle may be disposed of to a demolisher, notwithstanding any other provision of this article or the provisions of Virginia Code § 46.2-1205. 
Chapter 13 - NOISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1537, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 2009, amended Ch. 13 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 13, §§ 13-100-13-108, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Section 13-100. - Declaration of policy. 
    At certain levels, noise can be detrimental to the health, welfare, safety and quality of life of inhabitants of the town, and in the public interest noise should be restricted. Mass outdoor social gatherings, using amplified sound, in this town, unless subjected to coordination and planning efforts with the town, create excessive noise and related adverse effects for the citizens of this town. It is, therefore, the policy of the town to reduce, and eliminate where possible, excessive noise and related adverse conditions in the community, and to prohibit unnecessary, excessive, harmful and annoying noises from all sources subject to its police power. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 9-8-09) 
Section 13-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following respective meanings, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Excessive noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. Specific examples of prohibited excessive noise are set forth in section 13-103 of this chapter. 
    Mass outdoor social gathering means a social event conducted outside or in a partially enclosed structure, on public or private land in the town, to which two hundred (200) or more people are invited or expected to attend, as licensees, invitees, or trespassers, or as people who happen to show up, or at which two hundred (200) or more people are actually in attendance. This term may also be referred to as "the event". 
    Motor vehicle means a vehicle defined as a motor vehicle by Code of Virginia (1950), § 46.2-100, as amended. 
    Owner means the person owning, controlling, or possessing land, premises, or personalty. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, society, club, group of people acting in concert, or organization. This term shall not include the federal, state, county, town, city, or local government, or any agency or institution thereof. 
    Public property means any real property owned or controlled by the town or any other governmental entity or institution. 
    Plainly audible means any sound that can be heard clearly by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. When music is involved, the detection of rhythmic bass tones shall be sufficient to be considered plainly audible sound. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or alley. 
    Real property boundary means the property line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one (1) person from that owned by another person. 
    Residential refers to single-unit, two-unit, and multiunit dwellings, and residential areas of planned residential zoning district classifications, as set out in the zoning ordinance, Appendix A, Blacksburg Town Code, as amended. 
    Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity, or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that cause compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at a finite speed. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
    Sound amplifying equipment means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. This term shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
    Sponsor means a person or persons who organizes, supports, specifically benefits from, or is in charge of a mass outdoor social gathering. 
    Town manager means the town manager or the chief of police, or their respective designees. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 9-8-09) 
Section 13-102. - Excessive noise-Punishments. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the first offense, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense within a twelve (12) month period, and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any subsequent offense within the same twelve (12) month period. Each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 9-8-09) 
Section 13-103. - Same-Specific prohibitions. 
    Subject to the exceptions provided in section 13-104, any of the following acts, or the causing or permitting thereof, is declared to be excessive noise, constituting a class 2 misdemeanor and a public nuisance: 
(1)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments, loud speakers and other sound amplification devices. Operating, playing, using or permitting the operation or use of any radio, television, or music player, drum, musical instrument, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other device capable of producing or reproducing sound: 
a.  In such a manner as to be plainly audible across a residential real property boundary or through partitions common to two (2) dwelling units within a building; or 
b.  In such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more from the building in which it is located; or 
c.  When the sound is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more from its source. 
(2)  Horns, whistles, etc. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any horn, whistle or other auditory sounding device on or in any motor vehicle on any public right-of-way or public property, except as a warning of danger. 
(3)  Explosive, fireworks and similar devices. Using or firing any explosives, fireworks or similar devices which create impulsive sound in such a manner as to permit sound to be heard across a residential real property boundary or through partitions common to two (2) dwelling units within a building, or on any public right-of-way or public property, in either case between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. An exception to the hours limitation of this subsection may be granted by town council through a fireworks permit. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible across a residential real property boundary or through partitions common to two (2) dwelling units within a building. 
(5)  Schools, public buildings, places of worship, and hospitals. The creation of any noise on the grounds of any school, court, public building, place of worship, or hospital in a manner that is plainly audible within such school, court, public building, place of worship or hospital and interferes with the operation of the institution. 
(6)  Mass outdoor social gatherings. Using or causing to be used sound amplifying equipment for the purpose of producing music or entertainment for a mass outdoor social gathering, unless such use is registered with the town manager, as provided in section 13-106. 
(7)  Vehicles. 
a.  Operation of a motor vehicle or operation of a motorcycle within the town with a gutted muffler, muffler cutout, straight exhaust, or without an exhaust in good working order, as provided by Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1047 and 46.2-1049. Violations of this subsection shall be considered traffic infractions punishable as provided for in Town Code section 12-113. 
b.  Operation of sound amplifying equipment in a motor vehicle at a volume sufficient to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the vehicle. 
(8)  Construction. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or improvement between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except in the case of emergency under a permit granted by the town manager. In considering the granting, conditioning, or denial of the permit, the town manager shall be guided by the following standards: 
a.  Nature of the emergency; 
b.  Proposed extended hours of operation; 
c.  Duration of period of requested extended hours; 
d.  Character of the area surrounding the construction site; and 
e.  Number of residential units which would be impacted by the extended hours of construction. 
(9)  Pneumatic hammer, chain saw, etc. The operation between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any chain saw, pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other appliance. 
(10)  Animals. The owning, keeping, or possessing of any animal or animals (except dogs, which are covered by chapter 5, article II) which frequently or habitually howl, bark, meow, or squawk in such a manner that creates noise that is plainly audible at least once a minute for ten (10) consecutive minutes (1) inside the confines of the dwelling unit, house or apartment of another or (2) at fifty (50) or more feet from the animal or bird. This subsection shall not apply to any bona fide agricultural activity. 
(11)  Large party public nuisance. A gathering of ten (10) or more people where the gathering is not contained within a structure, but spills outdoors into balconies, yards, common areas, parking lots, or other outdoor spaces, and produces noise that is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more. 
(12)  Commercial vehicle and trash collection vehicle operation. Except in the downtown commercial zoning district, the operation of a commercial vehicle or trash collection vehicle between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in such a manner as to be plainly audible at any residence one hundred (100) or more yards away. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 1657, § 1, 9-11-2012; Ord. No. 1819, § 1, 3-14-17 ) 
Section 13-104. - Same-Exceptions. 
    Sections 13-102 and 13-103 shall have no application to any sound generated by any of the following: 
(1)  Sound which is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or the health, safety, life or limb of any person. 
(2)  Public speaking and public assembly activities conducted without the use of sound amplifying equipment on any public right-of-way or public property. 
(3)  Radios, sirens, horns, and bells on police, fire, or other emergency response vehicles. 
(4)  Parades, fireworks displays, school-related activities, and other such public special events or public activities. 
(5)  Activities on or in municipal, county, state, United States, or school athletic facilities, or on or in publicly owned property and facilities. 
(6)  Fire alarms and burglar alarms, prior to the giving of notice and a reasonable opportunity for the owner or person in possession of the premises served by any such alarm to turn off the alarm. 
(7)  Religious services, religious events, or religious activities or expressions, including, but not limited to music, singing, bells, chimes, and organs which are a part of such service, event, activity, or expression. 
(8)  Locomotives and other railroad equipment, and aircraft. 
(9)  The striking of clocks. 
(10)  Military activities of the Commonwealth of Virginia or of the United States of America. 
(11)  Household tools, lawnmowers, and other lawn care equipment with manufacturer's recommended mufflers installed, between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(12)  Agricultural activities. 
(13)  Lawful discharge of firearms. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 1819, § 1, 3-14-17 ) 
Section 13-105. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1626, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2011, repealed § 13-105, which pertained to sound amplifying equipment-registration and derived from Ord. No. 1537, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 2009. 
Section 13-106. - Same-Permit for use for mass outdoor social gathering. 
(a)  No person shall operate, cause to be operated, or permit the operation on any land of which that person is an owner or on any land of which that person is in control, of any sound amplifying equipment in the town in connection with a mass outdoor social gathering; and no person shall sponsor a mass outdoor social gathering at which sound amplifying equipment is proposed to be used, or is used, unless a permit has first been obtained from the town for such use of sound amplifying equipment as provided in this section. 
(b)  Persons applying for a permit under this section at least thirty (30) days prior to the event shall file with the town manager an application, in writing, giving the following information, hereby ordained as substantive requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Evidence of plans to mitigate and limit the sound from the mass outdoor social gathering, so that the effects of the excessive noise are minimized or eliminated; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner or owners of the site for the event; 
(3)  The name, address, and telephone number of the sponsor or sponsors; 
(4)  The name, address, and telephone number of a contact person representing the sponsor or owner, or both, who shall be available at the provided telephone number during the event and authorized to address problems related to the event that affect private citizens; 
(5)  The proposed location of the event; the boundaries of the event site; a general description of the sound equipment to be used; and the land use characteristics of the area surrounding the site; 
(6)  The expected number of persons to attend the event; 
(7)  The date and beginning and ending times for the use of amplified sound, and the beginning and ending times of the event, which in both cases shall not precede 10:30 a.m. or exceed 10:00 p.m. of any day. 
(8)  An indication that plans and provisions for the following have been addressed: Provision of at least one (1) toilet facility per fifty (50) people; sufficient refuse containers; and provision of ample, designated parking areas, or arrangement for transporting attendees to and from a remote parking area, or both, including if applicable, copies of written permission to use private property, not that of the owner of the site of the event or sponsor, for parking; 
(9)  Evidence that all town and state parking laws, and all town noise control laws, will be complied with; 
(10)  Evidence of plans to clean up the event site and surrounding area after the event; 
(11)  Evidence that notice of the event and names, telephone numbers, and addresses of the owner, sponsor and contact person have been given to representatives of any residential area that might be impacted by the mass outdoor social gathering; 
(12)  Evidence that the owner or sponsor has arranged for the presence during the mass outdoor social gathering of a sufficient (as determined by the town manager) number of monitors. The monitors shall aid the owner or sponsor in the resolution of any problems created by the event, including the conduct of objectionable activities by participants, and may report to the town police any violations of the law that may take place during the event. Nothing in this subparagraph shall afford the monitors town or other police powers or create an agency relationship between the town and the monitors. Monitors shall be acting for the owner or sponsor of the mass outdoor social gathering. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a substantially completed registration form, as determined by the town manager, using the standards of this section, the town manager shall immediately accept in writing the application. 
(d)  The town manager may negotiate with the applicant to lessen, adjust, or accommodate to the peculiarities of the situation, but not increase, the requirements of this chapter, in order to achieve the goals and meet the standards of public safety, comfort, convenience, and welfare, by reducing or limiting excessive noise and other adverse effects from the mass outdoor social gathering. To this end, with the town manager's permission, the applicant may amend the applicant's application up to three (3) days prior to the event. 
(e)  Upon the town manager's satisfaction that the applicant for the permit has met the standards of this section, the town manager on behalf of the town shall issue a written permit called for under this section to the applicant and shall send a copy of the permit to the town clerk for filing. 
(f)  The applicant shall comply with the permit and with the terms of this chapter in the conduct of the mass outdoor social gathering and in the use of amplified sound for a mass outdoor social gathering. The permittee shall keep the permit in the permittee's possession during the mass outdoor social gathering and shall promptly display it to any police officer on request. 
(g)  In case of emergency, or other circumstance calling for the immediate conduct of a mass outdoor social gathering, so that the 30-day deadline set out in subsection (b) cannot be met, the town manager may waive the deadline using the following standards, as applicable: the intensity or immediacy of the emergency or circumstance; lack of alternate means of applicant's accomplishing these same goals by complying with the deadline; and avoidance of nullifying the deadline by a repeated course of conduct. The waiver shall be in writing, shall address these standards as applicable, and shall be filed in the office of the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 1626, § 2, 10-11-2011) 
Section 13-107. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1537, § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 2009, repealed § 13-107, which pertained to warning; violation. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Section 13-108. - Other enforcement. 
(a)  Instead of the criminal enforcement of this chapter, the town may bring a suit for injunction, abatement, or other appropriate civil relief to remedy, correct, or abate excessive noise. 
(b)  Citizens of the town believing that excessive noise constituting a public nuisance exists may utilize the procedure set forth in Code of Virginia (1950), § 48-1 et seq., as amended, or any other legal civil or criminal remedies that may be available to them. 
(Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 9-8-09) 
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Public safety, ch. 17. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 14-100. - Interfering with, etc., town officers and employees. 
    No person shall carelessly or willfully interfere with, hinder or obstruct any officer or employee of the town who is engaged in, en route to or returning from, the performance of official duty, whether such interference, hindrance or obstruction is by threat, assault or otherwise. 
Section 14-101. - Impersonation of town officers and employees. 
    No person shall falsely represent that he or she is an officer or employee of the town, or without proper authority wear or display any uniform, insignia or credential which identifies any town officer or employee; nor shall any person, without proper authority, assume to act as an officer or employee of the town, whether to gain access to premises, obtain information, perpetrate a fraud or for any other purpose; provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a private citizen from making a lawful citizen's arrest for felony or breach of the peace committed in his or her presence. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
State Law reference- Impersonating officer, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-174; unlawful wearing of officer's uniform or insignia, or use of vehicle with "police" shown thereon, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-175. 
Section 14-102. - Disorderly conduct in public places. 
    A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct and a Class 1 misdemeanor if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, such person: 
(1)  In any street, highway, or public building, or while in or on a public conveyance or in a public place engages in conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such conduct is directed; or 
(2)  Willfully or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts any funeral, memorial service, or any meeting of the town council or any department, division or agency thereof, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if such disruption: 
a.  Prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the funeral, memorial service, or the meeting; or 
b.  Has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, the disruption is directed; or 
(3)  Willfully or while intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupts the operation of any school or any activity conducted or sponsored by any school, if the disruption: 
a.  Prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the operation or activity; or 
b.  Has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, the disruption is directed. 
    However, the conduct prohibited under subsection (1), (2) or (3) shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under the Virginia Code, Title 18.2. 
    The person in charge of any such building, place, conveyance, meeting, operation or activity may eject therefrom any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1494(Amd.), 6-10-08) 
Section 14-103. - Posting advertisements, signs, etc., on property of another. 
    Any person who shall (i) put up or cause or direct another to put up any poster, notice or advertisement, or (ii) place or mark any sign, letters or characters upon any building, window, wall, fence, utility pole or other property of another person, or of the town, without first obtaining the consent of the owner or person in charge or control of such property, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 1776, § 1, 10-13-15 ) 
Section 14-103.5. - Placement of unrequested materials on residential property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any commercial or noncommercial advertisement, sample, handbill, brochure, circular, paper or other material of a similar nature on any private residential (including multi-family residential) property on which there is conspicuously posted a "no solicitation" sign or any similar sign that clearly indicates that the owner or occupant of the property does not want to receive such materials. 
(b)  The materials set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not be deemed to include (i) materials delivered or distributed by any federal, state or local governmental agency or (ii) materials delivered or distributed pursuant to an active subscription. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be liable to the town for a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). Any ticket for a violation shall inform the violator that he or she may avoid a trial by paying this penalty to the town by mail or in person at the office of the director of finance within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of the ticket. 
(d)  If a person charged with a violation does not elect to pay the civil penalty within fourteen (14) calendar days, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
( Ord. No. 1776, § 1, 10-13-15 ) 
Section 14-104. - Littering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, deposit, discard or otherwise dispose of small quantities of trash or litter in or upon any public or private property within the town without the private property owner's consent, including but not limited to any street, sidewalk, park, vacant or occupied lot, except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles provided for public use. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be liable to the town for a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50.00). Any ticket for a violation shall inform the violator that he or she may avoid a trial by paying this penalty to the town by mail or in person at the office of the director of finance within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of the ticket. 
(c)  If a person charged with a violation does not elect to pay the civil penalty within fourteen (14) calendar days, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(d)  As used in this section, "trash or litter" means any garbage, refuse or other discarded material, including but not limited to, cigar or cigarette butts, newspapers, fliers, papers and food or food containers. 
( Ord. No. 1776, § 1, 10-13-15 ) 
Cross references- Disposition of dead animals and fowl, § 5-114; solid waste, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Dumping trash, etc., on highway, right-of-way or private property, Code of Virginia, § 33.1346. 
Section 14-105. - Urination or defecation in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or on any sidewalk, street or in any public place, or in any place where other persons are present, unless such urination or defecation be in a bathroom, restroom or other facility specifically designed for such purpose. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
Section 14-106. - Abandoned or discarded refrigerators and other airtight containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two (2) cubic feet of clear space which is airtight, without first removing the door or doors or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed, or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant, or is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319. 
Section 14-107. - Open storage of inoperable vehicles in certain zoning districts. 
(a)  (i)  As permitted by Virginia Code § 15.2-904, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure, or otherwise shielded or screened from view so that it is not visible by someone standing at ground level from outside of the property on which the subject vehicle is located, on any property zoned for residential, commercial or agricultural purposes, any inoperable motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, as such are defined in Virginia Code § 46.2-100. 
(ii)  As used in this section, a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is inoperable if it is not in operating condition, or which for a period of sixty (60) days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for operation, or on which there are displayed neither a valid license plate nor a valid state inspection decal. 
(iii)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business salvage dealer or scrap processor. 
(iv)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subsection, if the owner of such vehicle can demonstrate that he or she is actively restoring or repairing a vehicle, it may remain on the property if it is shielded from view at all times by a durable vehicle cover. If the vehicle is considered to be inoperable only because it lacks a current state inspection and license plate, no cover shall be required. However, in either case, only one (1) inoperable vehicle may be kept on a property. 
(b)  The town manager, through town agents or employees, may remove motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers as hereinabove described, whenever the owner of the premises, after reasonable notice, has failed to do so. In the event any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is so removed, the town manager may dispose of the same, after giving additional notice to the owner of the vehicle. 
(c)  The cost of such removal and disposal shall be chargeable to the owner of the vehicle or premises and may be collected by the town as taxes and levies are collected. Every such cost with which the owner of the premises shall have been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, the lien to continue until actual payment of such costs have been made to the town. 
(d)  Motor vehicles and other vehicles, as described in the Code of Virginia, Title 46.2, Article 6, shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection (a)(ii) above requiring a current license plate or valid state inspection certificate or sticker, but shall meet all other requirements of this section. 
(e)  (i)  Violations shall be punishable by a civil penalty. Any ticket or summons for a violation shall inform the violator that he or she may avoid a trial by paying this penalty to the town by mail or in person at the office of the director of finance within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of the ticket. 
(ii)  If a person charged with a violation does not elect to pay the civil penalty within fourteen (14) calendar days, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(iii)  However, violations shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor in the event three civil penalties have previously been imposed on the same defendant for the same or similar violation, not arising from the same set of operative facts, within a twenty-four (24) month period. The Town Attorney is also authorized to bring legal action, including injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to address continuing violations. 
(f)  As used in this section, "actively restoring or repairing a vehicle" means that the vehicle owner can demonstrate that he or she is actively taking steps to return the vehicle to an operable condition and not simply storing the vehicle on the property. 
(Ord. No. 1244, § 8, 10-2-00; Ord. No. 1368, § 4, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1864 , § 1, 10-1-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1368, § 6, adopted July 13, 2004, provided for an effective date of July 1, 2004. 
Cross reference- Zoning, App. A 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-904. 
Section 14-108. - Public nudity. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to prevent or combat the adverse impacts upon the public health, safety and welfare of nude live entertainment, including violence, sexual harassment, public intoxication, prostitution, the spread of sexually transmitted diseases, and other deleterious effects. 
(b)  As used in this section, state of nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, voluntarily and intentionally appear in public, or in a public place or in a place open to the public or open to public view, in a state of nudity, or to employ, encourage, or procure another person to appear so. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to the exhibition, presentation, showing or performance of any play, ballet, drama, tableau, production or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher learning or other similar establishment which is primarily devoted to such exhibitions, presentations, shows or performances as a form of expression of opinion, communication, speech, ideas, information, art, or drama, as differentiated from commercial or business advertising, promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advertising, promoting, selling or serving products or services or otherwise advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise, such as a hotel, motel, bar, nightclub, restaurant, tavern, or dance hall. 
(Ord. No. 1244, § 9, 10-2-00) 
Section 14-109. - Restrictions on use of firearms, bows and arrows, and similar weapons. 
(a)  No person shall discharge a firearm of any description within the town. This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer in the performance of official duties nor to any other person whose said willful act is otherwise justifiable or excusable at law in the protection of life or property, or is otherwise specifically authorized by law. In addition, this section shall not apply to any otherwise lawful discharge while actually engaged in target practice on ranges or other facilities lawfully established and maintained. It shall also not apply to the use of weapons in hunting as described in section 14-110.5 of this Code, as well as the use of blank ammunition at athletic events, military funerals, theatrical performances or events of similar character. 
(b)  No person shall use a bow or crossbow within the town, except as permitted by section 14-110.5 of this Code. 
(c)  No person shall use a pneumatic gun within the town, except: (i) at approved shooting ranges or (ii) on or within private property with permission of the owner or legal possessor thereof when conducted with reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the bounds of the property. Supervision by a parent, guardian or other adult supervisor approved by a parent or guardian of any minor below the age of sixteen (16) is required for all uses of pneumatic guns in the town. Any minor, whether permitted by a parent or guardian to use a pneumatic gun or not, shall be responsible for obeying all laws, regulations and restrictions governing such use. 
(d)  Violations of this section involving firearms shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. Violations involving pneumatic guns shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(e)  For purposes of this article, the word firearm shall mean any weapon in which ammunition may be used or discharged by explosion. The word ammunition, as used herein, shall mean a cartridge, pellet, ball, missile or projectile adapted for use in a firearm. The term pneumatic gun means any implement designed as a gun that will expel a BB or a pellet by action of pneumatic pressure. Pneumatic gun includes a paintball gun that expels by action of pneumatic pressure plastic balls filled with paint for the purpose of marking the point of impact. With regard to the use of a pneumatic gun, reasonable care means that the gun is being discharged so that the projectile will be contained on the property by a backstop, earthen embankment or fence. The discharge of projectiles across or over the bounds of the property shall create the rebuttable presumption that the use of the pneumatic gun was not conducted with reasonable care. 
(Ord. No. 1563, § 1, 1-12-10; Ord. No. 1611, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1563, § 1, adopted Jan. 12, 2010, amended § 14-109 title to read as herein set out. Former § 14-109 title pertained to discharge of firearms. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to regulate or prohibit discharge of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113; discharging firearms in streets or public places, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-280, 18.2-286. 
Section 14-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1372, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 2004, repealed § 14-110 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to use of weapons in hunting as enacted by Ord. No. 1244, § 10, adopted Oct. 2, 2000. 
Section 14.110.5. - Use of weapons in hunting. 
(a)  Hunting with bow and arrow is permitted in the Agricultural and Forestal District, and the Rural Residential I zoning district on any lot of three (3) acres or more, during seasons declared by the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, including any early, late, or special urban archery season. Hunting with bow and arrow is prohibited in all other zoning districts at all times. 
(b)  Hunting with shotguns and muzzle loading rifles is permitted within the Agricultural and Forestal District, during hunting seasons declared by the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries. Hunting with firearms, except as permitted by this subsection and subsection (c), is prohibited in all other areas of the town at all times. In the Agricultural and Forestal district, it is lawful to hunt groundhogs using a rifle or shotgun. 
(c)  It is unlawful to hunt except from a stand elevated at least ten (10) feet from the ground. This requirement does not apply to groundhog hunting. 
(d)  It is unlawful to hunt within one hundred (100) yards of a dwelling, sidewalk, street, or roadway. 
(e)  As authorized by Code of Virginia § 29.1-527, no person shall shoot or hunt with a firearm or traverse an area with a loaded firearm within one hundred (100) yards of the property line of a public school or a county, town or regional park. Any violation of this subsection is a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(f)  The owner or lessee of land, or other person designated by the director of game and inland fisheries, may use a rifle to kill deer or nuisance species, pursuant to a valid permit from the director of the department of game and inland fisheries. 
(g)  Any person hunting must comply with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations. 
(h)  The discharge of firearms as permitted by this section must be conducted with reasonable care to prevent projectiles from crossing property boundary lines onto the property of other landowners. 
(i)  Except as otherwise designated, any violation of this section is a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1372, § 1, 9-14-04; Ord. No. 1563, § 1, 1-12-10; Ord. No. 1869 , § 1, 7-10-18) 
Section 14-111. - Profane swearing and intoxication in public. 
    If any person profanely curses or swears or is intoxicated in public, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, he shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. In any area in which there is located a court-approved detoxification center a law-enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Ord. No. 1363, § 1, 4-13-04) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388; Authority: Code of Virginia, § 18.2-389. 
Section 14-112. - Disturbing the peace, generally. 
    It shall be unlawful and a Class 1 misdemeanor for any person to disturb the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, or by threatening, challenging to fight, assaulting, fighting or striking another. 
(Ord. No. 1494(Amd.), 6-10-08) 
Section 14-113. - Designation of police to enforce trespass violations. 
    Any owner, lessee, custodian, or person lawfully in charge of real property may, in writing on a form prescribed by the chief of police, designate the police department as a "person lawfully in charge thereof," as those terms are used in Virginia Code § 18.2-119, for the purpose of forbidding another to go or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of such owner, lessee, custodian, or person lawfully in charge. Such designation shall include a description of the land(s), building(s) or premises to which it applies. The designation shall be kept on file in the office of the chief of police or in such other location within the police department as the chief of police deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1507, § 1, 12-9-08) 
ARTICLE II. - WEED AND TRASH ABATEMENT 

Section 14-200. - Definitions. 
    Costs means the cost to the town to abate a weed or trash nuisance, including but not limited to the cost of delivering the notice, labor, equipment, tipping fees, contractor's fees, and any other cost directly associated with the action taken to abate the nuisance. 
    Occupant means any person age eighteen (18) or older who resides in a single-family dwelling, duplex or townhouse, whether or not the person is the lessor. Occupant means any person who possesses and uses commercial or other property, with permission of or by contract or lease with the owner. 
    Owner means the owner of record of real property. 
    Owner's agent shall mean any person appointed or employed by the owner for the purpose of managing the owner's real estate. 
    Reasonable time means a time period not less than forty-eight (48) hours and not more than ten (10) calendar days, which will afford the owner a fair opportunity to abate the violation, given the time of year, type of violation, amount of weeds or trash, and other relevant factors, while achieving the goal of eradicating the public nuisance. The term "reasonable time" with respect to a property with repeat notices of violation within any twelve (12) month time period shall mean a time period not less than twenty-four (24) hours and not more than ten (10) calendar days, with due consideration to the factors listed above. 
    Trash means abandoned personal property, garbage, refuse, litter or debris openly lying on any parcel, which might endanger the health of residents of the town. 
    Weed or weeds means any plant, grass or other vegetation over ten (10) inches in height growing upon private property within the Town of Blacksburg. The term includes any sage brush, poison oak, poison ivy, Ailanthus Altissima (commonly called Tree of Heaven or Paradise Tree), ragweed, dandelions, milkweed, Canada thistle, and any other undesirable growth. The term excludes trees, ornamental shrubbery, vegetable and flower gardens, purposefully planted and maintained by the property owner or occupant free of weed hazard or nuisance. The term excludes cultivated crops, or undisturbed woodland not otherwise in violation. Ground cover purposefully planted for bank stabilization is not included. The term excludes cultivated crops, hay grown, mown, and stored for animal feed, or undisturbed woodland. 
(Ord. No. 1244, § 11, 10-2-00) 
Section 14-201. - Accumulation of trash or weeds prohibited; duty of owner and occupant. 
(a)  Weeds growing or trash lying on any parcel shall constitute a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of real property to permit the accumulation thereon of any trash or weeds. It shall be the joint and several duty of the owner and occupant of any parcel to immediately cut, remove or destroy any and all weeds and to remove trash from his or her parcel. 
(b)  The owner and the occupant of property shall also cut weeds along public sidewalks, curb lines within paper streets or alleys, and within tree wells. 
(c)  Each seven (7) day period that such weeds or trash shall remain uncut or unremoved shall be deemed to constitute a separate misdemeanor offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 5, 8-14-01) 
Section 14-202. - Notice to remove weeds or trash. 
(a)  When the town manager determines that a violation of this article exists with respect to any parcel, the manager shall deliver written notice to the owner, via one (1) or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Mail written notice thereof to the owner, at the owner's address as determined from public records, via certified mail; 
(2)  Mail written notice thereof to the occupant, at the address where the violation is observed, via certified mail; 
(3)  Hand-deliver written notice to the owner, the owner's agent, or occupant personally, noting the date, time and place of personal delivery. 
(b)  The notice shall: 
(1)  Set forth the alleged violation of this article; 
(2)  Describe the parcel of real property by street address or reasonable alternative means; 
(3)  Demand the removal of the weeds or trash; 
(4)  Advise that if the weeds or trash are not removed within a specified reasonable time of the delivery of the notice, the town will proceed to remove them, with the costs thereof together with an administrative fee authorized by this article being specially assessed against the owner and the parcel; 
(5)  Advise that the town's costs together with the administrative fee will constitute a lien against the property in favor of the town, and a personal liability of the owner or occupant; 
(6)  Afford the owner or occupant an opportunity to meet with the town manager for a hearing on the alleged violation, the proposed action and the consequences thereof. 
(c)  The owner or occupant may request a hearing with the town manager, in writing, within the reasonable time period set forth in the notice. In the event the owner or occupant requests a hearing, the town manager shall set a hearing and notify the owner of the time and location of the hearing, to be held within five (5) days from the date of the manager's receipt of the request for a hearing. The town will postpone any enforcement action until after the date and time set for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
Section 14-203. - Town action to abate the violation. 
    If the owner or occupant shall fail to complete the abatement of the weeds or trash within the reasonable time specified in the written notice, the town manager may direct that town forces abate or complete the abatement of the violation. In the alternative, the town manager may contract for this work to be done by a private contractor. 
Section 14-204. - Costs of town action constitute lien on property; administrative fee authorized. 
    In any case where the town has delivered written notice to the owner through one (1) of the methods prescribed in section 14-202 above, the costs of any town action to abate a weeds or trash violation shall constitute a lien against the parcel. In addition, an administrative fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) or twenty-five (25) percent of the cost, whichever is less, but in no event less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), is hereby ordained to be assessed against the owner. The costs plus the administrative fee shall constitute a lien against the parcel, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes, and are enforceable in the same manner. Such liens may be waived in order to facilitate the sale of the property, and may be waived only as to a purchaser who is unrelated by blood or marriage to the owner and who has no business association with the owner. All such liens shall remain a personal obligation of the owner of the property at the time the liens were imposed. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 7, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 1368, § 5, 7-13-04) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1368, § 6, adopted July 13, 2004, provided for an effective date of July 1, 2004. 
Section 14-205. - Exemptions. 
    The requirement of section 14-201(a), to cut, remove, or destroy any and all weeds, shall not apply to any property which meets the following conditions: 
(1)  a.  The parcel is vacant, greater than five (5) acres in size, and is located in a residential zoning district; or 
b.  The parcel is open space (or equivalent) designated as such as a zoning proffer, on a subdivision plat, or as a conservation easement; the parcel is not used for active recreation; and the designation contemplates that the area is set aside to remain in a natural state; or 
c.  The parcel is a public area set aside by the town to remain in a natural state on a temporary or permanent basis. 
(2)  The parcel is free from the accumulation of trash. 
(3)  The owner or occupant mows a buffer swath at the perimeter of the property, ten (10) feet in width where the property line adjoins public or private property in residential, civic, commercial, office, or industrial use; and five (5) feet in width where the property line adjoins a public right-of-way. The vegetation in this buffer area shall not exceed ten (10) inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 6, 8-14-01) 
State Law reference- Authority for article, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-900, 15.2-1115, 15.2-901, 15.2-1429. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES 

Section 14-301. - Definition. 
    Nuisance: The doing of any act or the omission to perform any duty, or the permitting of any condition or thing to exist that endangers life or health, obstructs or interferes with the reasonable or comfortable use of public or private property, tends to depreciate the value of the property of others, or in any way renders other persons insecure in the life or the use of property. Whenever the term nuisance is used, it shall be deemed to mean a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 8, 8-10-99) 
Section 14-302. - Illustrative enumeration. 
    The existence of any of the following activities or conditions is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, provided, however, that this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(1)  Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin. 
(2)  Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located. 
(3)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(4)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(5)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, industrial wastes or other substances. 
(6)  Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground. 
(7)  Any action which unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream, ditch or drainage area. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 8, 8-10-99) 
Section 14-303. - Prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create, cause, permit or maintain a public nuisance. It shall also be unlawful for any person to permit the continuation of a public nuisance after having been served a notice to abate such nuisance. 
(b)  If the owner of a building or premises fails to abate or cause to be abated a public nuisance occurring on his or her property after receiving reasonable notice of its existence, even though such nuisance was caused or maintained by others, such owner shall be deemed to have permitted the continuation of such nuisance. 
(c)  Violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. In addition, each day a public nuisance shall continue after the date set by the town for its abatement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 8, 8-10-99) 
Section 14-304. - Notice to abate. 
    Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the town, a duly designated officer of the town shall give written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists and to the person causing or maintaining the nuisance, if such person be known. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 8, 8-10-99) 
Section 14-305. - Contents of notice. 
    The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this chapter shall contain: 
(1)  An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(2)  The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary. 
(3)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance. 
(4)  A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance and a date by which the nuisance shall be abated. 
(5)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the town will abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person. 
(6)  A statement that the failure to abate a nuisance constitutes a criminal offense punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 8, 8-10-99) 
Section 14-306. - Service of notice. 
(a)  The notice to abate a nuisance shall be given to the owner, the owner's agent, or person in control of the property on which the nuisance is located by delivering a copy of the notice to abate in person. If the person named in the notice to abate cannot be found after a diligent search, such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the last known address of such person and a copy of the notice to abate shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. 
(b)  The notice to abate a nuisance shall be given to a corporation, bank, trust company or other corporate entity who is the owner of such property or who acts as the owner's agent by delivering a copy thereof to its president or such other officer, manager, or director or agent thereof in the town; or if such person cannot be found at the regular office or place of business in the town of such corporation, bank, trust company, corporate entity, by delivering a copy to any employee thereof found at such office or place of business; or if no such person is found in such office or place of business, by leaving such copy posted at the front door of such office or place of business and a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. 
(c)  If the owner of property on which a nuisance is located is unknown or has no place of abode, office or place of business in the town, or after reasonable efforts the town cannot locate a last known address, notice shall be given by order of publication, by publishing a copy of the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least 30 days prior to the abatement of the nuisance and a copy of the notice to abate shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 8, 8-10-99) 
Section 14-307. - Hearings. 
    Upon request, a hearing shall be held before a designated officer of the town other than the officer who initially determined the existence of the nuisance. If, after hearing evidence, the hearing officer finds by a preponderance of the evidence that such a nuisance exists, he or she shall order its abatement; otherwise the notice shall be dismissed. A hearing must be requested in writing at least 48 hours prior to the date given for the abatement of the nuisance. The hearing shall be an informal administrative proceeding rather than a judicial-type trial and while each party shall have the opportunity to present pertinent information and to question adverse witnesses, the rules of evidence shall not apply. The decision of the designated officer is final and not subject to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 8, 8-10-99) 
Section 14-308. - Abatement by town. 
(a)  Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or who was so ordered by a hearing officer to abate the same, the town shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. In order to abate a nuisance, the town may revoke any permit or license issued by the town to the owner of the offending property and which is required by law to conduct the business or activity which gives rise to the nuisance. If the nuisance is not subject to abatement by the town, or if otherwise appropriate, the designated officer shall cause criminal proceedings to be instituted against the person or persons causing or permitting the continuation of the nuisance. 
(b)  When in the opinion of the designated officer, a nuisance results in a condition that creates an immediate, serious and imminent threat to the health or safety of the public, the official may have the necessary work done to abate the nuisance whether or not notice to require the owner or occupant of the premises to abate the nuisance has been given. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 8, 8-10-99) 
Section 14-309. - Costs of town action constitute lien on property; administrative fee authorized. 
(a)  Any and all costs incurred by the town in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a lien against the property upon which such nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven and collected as provided for by law. Such lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied. In addition, an administrative fee of $150.00 or 25% of the cost, whichever is less; however in no event shall the fee be less than $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 8, 8-10-99) 
Chapter 15.5 - PARK REGULATIONS 

Section 15.5-100. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have these meanings: 
    Department means the department of parks and recreation. 
    Director means the director of parks and recreation, or any person whom the director designates to act. 
    Park means town-owned and operated parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, indoor or outdoor athletic recreation facilities, and similar recreational or social facilities and open spaces, both within and outside the town corporate limits. 
    Permit means any written license issued by or under the authority of the director of parks and recreation, permitting the performance of a specified act or acts. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Town means the Town of Blacksburg. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Section 15.5-101. - Park operating policy. 
(a)  The director shall have the authority to ban, temporarily or permanently, individuals from park property for serious or repeated violations of park regulations. To enforce this ban, the director shall issue a written notice to the violator. Any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing within five (5) days to the town manager, or the manager's designee, who shall consider the matter and sustain or overrule the director's decision within fifteen (15) days. The decision of the town manager, or the manager's designee, shall be final. 
(b)  Parks shall be open to the public every day of the year from dawn until dusk, except those park facilities with special hours of operation. Notice of special hours of operation or closings shall be prominently posted. 
(c)  Any section or any part of any park may be closed at any time as the director shall deem reasonably necessary. 
(d)  The director is authorized to adopt and enforce reasonable written rules and regulations for the use of parks that supplement the regulations in this chapter, subject to the approval of the town manager. 
(e)  A copy of this chapter, and any supplemental rules or regulations adopted by the director, shall be available for inspection and review in the director's office and on the parks and recreation website. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Section 15.5-102. - Specific prohibitions. 
    No person shall do the following in any park: 
(1)  Mark, deface, or damage any building, table, bench, sign, monument or other park property. 
(2)  Dig or otherwise remove any dirt, sand, soil, rock or stones, except as permitted in play areas. 
(3)  Construct or erect any building or structure of any kind, whether permanent or temporary, except as authorized by the director. 
(4)  Set up a tent or other temporary shelter, or park any recreational vehicle for the purpose of camping except as authorized by the director. 
(5)  Possess spray paint without permission from the director. 
(6)  Damage, cut or remove any tree or plant. 
(7)  Harm or otherwise attempt to harm any animal, reptile or bird. 
(8)  Pollute or place litter in any fountain, pond, stream or other body of water. 
(9)  Dump or leave any bottles, cans, tobacco products, or any other trash except in proper receptacles. Where receptacles are not provided, all trash shall be carried away from the park. 
(10)  Enter or remain in a park or recreation area while in possession of any alcoholic beverage or illegal drug, unless the alcoholic beverage is being consumed at a specific event authorized by the town manager. 
(11)  Fail to follow posted rules applicable to specific facilities, such as the Skate Park, the Dog Park, the Aquatic Center or Market Square Park. 
(12)  Stage motion picture, video or broadcast television productions involving the use of vehicles, equipment or props on park property. Written permission for such activities may be given when such activities will permit normal use of park facilities by other visitors. The provisions of this section shall not in any way restrict the use of cameras by amateur photographers or news media operations. 
(13)  Conduct picketing except as permitted by sections 15-101 and 15-201. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 1848 , § 1, 3-13-18) 
Section 15.5-103. - Vehicles and traffic. 
(a)  No person shall drive any vehicle on any area except paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may be specifically designated by the director. 
(b)  No go-carts, all terrain vehicles, motorcycles, or any other motorized vehicles shall be operated in any park or recreation area except in areas specifically designated by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Section 15.5-104. - Parking. 
    Vehicles shall be parked only in established or designated parking areas in accordance with posted directions or pursuant to the instructions of any park attendant or police officer who may be present. No vehicle shall be parked in any area of a park for the purpose of washing, repairing or maintaining the same. Violations of this section shall be considered parking violations and be punishable as provided by Town Code section 12-414. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Section 15.5-105. - Bicycles. 
    Bicycles are prohibited except on vehicular roads or paths designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grass area or wooded trail or any paved area reserved for pedestrian use. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Section 15.5-106. - Skateboards, roller-skates, in-line skates. 
    Skateboards, roller-skates and in-line skates are permitted on vehicular roads, on multi-purpose trails, and in other specifically designated areas, such as the Skate Park. Skateboards, roller-skates, or in-line skates are prohibited on sidewalks, basketball courts, volleyball courts, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas not specifically designated for skateboard or skating use. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Section 15.5-107. - Prohibited uses of parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or bathe in any waters or waterways in any park, except those specifically designated. It shall be unlawful for any person to go onto ice on any of the waters except for such areas designated as skating areas and posted as such. 
(b)  No person shall fish in any park waters, whether by the use of hook and line, net, spear, gig, or other device, except as may be designated by the director. 
(c)  No person shall discharge firearms of any description, including pneumatic guns, in any park. The use of bows and arrows, slingshots and any other forms of weapons potentially dangerous to wildlife and to human safety is prohibited. The use of any kind of trapping device is also prohibited. This subsection shall not apply to law enforcement or official town activities. 
(d)  No person shall ride or lead a horse in a park except on areas or trails specifically designated by the director. Where permitted, horses shall be properly trained and ridden with due care. 
(e)  No person shall build or attempt to build a fire or use fireworks except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Section 15.5-108. - Use of picnic areas. 
(a)  Park attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in picnic areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. 
(b)  Unless the director has issued a permit, use of the individual grills at picnic areas, together with tables and benches, shall be on a first-come, first-served basis. 
(c)  Reservations for exclusive use of a shelter may be obtained by paying a fee. 
(d)  No person shall leave a picnic area before all fires are completely extinguished and before all trash is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area for proper disposal. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Section 15.5-109. - Concessions. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any food, beverage, refreshments or any article or service whatsoever in any park or recreation area except by concessionaires authorized by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Section 15.5-110. - Dogs. 
    Dogs are permitted in town parks, subject to the provisions of chapter 5, article 2 of the Town Code. The leash requirements of town Code section 5-200 shall not apply to persons using the town's dog park in accord with its regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Section 15.5-111. - Penalties. 
    Violation of any provision of this chapter may result in ejection from the park and shall be punishable as a Class 4 misdemeanor, unless otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 1615, § 1, 7-12-11) 
Chapter 15 - PARADES AND OTHER OUTDOOR ASSEMBLIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1562, § 1, adopted Jan. 12, 2010, amended Ch. 15 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 15, §§ 15-100-15-206, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; streets and sidewalks, ch. 21. 

ARTICLE I. - SPECIAL EVENTS 

Section 15-100. - Purpose of chapter. 
(a)  The town council enacts this chapter for the purpose of regulating the time, place and manner of special events and demonstrations to accommodate competing demands for the public use of public promenades, sidewalks, streets and other public places. Regulation is necessary to preserve the public peace and safety, to permit free expression on issues of public concern, to protect persons and property, to maintain acceptable conditions of traffic flow upon the streets and sidewalks and to prevent, control or eliminate any potential illegal, injurious or dangerous effects of this lawful activity. 
(b)  The town council does not enact this chapter, or seek through its enforcement, to deny or abridge any person's rights of assembly and free speech or the opportunity for communication of thought and discussion of public questions in public places. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 1, 1-12-10; Ord. No. 1707, § 1, 1-14-14 ) 
Cross references- Open-air concerts and similar entertainments, Chapter 4, Article II; use of streets by private persons, Chapter 20, Article II; Animals and fowl, Ch. 5. 
State Law reference- Power of town to promote public peace, safety, comfort and welfare, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1102. 
Section 15-101. - Special events; permit required. 
(a)  Events for which permit required. No person or entity shall conduct any of the following special events or activities unless a permit has been granted by the town: 
(1)  Parades, processions, marathons, bicycle races and other events utilizing the sidewalks or vehicular travel portion of town streets and highways. 
(2)  Motion picture, video or broadcast television productions, other than news media, involving the staging of vehicles, equipment, props or personnel on public property, including buildings, public promenades, sidewalks, or streets, or requiring the use of town equipment or services. 
(3)  Activities or events requiring a variance from the regulations for parks promulgated by the director of parks and recreation. 
(4)  Any demonstration or protest utilizing the vehicular travel portion of any town street or highway. 
(5)  Picketing or demonstrations by up to ten (10) persons at town parks or properties do not require a permit. Picketing or demonstrating on town sidewalks or promenades is addressed at this section. 
(6)  Picketing or demonstrations by more than ten (10) but less than twenty-five (25) persons at town parks or properties require a written notice, which shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The name, if any, of the organization or group sponsoring or proposing to demonstrate; 
(ii)  The location or locations in the town where the group proposes to assemble and demonstrate; 
(iii)  The date or dates on which the demonstration is to occur and the approximate times; 
(iv)  The name of the person and organization giving notice, as well as contact information (such as a working telephone number or e-mail); 
(v)  Whether or not persons below the age of eighteen (18) years are expected to participate; and 
(vi)  The person or persons coordinating or leading the demonstration and who will accompany it and carry any demonstration registration at all times. 
(vi)  Upon receiving a notice as set out above, the designated officer shall immediately issue a demonstration registration. The registration shall contain all information stated in the notice. Notice shall be given by the registration holder to the chief of police or the chief's designee immediately upon the cessation of such demonstration for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or more. Before resumption of demonstration interrupted for any such period, a new notice shall be given and a new registration issued. 
(7)  Picketing or demonstrations by more than twenty five (25) persons at town parks or properties requires the permit described in this section. 
(b)  Application contents and fee. An application for any permit required by this section shall be made to the town manager or the manager's designee, accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee as provided in section 15-102. The application shall be submitted not less than thirty (30) days nor more than six (6) months prior to the date of the proposed activity. An application for a major event (one involving the closure of more than three (3) blocks or which will last more than two (2) days) shall be filed not less than sixty (60) days nor more than six (6) months before the first date of the proposed activity. The application shall contain the following information, utilizing a form provided by the town manager: 
(1)  Description of the proposed activity; 
(2)  Date, time and location/route of proposed activity and the anticipated number of participants and spectators; 
(3)  Provisions for sanitation facilities, crowd, noise and traffic control, ADA compliance, parking and loudspeaker placement; 
(4)  Food and beverages to be sold or distributed; 
(5)  The designation of an individual or individuals who shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with the provisions of this section and the conditions of the permit; 
(6)  Proposed equipment, vehicles, staging, bleachers, shelters and electricity requirements; 
(7)  If revenue is anticipated to be generated by the activity, the individuals or entity that will benefit therefrom; 
(8)  Such additional information or assurances as the town manager may require. 
(c)  Application submission and processing requirements. 
(1)  A completed application shall be processed and either granted or denied within a reasonable time of receipt, but not more than thirty (30) days from the receipt of any application requiring sixty (60) days' advance filing or fifteen (15) days from the receipt of any application requiring thirty (30) days' advance filing. Such decision shall be in writing, setting forth the conditions of the permit, if granted, or the reasons for denial. The decision shall be provided to the applicant at the address stated in the application. 
(2)  If an application is submitted after the filing deadline set forth in subsection (a), the town manager or the manager's designee may modify the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) upon a demonstration by the applicant, in writing, that circumstances giving rise to the proposed event did not reasonably allow the applicant to apply for a permit within the time prescribed. 
(d)  Permit approval process. 
(1)  The permit shall be granted by the town manager if the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Any proposed use of public property, right-of-way, or facilities will have a public benefit (and not be primarily for one (1) group or organization's private use) and not unreasonably interfere with the normal use of the property, right-of-way or facility by the town or the general public; 
(ii)  The proposed activity does not present a safety or health risk to participants, spectators or the public, or an environmental hazard; 
(iii)  The proposed activity is compatible with the surrounding area or neighborhood, in consideration of anticipated noise, traffic, crowd capacity and other identifiable factors; and 
(iv)  The applicant has provided proof of liability insurance underwritten by insurers acceptable to the town, indemnifying the town against any perils, suits, claims and losses which may arise in connection with the proposed activity. Such coverage shall be in amounts consistent with a standard schedule approved by the town manager, based upon risks associated with each type of event, in consideration of anticipated attendance. 
(2)  When the grounds for anticipated denial of an application can be corrected by altering the date, time, duration, route or location of the event, the town manager or the manager's designee may conditionally approve the application, subject to the applicant's acceptance of such conditions. Any conditions so imposed shall provide only for such modification of the applicant's proposal as may be necessary to achieve compliance with this section. 
(3)  Prior to the final denial of any application, the applicant shall be apprised of the reason therefore and shall be entitled to a hearing before the town council. 
(e)  Permit requirements. The town manager or the manager's designee may impose, as conditions to granting a permit, such further requirements and restrictions as will reasonably protect the public health, safety, welfare, peace and order. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  The payment of a reasonable fee for the use or allocation of town property, equipment and personnel not exceeding the actual costs incurred by the town in connection with the proposed activity; and the posting of a performance bond or other surety securing payment of such fee. 
(2)  The provision of adequate crowd and traffic control, security, fire protection, food handling, waste and refuse disposal, and noise restrictions. 
(3)  For picketing or demonstrations, compliance with the standards of conduct set out at section 15-202. 
(f)  Exceptions for expressive activities. 
(1)  The requirements for insurance and for payment of fees for the use or allocation of town property, equipment and personnel authorized by this section shall not be imposed for any noncommercial gathering, parade or procession held for purposes of expressive activity, upon demonstration, in writing, that the applicant is financially unable to pay the costs of such fees and services and that the right to engage in expressive activity would be unreasonably curtailed by failure to waive such requirements. However, insurance may be required for collateral activities such as food service and the use of structures and equipment that present a demonstrable risk or hazard. 
(2)  Upon demonstration that the enforcement of the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) would unreasonably restrict the right of free expression, the town manager shall waive or reduce the time prescribed for advance notice of an event and impose only such provisions as will not unreasonably restrict the element of timeliness of the expressive activity. Spontaneous demonstrations are addressed below at sub-section (4). 
(3)  For purposes of this section and of section 15-102, expressive activity shall include any public gathering, procession or parade utilizing town streets or parks, the primary purpose of which is the exercise of the rights of assembly and free speech as guaranteed by the First Amendment of the Constitution of the United States. Expressive activities involving demonstrations or other scheduled public gatherings occurring exclusively on public sidewalks are addressed in article II of this chapter. 
(4)  At times, demonstrations may occur spontaneously in response to newsworthy or other high profile events. Such an event may occur without a permit if (i) it is an otherwise lawful assembly conducted in accord within sections 15-202 and 15-203, (ii) it will not unreasonably interfere with other previously permitted or scheduled events, and (iii) it does not block public streets or threaten public safety. Demonstrations that develop in response to a newsworthy event more than forty-eight (48) hours after the event will not qualify as spontaneous demonstrations, even without prior planning or announcement, and sponsors of events outside this time period must apply for and receive a permit in accordance with this article. 
(g)  The town manager, or the manager's designee, shall be authorized to revoke or suspend any permit previously granted: 
(1)  For any material violation of any provisions of this section, the provisions of section 15-202 (if applicable) or of any condition of the permit; 
(2)  For any material misrepresentation, intentional or otherwise, made in connection with the application; 
(3)  When weather conditions render the subject activity unsafe; and 
(4)  When otherwise reasonably required in the interest of public health, safety and welfare or environmental considerations. In the event a permit is revoked or suspended, the permittee shall immediately discontinue, or cause to be discontinued, the activity for which the permit was granted, but shall thereafter be entitled to a hearing concerning the revocation or suspension decision as provided by subsection (d)(3). 
(h)  Any permit granted under the provisions of this section shall remain in effect for the duration of the proposed activity, except as provided for in the preceding sub-section (g). 
(i)  The granting of any permit required by this section shall not eliminate any requirement for any business license, any other permit(s) which may be prescribed by any other federal, state or local statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations, or compliance with any other applicable federal, state or local statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations 
(j)  The town manager may designate one (1) or more officers or employees of the town to administer the provisions of this section. The town manager is authorized to develop administrative directives or standard operating procedures to implement this article. 
(k)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 1, 1-12-10; Ord. No. 1707, § 1, 1-14-14 ; Ord. No. 1848 , § 1, 3-13-18) 
Section 15-102. - Permit processing fee. 
    A nonrefundable processing fee, as follows, shall be submitted with the completed application for a special event: 
(a)  Festival, art show or event held for two (2) or more consecutive days ..... $150.00 
(b)  (i) 
Parade, procession, march, footrace, bicycle race, other event requiring closure of sidewalk, street or thoroughfare ..... 75.00 
(ii)  Race, march or procession requiring temporary closure or monitoring of sidewalk, street or thoroughfare ..... 25.00 
(iii)  Festival, art show or event held for one (1) day ..... 75.00 
(iv)  Commercial motion picture or television production for one (1) day ..... 75.00 
(c)  Activities or events requiring a variance from park regulations ..... 50.00 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 1, 1-12-10) 
ARTICLE II. - PICKETING AND DEMONSTRATIONS 

Section 15-200. - Definitions. 
    The terms picket , pickets and picketing as used herein are deemed to include "demonstrators," persons participating in vigils and any action primarily promoting or objecting to a policy upon those portions of the public ways not used primarily for vehicular parking and moving traffic and not constituting a parade. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 1, 1-12-10) 
Section 15-201. - Picketing permitted; notice of intent and receipt required. 
    Peaceful picketing shall be permitted in the town provided the same is done under the following conditions: 
(a)  No picketing shall be conducted on the public ways of this town and no person shall participate in the same unless notice of intent to picket has been given to the chief of police or the chief's designated representative, and unless a receipt of such notice has been issued. 
(b)  A group of fewer than ten (10) persons may give written notice of intent to picket but is not required to do so. A group of ten (10) or more persons shall give notice in writing and the notice given shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, if any, of the organization or group sponsoring or proposing to picket; 
(2)  The location or locations in the town where the pickets propose to assemble and demonstrate; 
(3)  The date or dates on which the picketing is to occur and the approximate times; 
(4)  The name of the person and organization giving notice of intent to picket, as well as contact information (such as a working telephone number or e-mail); 
(5)  Whether or not persons below the age of eighteen (18) years are expected to participate; and 
(6)  The person or persons to be in charge of the activity and who will accompany it and carry any receipt of notice at all times. 
(c)  Upon receiving a notice set out, the designated officer shall immediately issue a picketing registration. The registration shall contain all information stated in the notice. Notice shall be given by the registration holder to the chief of police or the chief's designee immediately upon the cessation of such picketing for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or more. Before resumption of picketing interrupted for any such period, a new notice shall be given and a new registration issued. 
(d)  Picketing or demonstrating on town property such as parks or streets is subject to the permit requirements in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 1, 1-12-10; Ord. No. 1848 , § 1, 3-13-18) 
Section 15-202. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  Picketing shall be conducted only on portions of the public ways not used primarily for vehicular parking or moving traffic. 
(b)  Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs; however, such written or printed placards or signs shall not at any time nor in any way (i) be detached from any supporting poles or rods or (ii) obstruct, interfere with, or block the sidewalk or public way. Pickets may not carry (i) clubs, sticks or similar items, (ii) wear masks as prohibited by Virginia Code § 18.2-422, (iii) carry shields or (iv) use pepper spray or similar items as prohibited by Virginia Code § 18.2-312. Candles are permitted but torches or any other burning substances attached to a stick or rod are not. 
(c)  If pickets promoting different objectives, causes, actions or policies desire to use a sidewalk that is already used for picketing, the chief of police or the chief's designated agent shall allot a number of pickets promoting each objective to use such sidewalk on an equitable basis, proportionate to the number of objectives being promoted. 
(d)  Pickets shall be restricted to the use of the outermost half of the sidewalk or other public way nearest the street and shall not at any time nor in any way obstruct, interfere with, or block: persons entering or exiting from vehicles; persons crossing streets or otherwise using the public way; the entrance or exit to any building or access to property abutting the street or sidewalk; or pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(e)  No person observing, engaging in, or assisting in picketing shall bring any vicious animal to, or allow it to remain in the immediate picketing area. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for a group of ten (10) or more persons to picket without filing a notice as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 1, 1-12-10; Ord. No. 1848 , § 1, 3-13-18) 
Section 15-203. - Interference with picket prohibited; police authority to disperse crowds. 
(a)  Pickets or demonstrators promoting different objectives are subject to the restrictions in preceding section 15-202 (b). It shall be unlawful for any person to physically interfere with pickets in the use of the sidewalk or to address profane, indecent, abusive, or threatening language to or at those pickets which would tend to provoke the pickets or others to a breach of the peace. 
(b)  Town police officers may, in the event of the assemblage of persons in such numbers as to tend to intimidate pickets pursuing their lawful objective through numbers alone or through use of inflammatory words, threats of violence or violence, direct the dispersal of persons so assembled and may arrest any person who fails to absent himself or herself from the place of such assemblage when so directed by the police. To preserve public safety, peace or order, the chief of police, or the chief's designee, may also physically separate hostile groups of persons promoting different causes through the use of barricades or similar devices as required to keep hostile groups apart from one (1) another. 
(c)  Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk shall be obstructed by a crowd, whether or not the crowd assembles as a result of or in connection with picketing, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move on when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to so disperse or move on when so directed by a police officer as herein provided. 
(d)  The town manager is authorized to develop administrative directives or standard operating procedures to implement this article. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 1, 1-12-10; Ord. No. 1848 , § 1, 3-13-18) 
Section 15-204. - Penalty for violation. 
    The provisions of this article are mandatory, and not merely directory, and failure to comply with its provisions is hereby declared to be unlawful and punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1562, § 1, 1-12-10) 
Chapter 16 - PURCHASING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1411, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2006, amended ch. 16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 16 pertained to similar subject matter. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 16-100. - Title, purpose and application of chapter 
(a)  This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Procurement Code of the Town of Blacksburg. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in public purchasing by the town, to maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement and to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(c)  This chapter applies to contracts for the procurement of goods, services, insurance and construction entered into by the town involving every expenditure of public funds for public purchasing. However, this chapter does not apply to any grants or contracts between the town and the commonwealth or other governments. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the town from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, bequest, or cooperative agreement. 
Section 16-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Construction: Building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any structure, building or highway and any draining, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property. This term does not include the routine operation, routine repair or routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings, or real estate. 
    Contract: All types of agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement of goods, services, insurance or construction. 
    Contractor: Any person having a contract with the town. 
    Employee: An individual drawing a salary or wages from the town, whether elected or not; any noncompensated individual performing personal services for the town. 
    Incentive contracts: A contract in which the contractor has the opportunity to share in any cost savings realized by the town when project costs are reduced by such contractor, without affecting project quality, during construction of the project. 
    Informality: A minor defect or variation of a bid or proposal from the exact requirements of the invitation to bid, request for proposal, specifications, or bid form, which does not substantially affect the price, quality, quantity or delivery schedule for the goods, services or construction being procured. 
    Insurance: A contract whereby, for a stipulated consideration, one person undertakes to compensate the other for loss on a specified subject for specified perils. 
    Person: Any business, individual, union, committee, club other organization or group of individuals. 
    Professional services: Work performed by an independent contractor within the scope of the practice of accounting, architecture, land surveying, landscape architecture, law, dentistry, medicine, actuarial services, optometry, pharmacy, or professional engineering. 
    Recycled paper and paper products: Any paper or paper product meeting the Environmental Protection Agency Recommended Content Standards as defined in 40 C.F.R. Part 250. 
    Responsible bidder or offeror: A person who has the capability, in all respects, to perform fully the contract requirements and the moral and business integrity and reliability which will assure good faith performance, and who has been prequalified, if required. 
    Responsive bidder: A person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the invitation to bid. 
    Services: Any work performed by an independent contractor wherein the service rendered does not consist primarily of acquisition of equipment or materials or the rental of equipment, materials and supplies. 
    Sheltered workshop: A work-oriented rehabilitative facility, with a controlled working environment and individual goals, which utilizes work experience and related services for assisting handicapped persons to progress toward normal living and a productive vocational status. 
Section 16-103. - Administration of chapter. 
    The director of finance shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter. The director of finance is designated the purchasing agent for the town. He or she may delegate this authority to a responsible person within the finance department. 
Section 16-104. - Availability of funds as prerequisite to purchase. 
(a)  The purchasing agent shall refuse to issue any purchase order until there has been certification that there is to the credit of the requesting department a sufficient unencumbered appropriate balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order. 
(b)  Before any purchase is made, the purchasing agent shall determine the availability of sufficient funds to cover the purchase. If funds are unavailable, the department head shall be responsible for initiating the request for funds. 
Section 16-105. - Formulation of specifications. 
    It shall be the purchasing agent's responsibility to formulate, in conjunction with the user department, nonrestrictive specifications to ensure quality levels equal to the intended use of an item. 
Section 16-106. - Cooperative procurement. 
    The town may participate in, sponsor, conduct or administer cooperative procurement agreements with one or more other public bodies for the purpose of combining requirements to increase efficiency or reduce administrative expenses. As provided by Virginia Code § 2.2-4304, the town may make purchases from another public body's contract. 
State Law reference- Authority for cooperative procurement, Code of Virginia § 2.2-4304. 
Section 16-107. - Nondiscrimination and drug-free workplace provisions required in certain contracts. 
    Every contract of over $10,000.00 shall include nondiscrimination and drug-free workplace provisions required by Virginia Code §§ 2.2-4311 and 2.2-4312. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 2.2-4311 and 2.2-4312. 
Section 16-108. - Types of contracts permitted. 
(a)  Any type of contract which will promote the best interest of the town may be used, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The use of a cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract is prohibited except in case of emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare. A policy or contract of insurance or prepaid coverage having a premium computed on the basis of claims paid or incurred, plus the insurance carrier's administrative costs and retention stated in whole or in part as a percentage of such claims, shall not be prohibited by this section. 
(2)  A cost reimbursement contract may be used only when a determination is made in writing that such a contract is likely to be less costly to the town than any other type or that it is impracticable to obtain the supplies, services or construction required except under such a contract. 
(b)  The town may award incentive contracts. The fee, if any, charged by the project engineer or architect for determining cost savings shall be paid as a separate cost and shall not be calculated as part of any cost savings. 
Editor's note- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4331. 
Section 16-109. - Multi-term contracts. 
    A contract for goods, services or insurance may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interests of the town, provided the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of the contract. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds therefor. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be canceled without liability to the town. 
Section 16-110. - Progress payments and retainage on construction contracts. 
(a)  In any public contract for construction which provides for progress payments in installments based upon an estimated percentage of completion, the contractor shall be paid at least 95 percent of the earned sum when payment is due, with not more than five percent being retained to ensure faithful performance of the contract. All amounts withheld may be included in the final payment. 
(b)  Any subcontract for a public project which provides for similar progress payments shall be subject to the same limitation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §2.2-43333. 
Section 16-111. - Modification of contracts. 
    A public contract may include provisions for modification of the contract during the performance, but no fixed-price contract may be increased by more than 25 percent of the amount of the contract or $50,000.00, whichever is greater, without the advance written approval of the town council. In no event may the amount of any contract, without adequate consideration, be increased for any purpose, including, but not limited to, relief of an offeror from the consequences of an error in its bid or offer. 
Section 16-112. - Unauthorized purchases. 
    No town employee shall purchase or contract for any goods, services, insurance or construction within the purview of this chapter, other than by and through the purchasing system, and any purchase order or contract made contrary to the provisions of this section is void and the town shall not be bound thereby. 
Section 16-113. - Public access to procurement information. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, all proceedings, records, contracts and other public records relating to procurement transactions shall be open to the inspection of any citizen or any interested person, in accordance with the Virginia Freedom of Information Act. 
(b)  Cost estimates relating to a proposed transaction prepared by or for the town shall not be open to public inspection. 
(c)  Any competitive sealed bidding bidder, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect bid records within a reasonable time after the opening of all bids but prior to award, except in the event that the town decides not to accept any of the bids and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, bid records shall be open to public inspection only after award of the contract. 
(d)  Any competitive negotiation offeror, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect proposal records within a reasonable time after the evaluation and negotiations of proposals are completed but prior to award, except in the event that the town decides not to accept any of the proposals and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, proposal records shall be open to public inspection only after award of the contract. 
(e)  Any inspection of procurement transaction records under this section shall be subject to reasonable restrictions to ensure the security and integrity of the records. Trade secrets or proprietary information submitted by a bidder, offeror or contractor in connection with a procurement transaction or prequalification application submitted pursuant to Virginia Code § 2.2-4317(B) shall not be subject to public disclosure under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act. However, the bidder, offeror, or contractor shall (i) invoke the protections of this provision prior to or upon submission of the data or other materials, (ii) identify the data or other materials to be protected, and (iii) state the reasons why protection is necessary. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4342, Freedom of Information Act, § 2.2-3700 et seq. 
Section 16-114. - Disposal of surplus property. 
(a)  All town departments shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such time and in such form as he or she shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. 
(b)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to other departments. 
(c)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies which have been deemed unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies. 
(d)  All sales of property pursuant to this section shall be sold on the basis of competitive bids, wherever feasible, to obtain the highest price. A public auction of surplus property will satisfy this requirement. The purchasing agent may require sealed bids, in his or her discretion. 
Section 16-115. - Recycled paper and paper products. 
    In determining the award of any contract for paper or paper products, the purchasing agent shall award the contract to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder offering recycled paper or paper products of a quality suitable for the purpose intended, so long as the bid price is not more than ten (10) percent greater than the bid price of the lowest responsive and responsible bidder offering a product that does not qualify as recycled paper and paper products under this section. 
Section 16-116. - When town council to authorize contract. 
    Town council shall authorize the award of any contract: 
(1)  For legal services provided by outside counsel reasonably expected to exceed twenty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($22,500.00). Council authorization shall not be necessary for legal services required for the issuance of bonds. 
(2)  For the construction or remodeling of any building in excess of eighty thousand dollars ($80,000.00). 
(3)  For professional services in excess of sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) in the aggregate for any one (1) project. 
(Ord. No. 1455, § 2, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1552, § 1, 12-8-09; Ord. No. 1727, § 1, 6-10-14 ; Ord. No. 1831, § 1, 5-9-17 ) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 15.2-1520. 
Section 16-117. - Prequalification of bidders. 
(a)  The purchasing agent is authorized to prequalify bidders prior to any solicitation of bids or proposals, whether for goods, services, insurance or construction, by requiring prospective bidders to submit such information as the purchasing agent shall deem appropriate, including samples, financial reports and references; provided, however, that opportunity to prequalify shall be given to any prospective bidder who has not been suspended or debarred under this chapter. 
(b)  Any decision not to prequalify a prospective contractor shall be made in writing, listing reasons for the decision. 
(c)  Prequalification of a bidder shall not constitute a conclusive determination that the bidder is responsible, and such bidder may be rejected as nonresponsible on the basis of subsequently discovered information. 
(d)  Failure of a bidder to prequalify with respect to a given procurement shall not bar the bidder from seeking prequalification as to future procurements, or from bidding on procurements which do not require prequalification. 
Section 16-118. - Same-Construction contracts. 
    Any prequalification of prospective contractors for construction shall be conducted pursuant to a prequalification process adopted by the town council. The town may deny prequalification to any construction contractor only if it finds one of the factors listed in Virginia Code § 2.2-4317(C). 
Section 16-119. - Determination of ineligibility. 
    The purchasing agent shall determine whether a prospective bidder shall be prequalified to bid. If the purchasing agent determines that a prospective bidder is ineligible, he or she will proceed as follows: 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a written determination of disqualification or ineligibility, the purchasing agent shall (i) notify the prospective bidder in writing of the results of the evaluation, (ii) disclose the factual support for the determination, and (iii) allow the prospective bidder an opportunity to inspect any documents which relate to the determination, if so requested within five (5) business days after receipt of the notice. 
(2)  Within ten (10) business days after receipt of the notice, the prospective bidder may submit rebuttal information challenging the evaluation. The purchasing agent shall issue his or her written determination of disqualification or ineligibility based on all information in the town's possession, including any rebuttal information, within five (5) business days of the date the town received such rebuttal information. 
(3)  If the evaluation reveals that the prospective bidder, offeror or contractor should be allowed permission to participate in the public contract, the purchasing agent shall cancel the proposed disqualification action. If the evaluation reveals that the bidder should be refused permission to participate, or disqualified from participation, in the public contract, the purchasing agent shall so notify the bidder, offeror or contractor. Such notice shall state the basis for the determination, which shall be final unless the bidder appeals the decision within ten days after receipt of the notice by instituting legal action in the Montgomery County Circuit Court. 
(4)  If, upon appeal, it is determined that the action taken was arbitrary or capricious, or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, the Virginia Code, or this chapter, the sole relief shall be restoration of eligibility. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 2.2-4357. 
Section 16-120. - Debarment or suspension of prospective contractors. 
(a)  The purchasing agent is authorized to debar a person, for cause, from consideration for award of contracts. 
(b)  Debarment procedures. The following procedures shall govern the debarment decision-making process: 
(1)  Notice to contractor. Debarment shall be initiated by advising the prospective contractor and any specifically named affiliate, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that debarment is being considered. Such notice shall include the reasons for the proposed debarment in terms sufficient to put the contractor on notice of the conduct or transaction upon which it is based. 
(2)  Period of debarment. Debarment shall be for a period commensurate with the seriousness of the cause, as determined by the purchasing agent, but in no event for a period to exceed three years. 
Section 16-121. - Grounds for debarment. 
    The causes or grounds for debarment include: 
(1)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract. 
(2)  Conviction under state and federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects responsibility as a town contractor. 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals. 
(4)  Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the purchasing agent to be so serious as to justify debarment: 
a.  Deliberate failure, without good cause, to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or 
b.  A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment. 
(5)  Any other cause the purchasing agent determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a town contractor, including debarment by another governmental entity for any cause and violation of the ethical standards set forth in this chapter and the Virginia Code. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 15.2-1520 
Section 16-122. - Appeal of proposed debarment. 
(a)  Submission of appeal by contractor. The prospective contractor may submit an appeal to the purchasing agent, within 15 days after receipt of notice of the proposed debarment, including any additional specific information that raises a genuine dispute of material fact. The purchasing agent shall render a decision in writing within 15 days after receipt of the contractor's appeal. 
(b)  Appeals. The decision of the purchasing agent shall be final unless the prospective contractor appeals by instituting legal action as provided in the Virginia Public Procurement Act. 
Sections 16-123-16-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONTRACT FORMATION 

Section 16-200. - Methods of procurement. 
(a)  Any contracts with non-governmental contractors for the purchase or lease of goods, or for the purchase of services, insurance or construction shall be awarded after competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation, unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(b)  The purchasing agent may establish written small purchase procedures not requiring competitive sealed bids or competitive negotiation for single or term contracts for goods or services other than professional services if the aggregate of all phases is not expected to exceed $50,000.00; however, the small purchase procedures shall provide for competition wherever practicable. Purchases that are expected to exceed $30,000.00 shall require the written informal solicitation of a minimum of four bidders. 
(c)  No person or firm who has been engaged as an architect or engineer for a project shall be eligible to bid on such contract or to have same awarded to him or it. 
(d)  No bid from any bidder who is not properly licensed under Virginia Code (1950), Title 54, Chapter 7 as amended, shall be received or considered. 
(e)  Upon a determination made in advance by the town manager and set forth in writing that competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous to the public, goods, services, or insurance may be procured by competitive negotiation. The town manager shall document the basis for this determination in writing. 
(f)  Construction shall be procured by competitive sealed bidding, except that competitive negotiation may be used upon a written determination made in advance by the town manager that competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous to the public, which writing shall document the basis for this determination: 
(1)  For the alteration, repair, renovation or demolition of buildings when the contract is not expected to cost more than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00); 
(2)  For the construction of highways and any draining, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property; or 
(3)  As permitted by Virginia Code § 2.2-4308 for design-build or construction management contracts. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia § 2.2-4303. 
Section 16-201. - Requirement of competitive negotiation. 
(a)  Professional services shall be procured by competitive negotiation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the purchasing agent is authorized to establish written procedures for contracts to be entered into without requiring competitive negotiation for single or term contracts if the aggregate or the sum of all phases is not expected to exceed sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00); however, such small purchase procedures shall provide for competition wherever practicable. 
(b)  The process for competitive negotiation shall be as provided by Virginia Code § 2.2-4301. 
(Ord. No. 1552, § 1, 12-8-09; Ord. No. 1727, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4301. 
Section 16-202. - Competitive procurement on state-aid projects. 
    No contract for the construction of any building or for an addition to or improvement of an existing building for which state funds of not more than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) in the aggregate or for the sum of all phases of a contract or project, either by appropriation, grant-in-aid or loan, are used or are to be used for all or part of the cost of construction shall be let except after competitive bidding or after competitive negotiation as provided under Virginia Code § 2.2-4303(D). The procedure for the advertising for bids and letting of the contract shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
Section 16-203. - Exceptions to requirement of competitive procurement-Sole source. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, contracts may be entered without competition for goods, professional services, services or construction where there is only one (1) source practicably available for the needed goods, professional services, services or construction. This determination must document the basis for the decision and be made in writing. The town manager or designee must post a written notice stating that only one source was determined to be practicably available, and identifying that which is to be procured, the contractor selected, the date on which the contract was or will be awarded. This notice shall be posted in a designated public area or published in a newspaper of general circulation on the day the town awards or announces its decision to award the contract, whichever occurs first. 
State Law reference- Authority for this section, Code of Virginia § 2.2-4303. 
Section 16-204. - Same-Emergency procurement. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, in the case of an emergency, a contract may be awarded without competitive sealed bidding or competitive bidding, however, such procurement shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. In addition, the town manager or designee shall issue a written notice stating that the contract is being awarded on an emergency basis, and identifying that which is being procured, the contractor selected, and the date on which the contract was or will be awarded. This notice shall be posted in a designated public area or published in a newspaper of general circulation on the day the town awards or announces its decision to award the contract, whichever occurs first, or as soon thereafter as is practicable. 
State Law reference- Authority for this section, Code of Virginia § 2.2-4303. 
Section 16-205. - Same-Insurance and electric utility services. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, contracts may be entered without competition for insurance and/or electric utility services if purchased through an association of which the town is a member if the association was formed and is maintained for the purpose of promoting the interest and welfare of and developing close relationships with similar public bodies, provided such association has procured the insurance or electric utility services by use of competitive principles and provided the town has made a determination in advance after reasonable notice to the public and set forth in writing that competitive sealed bidding and competitive negotiation are not fiscally advantageous to the public. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. 
State Law reference- Authority for this section, Code of Virginia § 2.2-4345(13). 
Section 16-206. - Same-Legal services. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, contracts may be entered without competition for legal services or expert witnesses or other services associated with litigation or regulatory proceedings. 
State Law reference- Authority for this section, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4344. 
Section 16-207. - Same-Sheltered workshop. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, contracts may be entered without competition for goods or services (i) produced or performed by a nonprofit sheltered workshop or other nonprofit organization which offers transitional or supported employment services serving the handicapped, or by (ii) persons, schools or workshops under the supervision of the Virginia Department for the Visually Handicapped. 
State Law reference- Authority for section, Code of Virginia § 2.2-4344. 
Section 16-208. - Same-Existing contract. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, contracts may be entered without competition when the term of an existing contract for professional services or services is extended to allow completion of work undertaken but not completed during the original term of the contract. 
Section 16-209. - Power to reject bids and proposals. 
    An invitation to bid, request for proposals, any other solicitation, and any and all bids or proposals may be canceled or rejected. The reasons for cancellation or rejection shall be made part of the contract file. The Town shall not cancel or reject an invitation to bid, a request for proposal, any other solicitation, bid or proposal pursuant to this section solely to avoid awarding a contract to a particular responsive and responsible bidder or offeror. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia § 2.2-4319. 
Sections 16-210-16-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDDING PROCEDURES 

Section 16-300. - Invitation for bids; public notice. 
(a)  Written invitations for bids shall be issued containing or incorporating by reference the specifications and contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. 
(b)  Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date set forth therein for the receipt of bids. Such notice shall be posted in a designated public area and may include publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the community. The advertisement shall state the place where bidders may examine any plans and specifications for the work, whether the contract will be let for a lump sum or on a cost plus basis, and the time and place where the bids for the work will be opened. The procedure for withdrawal of a bid shall be included in any advertisement for a construction contract. 
(c)  In addition to public posting or advertising, bids may also be solicited directly from potential contractors. Any such direct solicitation shall include appropriate businesses selected from a list made available by the Virginia Department of Minority Business Enterprise. 
Section 16-301. - Brand names. 
    Unless otherwise provided in the invitation to bid, the name of a certain brand, make or manufacturer shall not restrict bidders to the specific brand, make or manufacturer named; it conveys the general style, type, character and quality of the article desired, and any article which the town, in its sole discretion, determines to be the equal of that specified, considering quality, workmanship, economy of operation and suitability for purposes intended, shall be accepted. 
Section 16-302. - Bid bonds. 
(a)  Except in cases of emergency, all bids or proposals for construction contracts in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall be accompanied by a bid bond from a surety company selected by the bidder which is legally authorized to do business in Virginia, as a guarantee that if the contract is awarded to such bidder, that bidder will enter into the contract for the work mentioned in the bid. The amount of the bid bond shall not exceed five (5) percent of the amount bid. 
(b)  No forfeiture under a bid bond shall exceed the lesser of (1) the difference between the bid for which the bond was written and the next low bid, or (2) the face amount of the bid bond. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 2.2-4336. 
Section 16-303. - Bid openings; acceptance; waiver of informalities. 
(a)  All bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one (1) or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid, together with the name of each bidder, shall be recorded. The record on each bid shall be open to public inspection. 
(b)  All bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized by the Code of Virginia (1950) as amended, or by this chapter. The town, in its sole discretion, may elect to waive an informality in a bid or proposal. 
(c)  No statement or notation whatsoever, written, printed, typed or otherwise set out, on any bid envelope, including any addition or deduction in contract price, shall be recognized or considered in the review and tabulation of any bid or offer or for any other purpose. 
Section 16-304. - Withdrawal of bid due to error. 
(a)  A bidder for public construction contract, other than a contract for construction or maintenance of public highways, may withdraw a bid from consideration, if the price bid was substantially lower than the other bids due solely to a mistake therein, provided the bid was submitted in good faith and the mistake was a clerical mistake, as opposed to a judgment mistake, and was actually due to an unintentional arithmetic error or an unintentional omission of a quantity of work, labor or material made directly in the compilation of a bid, which unintentional arithmetic error or unintentional omission can be clearly shown by objective evidence drawn from inspection or original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid sought to be withdrawn. If a bid contains both clerical and judgment mistakes, a bidder may withdraw the bid from consideration if the price bid would have been substantially lower than the other bids due solely to the clerical mistake, that was an unintentional arithmetic error or an unintentional omission of a quantity of work, labor or material made directly in the compilation of a bid which shall be clearly shown by objective evidence drawn from inspection of original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid sought to be withdrawn. The procedure for such bid withdrawal shall be stated in the advertisement for bids and shall be as follows: Any bidder claiming the right to withdraw a bid shall give notice in writing of this claim of right to withdraw the bid within two (2) business days after conclusion of the bid opening procedure and shall submit original work papers with such notice. 
(b)  Procedures for the withdrawal of bids of other than construction contracts may be established in writing by the purchasing agent. 
(c)  No bid may be withdrawn under this section when the result would be the awarding of the contract on another bid of the same bidder or of another bidder in which the ownership of the withdrawing bidder is more than five (5) percent. 
(d)  If a bid is withdrawn under the authority of this section, the lowest remaining responsible bid shall be deemed to be the low bid. 
(e)  No bidder who is permitted to withdraw a bid shall, for compensation, supply any material or labor to or perform any subcontract or other work agreement for the person to whom the contract is awarded or otherwise benefit, directly or indirectly, from the performance of the project for which the withdrawn bid was submitted. 
(f)  If the purchasing agent denies the withdrawal of a bid under the provisions of this section, the purchasing agent shall notify the bidder in writing, stating the reasons for the decision. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4330. 
Section 16-305. - Bid evaluation. 
(a)  In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in addition to the price, the purchasing agent and/or bid committee shall consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required. 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder. 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services. 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and policies relating to the contract or service. 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service. 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the goods or services to the particular use required. 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract. 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(10)  If any bidder is a resident of any other state and such state under its laws allows a resident contractor of that state preference, a like preference may be allowed to the lowest responsible bidder who is a resident of Virginia. 
(b)  No special consideration should be shown to local vendors, except in case of a tie bid. However, in determining the lowest responsible bidder, consideration should be given to purchase price, availability and cost of parts and service, transportation costs, availability of technical assistance and any other potential costs which may be associated with the purchase. 
Section 16-306. - Award. 
(a)  The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. 
(b)  If the bid from the lowest responsive and responsible bidder exceeds available funds, and if, as evidenced by the purchasing agent's written certification placed in the procurement file, time or economic considerations preclude resolicitation of work of reduced scope, the purchasing agent may negotiate with the apparent low bidder to obtain a contract price within available funds. 
Section 16-307. - Tie bids. 
(a)  In the case of tie bids made in response to an invitation for bids, the town manager or town council, as appropriate, shall give preference, first to goods, services, and construction produced in the town or provided by person, firms, or corporations having principal places of business in the town, if choice is available; or second to goods, services and construction produced in the Commonwealth or provided by persons, firms, or corporations having principal places of business in the Commonwealth; otherwise, the tie shall be decided by lot, except as provided below. 
(b)  Whenever the lowest responsive and responsible bidder is a resident of any other state and such state under its laws allows a resident contractor of that state a percentage preference, a like preference shall be allowed to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder who is a resident of Virginia and is the next lowest bidder. If the lowest bidder is a resident contractor of a state with an absolute preference, the bid shall not be considered. 
Section 16-308. - Determination of non-responsibility. 
    The purchasing agent shall determine whether the apparent low bidder is responsible following the public opening and announcement of bids. If the purchasing agent determines that the apparent low bidder is not responsible, the town will proceed as follows: 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of a written determination of non-responsibility, the town shall (i) notify the apparent low bidder in writing of the results of the evaluation, (ii) disclose the factual support for the determination, and (iii) allow the apparent low bidder an opportunity to inspect any documents which relate to the determination, if so requested by the bidder within five (5) business days after receipt of the notice. 
(2)  Within ten (10) business days after the receipt of the notice, the bidder may submit rebuttal information challenging the evaluation. The purchasing agent shall issue his or her written determination of responsibility based on all information in the town's possession, within five (5) business days of the due date for rebuttal information. The purchasing agent shall notify the bidder of the final determination in writing, by first class mail, return receipt requested. 
(3)  This notice shall state the basis for the determination, which shall be final unless the bidder appeals the decision within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice by instituting legal action as provided in section 16-501. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 2.2-4359. 
Sections 16-309-16-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERFORMANCE AND PAYMENT BONDS 

Section 16-400. - Performance and payment bonds required. 
(a)  Upon the award of any public construction contract exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to any prime contractor, such contractor shall furnish to the town the following bonds: 
(1)  A performance bond in the sum of the contract amount conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract in strict conformity with the plans, specifications and conditions of the contract. 
(2)  A payment bond in the sum of the contract amount. Such bond shall be for the protection of claimants who have and fulfill contracts to supply labor or materials to the prime contractor to whom the contract was awarded, or to any of its subcontractors, in the prosecution of the work provided for in such contract, performed in prosecution of the work. Labor or materials shall include public utility services and reasonable rentals of equipment, but only for periods when the equipment rented is actually used at the site. 
(b)  Each of such bonds shall be executed by one (1) or more surety companies selected by the contractor which are legally authorized to do business in Virginia. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the purchasing agent from requiring payment or performance bonds for construction contracts below one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or for contractors for goods or services in any amount. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall preclude such contractor from requiring each subcontractor to furnish a payment bond with surety thereon in the sum of the full amount of the contract with such subcontractor conditioned upon the payment to all persons who have and fulfill contracts which are directly with the subcontractor for performing labor and furnishing materials in the prosecution of the work provided for in the subcontract. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 2.2-4337. 
Section 16-401. - Action on performance bonds. 
    No action against the surety on a performance bond shall be brought unless within one (1) year after: (i) completion of the contract, including the expiration of all warranties and guarantees, or (ii) discovery of the defect or breach of warranty, if the action be for such, in all other cases. 
State Law reference- Authority for this section, Code of Virginia § 2.2-4340. 
Section 16-402. - Action on payment bonds. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) hereof, any claimant who has performed labor or furnished material in accordance with the contract documents in the prosecution of the work provided in any contract for which a payment bond has been given, and who has not been paid in full therefor before the expiration of ninety (90) days after the day on which such claimant performed the last of such labor or furnished the last of such materials for which payment is claimed, may bring an action on such payment bond to recover any amount due for such labor or material, and may prosecute such action to final judgment and have execution on the judgment. The obligee named in the bond need not be named a party to such action. 
(b)  Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with any subcontractor from whom the contractor has not required a subcontractor payment bond under section 16-404(d) but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with such contractor, may bring an action on the contractor's payment bond only if claimant has given written notice to such contractor within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date on which the claimant performed the last of the labor or furnished the last of the materials for which payment is claimed, stating with substantial accuracy the amount claimed and the name of the person for whom the work was performed or to whom the material was furnished. Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with a subcontractor from whom the contractor has required a subcontractor payment bond under section 16-400(d) but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with such contractor, may bring an action on the subcontractor's payment bond. Notice to the contractor shall be served by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to such contractor at any place where the contractor's office is regularly maintained for the transaction of business. Claims for sums withheld as retainage with respect to labor performed or materials furnished shall not be subject to the time limitations stated in this subsection. 
(c)  Any action on a payment bond must be brought within one (1) year after the day on which the person bringing such action last performed labor or last furnished or supplied materials. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 2.2-4341. 
Section 16-403. - Alternative forms of security. 
(a)  In lieu of a bid, payment, or performance bond, a bidder may furnish a certified check or cash escrow in the face amount required for the bond. 
(b)  If approved by the Town Attorney, a bidder may furnish a personal bond, property bond, or bank or savings institution's letter of credit on certain designated funds in the face amount required for the bid, payment or performance bond. Approval shall be granted only upon a determination that the alternative form of security proffered affords protection to the public body equivalent to a corporate surety's bond. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 2.2-4338. 
Sections 16-404-16-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REMEDIES 

Section 16-500. - Denial of withdrawal of bid. 
(a)  A decision denying the withdrawal of a bid under the provisions of section 16-304 shall be final and conclusive, unless the bidder institutes legal action in the Montgomery County Circuit Court within ten days of the date of the decision. 
(b)  If no bid bond was posted, a bidder refused withdrawal of a bid under the provisions of section 16-304, prior to appealing, shall deliver to the purchasing agent a certified check or cash bond in the amount of the difference between the bid sought to be withdrawn and the next lowest bid. Such security shall be released only upon a final determination that the bidder was entitled to withdraw the bid. 
(c)  If, upon appeal, it is determined that the decision refusing withdrawal of the bid was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, applicable state law or regulation, or the terms or conditions of the invitation to bid, the sole relief shall be withdrawal of the bid. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 2.2-4358. 
Section 16-501. - Appeal of determination of non-responsibility. 
(a)  A determination of non-responsibility shall be final unless the bidder appeals the decision within ten days of the date of the decision, by commencing a legal action in the Montgomery County Circuit Court. 
(b)  The court shall uphold the town's determination unless it finds that it was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, applicable state law or this chapter, or the terms or conditions of the invitation to bid, and the award of the contract has not been made, the sole relief shall be a finding that the bidder is a responsible bidder, or the court may direct the town to award the contract, forthwith, to such bidder as provided by Virginia Code § 2.2-4364(A), or both. 
(c)  In the event the apparent low bidder is found by the court to be a responsible bidder, and the award of the contract has not been made, then the sole relief shall be a finding to that effect. The town shall cancel the proposed award or revise it to comply with the law. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 2.2-4364. 
Section 16-502. - Appeal of determination of ineligibility. 
(a)  A final determination of ineligibility shall be final unless the prospective bidder appeals the decision within ten days of the date of the decision, by commencing a legal action in the Montgomery County Circuit Court. 
(b)  The court shall uphold the town's determination unless it finds that it was not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather was arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the Constitution of Virginia, applicable state law or this chapter, or the criteria for denial of prequalification set forth in Virginia Code 2.2-4317(C). 
(c)  If, upon appeal, the town's determination is reversed, the sole relief shall be restoration of eligibility. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 2.2-4357. 
Section 16-503. - Protest of award or decision to award. 
(a)  Any bidder or offeror, who desires to protest the award or decision to award a contract shall submit such protest in writing to the purchasing agent no later than ten days after the award or the announcement of the decision to award, whichever occurs first. The written protest shall include the basis for the protest and the relief sought. 
(b)  Any potential bidder or offeror on a contract negotiated on a sole source or emergency basis who desires to protest the award or decision to award such contract shall submit such protest in the same manner no later than ten days after posting or publication of the notice of such contract as provided in section 16-203. 
(c)  If the protest of any actual or potential bidder or offeror depends in whole or in part upon information contained in public records pertaining to the procurement transaction which are subject to inspection under section 16-113, then the time within which the protest must be submitted shall expire ten days after those records are available for inspection by such bidder or offeror. 
(d)  No protest shall lie for a claim that the selected bidder or offeror is not a responsible bidder or offeror. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit a bidder to challenge the validity of the terms or conditions of the invitation to bid or request for proposal. 
(e)  The town manager shall issue a decision in writing within ten days of receipt of the protest, stating the reasons for the action taken. This decision shall be final unless the bidder or offeror appeals within ten days by commencing an action in the Montgomery County Circuit Court. 
(f)  If prior to an award it is determined that the decision to award is arbitrary or capricious, then the sole relief shall be a finding to that effect. The town shall cancel the proposed award or revise it to comply with the law. 
(g)  If, after an award, it is determined that an award of a contract was arbitrary or capricious, then the sole relief shall be as hereinafter provided. Where the award has been made but performance has not begun, the performance of the contract may be enjoined. Where the award has been made and performance has begun, the town may declare the contract void upon a finding that this action is in the best interest of the public. Where a contract is declared void, the performing contractor shall be compensated for the cost of performance up to the time of such declaration. In no event shall the performing contractor be entitled to lost profits. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 2.2-4360. 
Section 16-504. - Effect of protest or appeal upon contract. 
    Pending final determination of a protest or appeal, the validity of a contract awarded and accepted in good faith in accordance with this chapter shall not be affected by the fact that a protest or appeal has been filed. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 2.2-4361. 
Section 16-505. - Stay of award during protest. 
    An award need not be delayed for the period allowed a bidder or offeror to protest, but in the event of a time protest or the filing of a timely legal action, no further action to award the contract will be taken unless the town manager makes a written determination that proceeding without delay is necessary to protect the public interest or unless the bid or offer would expire. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia § 2.2-4362. 
Section 16-506. - Contractual disputes. 
(a)  Contractual claims, whether for money or other relief, shall be submitted in writing no later than 60 days after occurrence of the event giving rise to the claim. Nothing herein shall preclude a contract from requiring submission of an invoice for final payment within a certain time after completion and acceptance of the work or acceptance of the goods. Pendency of claims shall not delay payment of amounts agreed due in the final payment. 
(b)  The contractor shall provide such information in writing as the town may require in order to make a determination on the claim. The contractor shall make available to the town such books and records for inspection and copying as the town may require in order to arrive at a determination on the claim. 
(c)  The town manager shall make a final determination in writing on the validity of any contractual claim within 60 days following receipt of the claim. The town manager shall state his or her reasons in writing. 
(d)  The dispute resolution procedure contained in this section shall be included in all contracts with the town, and may be incorporated by reference. 
Sections 16-507-16-599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC PROCUREMENT 

Section 16-600. - Generally. 
    The provisions of Virginia Code, Title 2.2, Chapter 43, the Virginia Public Procurement Act, Article 6, "Ethics in Public Contracting," shall apply to all procurement of this town. Willful violation of any provision of the above-referenced article shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. In case of conviction therefor of any town employee, in addition to any other fine or penalty provided by law, such employee shall forfeit his or her employment. 
Chapter 17 - PUBLIC SAFETY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; offenses, ch. 14. 

ARTICLE I. - POLICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees generally, § 2-200 et seq.; general authority of town manager relative to police, § 2-300; town departments, § 2-400 et seq.; rules and regulations of chief of police governing dance halls and dances, § 4-401; fingerprinting fee, § 17-109. 
State Law reference- Authority of council to preserve peace and good order, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1700; general powers and duties of local police force, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1704. 

Section 17-100. - Chief to be commanding officer. 
    The chief of police shall be the commanding officer of the police force of the town and all personnel of the police department. 
Section 17-101. - Appointment of officers and members of force. 
    The town manager shall appoint such number of officers and members to constitute the police department of the town as the town council may authorize from time to time, by appropriation or otherwise. 
Charter reference- Administrative departments, § 5.01 et seq. 
Section 17-102. - Arrests. 
(a)  The chief of police and other police officers of the town shall have the power to make an arrest upon the warrant of any proper officer for a violation of any law of the state or ordinance of the town. 
(b)  A town officer, if in uniform or displaying a badge of office, may arrest, without a warrant, any person who commits any crime in the presence of such officer and any person whom he or she has reasonable grounds or probable cause to suspect of having committed a felony not in his or her presence. Any officer may arrest, without a warrant, under any and all circumstances where authorized by the Virginia Code (1950), as amended, including, but not limited to, §§ 19.2-81, 19.2-81.3, and 19.2-82 thereof. 
(c)  Whenever a police officer makes an arrest without first securing a warrant therefor, he or she shall, as soon as possible, take the offender before some officer authorized to issue warrants of arrest, and shall not place the offender in jail without an order from a proper officer authorizing it, unless it is a case of emergency or necessary in order to prevent his or her escape, or in such cases as are provided for in other ordinances of the town or by the laws of the state. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 19.2-81, 19.2-82. 
Section 17-103. - Refusal to aid officer. 
    If any person, on being required by any police officer of the town, refuses or neglects to assist a police officer: 
(1)  In the execution of his or her office in a criminal case; 
(2)  In the preservation of the peace; 
(3)  In the apprehending or securing of any person for a breach of the peace; or 
(4)  In any case of escape or rescue; 
he or she shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-463. 
Section 17-104. - Employment of off-duty officers; fees. 
(a)  The chief of police shall promulgate reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to employment of off-duty law enforcement officers, which employment may occasionally require the use of police powers. 
(b)  Law enforcement officers of the town are expressly authorized to engage in off-duty employment which may occasionally require the use of their police powers in the performance of such employment pursuant to the regulations pertaining thereto promulgated pursuant to this section. 
(c)  For the off-duty employment of law enforcement officers, the persons, firms or organizations utilizing the services of such officers shall pay, for each law enforcement officer so employed, an hourly fee equal to the overtime rate of the police patrol officer's current pay grade. 
(d)  The foregoing fees shall be paid to the director of finance. 
State Law reference- Employment of off-duty officers, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1712. 
Section 17-105. - False alarm or report to police. 
    No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false alarm of the need for police protection, assistance or investigation, or any false report to the police department. 
State Law reference- Giving false reports to police officers, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-461. 
Section 17-106. - Alarm fees. 
(a)  The town manager shall charge and collect the following fees to each person maintaining under contract with the town a burglar, intrusion, holdup, fire or other security or emergency alarm system terminating at the police communications console and monitored by police communications personnel: 
(1)  Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per alarm system per calendar month for basic service; 
(2)  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each false alarm from such alarm system over one per calendar month. False alarm shall mean the activation of such an alarm system in the absence of an actual or apparent security or safety reason therefore The town manager shall determine whether an alarm was false or not. 
(b)  The town manager may prepare, issue and amend regulations to facilitate the operation of this program. 
Section 17-107. - Alarm notification. 
(a)  Any person maintaining an intrusion or fire alarm for a facility or residence in this town shall provide to the town, and continually update as necessary, a list of two (2) people whom may be contacted to turn off the alarm in the event the alarm is triggered and the person maintaining the alarm may not be found. The person shall provide to the town the name, business and home address and telephone number, and street address of these persons to be contacted. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
Section 17-108. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1658, § 1, adopted Oct. 9, 2012, repealed § 17-108, which pertained to costs imposed on criminal and traffic cases and derived from its original codification. 
Section 17-109. - Fee for voluntary fingerprinting. 
    The fee to be charged by the town for voluntary fingerprinting of persons upon request shall be five dollars ($5.00) per set of fingerprints. 
Section 17-110. - Sale of unclaimed bicycles in possession of the police; action of town manager. 
    The town manager is authorized either to sell at a public sale, or to donate to a charitable organization for disposition to needy individuals, any bicycle or moped which has been in the possession of the chief of police, unclaimed, for more than thirty (30) days. In case of the sale of this property, the town manager shall follow the procedures set out in this Code or purchasing procedures governing the disposition of surplus supplies. 
State Law reference- Virginia Code, § 15.2-1720. 
Section 17-111. - Disposition of unclaimed property. 
(a)  The town manager may sell at public sale any unclaimed personal property which has been in possession of the police department and unclaimed for more than sixty (60) days. 
(b)  "Unclaimed personal property" means any personal property belonging to another which has been acquired by a law enforcement officer pursuant to his or her duties, which is not needed in any criminal prosecution, which has not been claimed by its rightful owner, and which the state treasurer has indicated will be declined if remitted under the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act (§ 55-210.1, and following, Code of Virginia). 
(c)  Prior to the sale of any unclaimed item, the chief of police shall make reasonable attempts to notify the rightful owner of the property, obtain from the attorney for the Commonwealth a written statement advising that the item is not needed in any criminal prosecution, and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in this town once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, notice that there will be a public sale of unclaimed personal property. Such property shall be described generally in the notice, together with the date, time, and place of sale. The town manager shall cause the chief of police to pay from the proceeds of the sale the costs of the advertisement, removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens, and notice of sale. The balance of the funds shall be held by the town for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. 
(d)  If no claim has been made by the owner for the proceeds of such sale within sixty (60) days of the sale, the remaining funds shall be deposited in the general fund of the town. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the town within three (3) years from the date of sale and, if timely application is made therefor, the town shall pay the remaining proceeds of the sale to the owner without interest or other charges. No claim shall be made and no suit, action or proceeding shall be instituted for the recovery of such funds after three (3) years from the date of the sale. 
State Law reference- Virginia Code, § 15.2-1719. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees generally, § 2-200 et seq.; town departments, § 2-400 et seq.; authority of members of fire department to direct traffic, § 12-103. 
State Law reference- Use of fire-fighters and equipment in emergencies beyond territorial limits of town, Code of Virginia, § 27-1; contracts of towns to furnish fire protection, § 27-2; fire departments and fire companies generally, § 27-6.1 et seq.; ordinances as to fire departments, § 27-14. 

Section 17-200. - Composition. 
(a)  The fire department shall be a volunteer organization known as the Blacksburg Volunteer Fire Department. The principal officer of the fire department shall be known as "the chief," and shall have and maintain full authority, control and responsibility as to the operation of the fire department. 
(b)  The Blacksburg Volunteer Fire Department is recognized as an integral part of the safety program of the Town. It is organized exclusively for the benefit of the general public without charge. 
(c)  The fire department shall have charge and control of all paid employees and all property of the department, except where otherwise provided by law. 
State Law reference- Virginia Code, § 27-6.1. 
Section 17-201. - Constitution and by-laws. 
    The Blacksburg Volunteer Fire Department shall be governed by a constitution and by-laws, including by-laws pertaining to social purposes, adopted by the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 1684, § 1, 6-11-13) 
State Law reference- Virginia Code, § 27-7. 
Section 17-202. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1684, § 1, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 17-202, which pertained to rules and regulations and derived from its original codification. 
Section 17-203. - Election of officers. 
    The officers of the fire department shall be specified in its constitution and shall be elected in November or December of each year. Their term of office shall commence on the first day of January next following. The names of the officers chosen shall be presented to the town council at its next regular meeting for confirmation. In case the council refuses to confirm such officers, the department shall forthwith elect other persons in place of those whom the council refused to confirm and submit their names to the council at its next regular meeting for confirmation. 
State Law reference- § 27-13. 
Section 17-204. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1684, § 1, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 17-204, which pertained to eligibility and oath of chief and derived from its original codification. 
Section 17-205. - General powers and duties of chief. 
(a)  The chief or, in his absence, the assistant chief, shall have control over all members of the fire department while in service at fires. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the chief to keep a record of all fires, their place and time of occurrence, to ascertain if possible the amount of insurance, if any, and actual loss, and to make report thereof to the council as the council may direct. The chief shall make such reports to the state commissioner of insurance as may be required by state law. The chief shall deliver to his or her successor in office records which may be in his or her control pertaining to the fire department. The chief shall have full supervision of all apparatus, equipment, and property of the fire department. 
(c)  The chief shall have day-to-day charge of any fire station, and the members of the fire department shall be under his or her immediate supervision. It shall be the chief's duty to see that the apparatus is kept in good condition and ready at any and all times to respond to a call and properly cared for at and after returning from a fire; that the station is properly cared for; and the chief shall perform such other duties as may be necessary to keep any fire station and apparatus in good condition. 
(Ord. No. 1684, § 1, 6-11-13) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 27-15.1. 
Section 17-206. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1684, § 1, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 17-206, which pertained to chief's annual report and derived from its original codification. 
Section 17-207. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1684, § 1, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 17-207, which pertained to charges against members for nonperformance of duty and derived from form its original codification. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- General authority of town manager relative to fire matters, § 2-300; building regulations, Ch. 6; smoke alarms, § 6-207; fire department, Chapter 17, Art. II; establishment and marking of fire lanes at shopping centers and other congested areas, § 12-412; fire hydrants, § 24-500 et seq. 
State Law reference- Fire protection, Code of Virginia, Title 27, § 27-15.1; false alarms, Code of Virginia, Title 18.22, § 212. 

Section 17-300. - Obedience to orders at scene of fire; exclusion of spectators. 
(a)  Every person present at a fire shall be subject and obedient to the orders of firemen and police officers in any matter relating to extinguishing the fire, removal and protection of persons and property endangered by fire, smoke or water, freedom of fire department and medical personnel and apparatus to perform their duties or to function property and the maintenance of order at or near the scene of the fire. It shall be a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to disobey any such order of a fireman or police officer. The chief or other officer in charge shall have authority to arrest persons who disobey such orders and to hold them in custody until the fire has been extinguished, at which time the violators shall be dealt with according to law. 
(b)  The fire department officer in command at the scene of any fire and the police officers present shall exclude all persons from buildings and grounds adjacent thereto, during a fire, and no person, except town officials and employees in the discharge of their duties, shall have the right to enter within the ropes surrounding such fire, except owners of property thereat, or such other persons as may obtain permission of the fire department officer in command. Such officers shall have authority to take into custody all persons persisting in any interference with the work of the fire department in the manner provided in subsection (a) above. 
Section 17-301. - Bonfires. 
(a)  No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any private land, unless the location is not less than fifty (50) feet from any structure and adequate provision is made to prevent fire from spreading to within fifty (50) feet of any structure. 
(b)  Bonfires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such fires are extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose connected to the water supply or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use. 
(c)  The fire chief may prohibit any or all bonfires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. 
(d)  Here, "bonfire" shall mean a campfire or other fires that are used solely for recreational purposes, for ceremonial occasions, for outdoor noncommercial preparation of food, and for warming of outdoor workers, and that are not fueled by any rubber tires, asphaltic materials, crankcase oil, impregnated wood or other rubber or petroleum based materials, hazardous waste, or hazardous waste containers. 
State Law reference- Burning of woods, brush, etc., Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1142. 
Section 17-302. - Kindling fire on land of another. 
    No person shall kindle a fire upon the land of another without permission of the owner thereof or his agent. 
Section 17-303. - Permission of council required to burn building. 
    Any person who desires to intentionally destroy or raze, by fire or burning, any building or part thereof which is located within the corporate limits of the town must obtain permission from the town council. The permission shall be necessary whether or not the fire department is assisting in the destruction. The term "building," as used in this section, shall mean all buildings of whatever nature, regardless of the use or size. 
Section 17-304. - Flammable decorative materials in buildings of mercantile and institutional occupancy. 
    Highly flammable materials, such as cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves, trees, artificial flowers or shrubbery and foam plastic materials, shall not be used for decorative purposes in show windows or other parts of mercantile and institutional occupancies, unless first rendered flameproof. Electric light bulbs in mercantile and institutional occupancies shall not be decorated with paper or other combustible materials, unless such materials shall first have been rendered flameproof. 
Section 17-305. - Magazines for explosives prohibited. 
    No person shall use any building or structure within the town to store powder, dynamite or other explosives. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to prohibit storage of explosives, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113. 
Section 17-306. - Delivery of explosives to minors. 
    No person shall sell, deliver, give away, or otherwise dispose of any explosives to any individual under eighteen (18) years of age, whether such individual is acting for himself or for another person. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-138. 
Section 17-307. - Blasting. 
    No person shall blast rock or other material within the town without first having obtained a written permit from the town manager. Blasts shall be loaded down with a mat or secured in some other satisfactory manner. A permit issued under this section shall not be construed as relieving the permittee from responsibility for injury to persons or property. The town manager may refuse to grant such permit when, in his opinion, such blasting would be dangerous to the life or health of any person or to the property of another or would otherwise constitute a hazard to the public safety. 
Section 17-308. - Open burning prohibited. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, and subject to the provisions of section 17-309 of this article, there shall be no open burning of any material, substance, or thing within the town. No one shall burn leaves, and tree, yard and garden trimmings, except as may be allowed in subparagraph (b) of this section. 
(b)  Subparagraph (a) shall not apply to the kinds of open burning described below in this subsection which shall be allowed within the town, under written permit from the town manager, on written application made no less than five (5) days prior to the proposed burning. The permit may be issued at no charge and shall assure that the open burning shall comply with this article, state laws and regulations, with any other applicable legal rule, and with any condition imposed by the town manager in consultation with the fire chief to assure the safety and propriety of the open burning. 
(1)  Upon the request of an owner or a responsible civil or military public official, the town manager may approve open burning under controlled conditions for the elimination of a hazard which constitutes a threat to the public health, safety or welfare and which cannot be remedied by other means consonant with the circumstances presented by the hazard. Such uses of open burning may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Destruction of deteriorated or unused explosives and munitions on government or private property when other means of disposal are not available. 
b.  Disposal of debris caused by floods, tornadoes, hurricanes or other natural disasters where alternate means of disposal are not economical or practical and when it is in the best interest of the citizens of Blacksburg. 
(2)  Open burning is permitted for training and instruction of government and public firefighters under the supervision of the designated official and industrial in-house firefighting personnel. The designated official in charge of the training shall notify and obtain the approval of the town manager prior to conducting the training exercise. Training schools where permanent facilities are installed for firefighting instruction are exempt from this notification requirement. 
(3)  Open burning is permitted for campfires or other fires that are used solely for recreational purposes, for ceremonial occasions, for outdoor noncommercial preparation of food, and for warming of outdoor workers, provided that these fires shall not be fueled by any of the following materials: 
Rubber tires, asphaltic materials, crankcase oil, impregnated wood or other rubber or petroleum based materials, hazardous waste, and hazardous waste containers. 
(4)  On land in the town that is in an agricultural zoning district, or that is within a current agricultural or forestal or agricultural and forestal district of the town or of Montgomery County, or that is used for bona fide agricultural or forestal, or both, purposes, open burning is permitted for forest management and (in the absence of other means of disposal) agricultural practices under the following conditions: 
a.  The burning shall take place at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any occupied building, unless the occupants have given prior permission, but this condition shall not apply to a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted. 
b.  The burning shall be attended at all times. 
(5)  Forest management, and agricultural practices, respectively, shall mean: 
a.  Forest management practices: Reduction of forest fuels and minimization of the effects of wildfires; control of undesirable growth of hardwoods; control of disease in pine seedlings; preparation of land for planting or seeding; creation of a favorable habitat for certain species of wildlife; and removal of dead vegetation for the maintenance of railroad, highway, or public utility right-of-way. 
b.  Agricultural practices: Destruction of undesirable vegetation; clearance of orchards and orchard prunings; destruction of fertilizer and chemical containers; denaturing of seed and grain which may no longer be suitable for agricultural purposes; prevention of loss from frost or freeze damage; creation of a favorable habitat for certain species of wildlife; and destruction of strings and plastic ground covering remaining in the field after being used in growing staked tomatoes. 
(6)  Open burning is permitted for disposal of land-clearing refuse on the site of clearing operations resulting from the development or modification of roads or highways, parking areas, railroad tracks, pipelines, power and communication lines, buildings or building areas, or sanitary landfills; or from any other land-clearing operation which may be first approved by the town manager. Any burning permitted under this subparagraph shall meet, as determined by the town manager, the following conditions: 
a.  The burning shall be at least five hundred (500) feet from any occupied building, unless the occupants have given prior permission, other than a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted. The burning shall be conducted at the greatest distance practicable from highways and airfields. If the town manager determines that it is necessary to protect public health and welfare, the manager may direct that this distance be increased. 
b.  All reasonable efforts shall be made to minimize the amount of material burned. Such efforts shall include, but are not limited to, the removal of pulpwood, sawlogs, and firewood. 
c.  The material to be burned may consist of brush, stumps, and similar land-clearing refuse generated at the site and shall not include demolition material or any refuse brought in from other sites. 
d.  The burning shall be at least five hundred (500) feet from any occupied building, unless the occupants have given prior permission, other than a building located on the property on which the burning is conducted. The burning shall be conducted at the greatest distance practicable from highways and airfields. If the town manager determines that it is necessary to protect public health and welfare, he may direct that this distance be increased. 
e.  The burning shall be attended at all times and conducted in such a manner as to ensure the best possible combustion with a minimum of smoke being produced. The burning shall not be allowed to smolder beyond the minimum period necessary for the destruction of the materials. 
f.  The burning shall be conducted only when the prevailing winds are away from any city, town, or built-up area. 
(c)  Any open burning allowed under this section shall be conducted under the following conditions and limitations, any additional conditions and limitations imposed by state law or regulation, and any conditions and limitations imposed by the town manager as an element of the permit: 
Upon declaration of an alert, warning, or emergency stage of an air pollution episode, as defined by state law or regulation, or when deemed advisable by the Virginia Department of Air Pollution Control to prevent a hazard to, or an unreasonable burden upon, public health or welfare, no owner or other person shall cause or permit open burning in the town. Any such in-process burning shall be immediately terminated. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
State Law reference- Regulating or prohibiting the making of fires, Virginia Code, § 15.2-1118. 
Section 17-309. - Penalty; enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor to violate any provision of this article, unless otherwise specified. 
(b)  This article shall be enforced by the town manager. The town manager shall allocate adequate town resources for this purpose and practice intergovernmental cooperation and exchange of information. 
(c)  Any violation or failure to conform to the provisions of this article may be abated or eliminated by suit for injunction or other appropriate legal proceeding. 
Section 17-310. - General prohibition against possession, sale, use, etc., of fireworks. 
(a)  Except as may be otherwise provided in this Code or other ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to transport, manufacture, store, sell, offer or expose for sale, or to possess, buy, use ignite or explode any firecracker, torpedo, skyrocket or other substance or thing of whatever form or construction containing nitrates, chlorates, oxalates, sulphides of lead, barium, antimony, nitroglycerine, phosphorus or any other explosive or inflammable compound or substance, and intended or commonly known as fireworks. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to Roman candles, sparklers, pharaoh's serpents or caps for pistols, nor shall it apply to pinwheels commonly known as whirligigs or spinning jennies, when used, ignited or exploded on private property with the consent of the owner of such property. 
(c)  This section shall have no application to any officer or member of the armed forces of this state, or of the United States, while acting within the scope of his authority and duties as such, nor to any offer of sale or sale of fireworks to any authorized agent of such armed forces, nor shall it be applicable to the sale or use of materials or equipment, otherwise prohibited by law, when such materials or equipment are used or to be used by any person for signaling or other emergency use in the operation of any boat, railroad train or other vehicle for the transportation of persons or property. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to prohibit fireworks, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1113, 59.1-148. 
Section 17-311. - Permit to display fireworks. 
    Any fair association, amusement park or other organization or group of individuals may apply in writing to the town council for a permit to display fireworks, and the town council may grant such permit under such terms and conditions as the council may prescribe. After such permit has been issued, sales of fireworks may be made for use under such permit and the permit holder may make use of such fireworks under the terms and conditions of the permit. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-144. 
Section 17-312. - Inspections to detect hazards. 
    It shall be the duty of the building official to inspect, or cause to be inspected, all buildings and premises, except the interiors of dwellings, as often as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire or explosion, endanger life from fire or explosion, or any violations of state law, this Code or other ordinance for the prevention and abatement of fire and explosion hazards. Any occupant or owner of any such building or premises who shall fail or refuse to permit such inspection to be made under a search warrant shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 17-313. - Order to abate-Generally. 
(a)  Whenever the building official or other inspector designated by him or her shall find in any building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions or materials as follows, he or she shall order such dangerous conditions or materials to be removed or remedied in such manner as may be specified by the building official: 
(1)  Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials. 
(2)  Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive or otherwise hazardous materials. 
(3)  Dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings or other highly combustible materials. 
(4)  Accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning or ventilating systems or of grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts or inadequate clearances to unprotected combustible material from hoods, grease extractors and ducts. 
(5)  Obstructions to or on fire escapes, designated access openings in exterior walls for fire department use, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire. 
(6)  Any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of adequate exit facilities, automatic or other fire alarm apparatus or fire extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, creates a hazardous condition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with the terms of any order issued to him or her pursuant to this section. 
Section 17-314. - Same-Service. 
    An order issued pursuant to section 17-313 shall be served upon the property owner, occupant or other person responsible for the conditions referred to therein, either by delivering a copy thereof to such person or by delivering it to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of premises, such order may be served in any manner provided by law. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESCUE SQUAD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Rescue squad recognized as part of official safety program, § 17-400(b). 

Section 17-400. - Composition. 
(a)  The town's rescue squad shall be a voluntary organization known as the Blacksburg Volunteer Rescue Squad. It shall provide emergency medical and rescue assistance to the citizens of the town and its environs. 
(b)  The Blacksburg Volunteer Rescue Squad is recognized as an integral part of the safety program of the town. It is organized exclusively for the benefit of the general public without charge. 
(Ord. No. 1684, § 2, 6-11-13) 
Section 17-401. - Constitution and by-laws. 
    The Blacksburg Volunteer Rescue Squad shall be governed by a constitution and by-laws, including by-laws pertaining to social purposes, adopted by the rescue squad. 
(Ord. No. 1684, § 2, 6-11-13) 
Section 17-402. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1684, § 2, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 17-402, which pertained to rules and regulations and derived from Ord. No. 1362, § 1, adopted April 13, 2004. 
Section 17-403. - Election of officers. 
    The officers of the rescue squad shall be specified in its constitution and shall be elected in November or December of each year. Their term of office shall commence on the first day of January next following. The names of the officers chosen shall be presented to the town council at its next regular meeting for confirmation. In case the council refuses to confirm such officers, the squad shall forthwith elect other persons in place of those whom the council refused to confirm and submit their names to the council at its next regular meeting for confirmation. 
(Ord. No. 1684, § 2, 6-11-13) 
Section 17-404. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1684, § 2, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 17-404, which pertained to eligibility and oath of chief and derived from Ord. No. 1362, § 2, adopted April 13, 2004. 
Section 17-405. - Rescue chief. 
    The head of the rescue squad shall be the chief. The rescue chief shall be responsible for the day-to-day operation, well being, and improvement of the rescue squad. The chief shall have day-to-day charge of any rescue building and members of the rescue squad shall be under his or her immediate supervision. The chief shall assume command at medical and rescue emergencies and be responsible for training of personnel in the latest emergency medical and rescue techniques and for maintaining the emergency medical and rescue apparatus in proper operating condition. The chief shall preside at all rescue squad meetings and shall have charge and control of all paid employees and all property of the squad, except where otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § 3, 4-13-04) 
Section 17-406. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1684, § 2, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 17-406, which pertained to chief's annual report and derived from Ord. No. 1362, § 4, adopted April 13, 2004. 
Section 17-407. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1684, § 2, adopted June 11, 2013, repealed § 17-407, which pertained to charges against members for nonperformance of duty and derived from its original codification. 
Chapter 18 - SEWERS AND STORM DRAINAGE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Acquisition of property under eminent domain power and acquisition of property outside corporate limits for sewer pipes, lines and facilities, § 2.04; budget provisions for town utilities, § 6.04. 
Cross reference- General powers and duties of director of public works relative to sewer systems, § 2-99; building regulations, ch. 6; erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 10; solid waste, ch. 20; water, ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to establish, maintain and operate sewage disposal system, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2122; authority to regulate sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2157; assessments for construction or use of sanitary or storm water sewers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-2404. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 18-100. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    Collection system means the mains, service connections, manholes, pumping facilities, and STEG and STEP systems used for the collection of sewage from its source to the Blacksburg-VPI Sanitation Authority's mains. 
    Customer means any person, firm, corporation, company, association, governmental unit or owner of property furnished sanitary sewer service by the town. 
    Developer means a person who improves or has real property improved. 
    Director means the director of public works of the town or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Equivalent unit is the average daily consumption of four hundred (400) gallons of water per day. A single-family dwelling unit shall be considered one (1) equivalent unit. One (1) equivalent unit for a restaurant will equal sixteen (16) seats and one (1) equivalent unit for a laundromat will equal three (3) laundromat machines (each machine shall be rated for no more than nine (9) to twelve (12) pounds of laundry). When computing the equivalent units for buildings or structures other than dwelling units, restaurants and laundromats, the daily water consumption rate of four hundred (400) gallons per day shall be used as the basis for determining the equivalency. The daily water consumption rate shall be estimated in accordance with the regulations of the state health department prevailing at the time. 
    Main means a sewer pipe owned, operated and maintained by the town which is used for the purpose of transmission or collection of sanitary sewage, but is not a sewer service lateral. 
    Owner, as it applies to sewer extensions, is the owner of record of real property. The term "owner" as it applies to applications for sewer services and payment for treatment shall mean the owner of real property and dwellings or structures thereon, or the owner of dwellings or structures on leased land. 
    Premises shall include, but is not restricted to, the following: 
(1)  A building or combination of buildings owned by one (1) customer in one (1) common enclosure occupied by one (1) family as a residence. 
(2)  Each unit of a multiple building, separated by a solid vertical partition wall, owned as a residence or owned or leased by one (1) firm as a place of business. 
(3)  A building having a number of apartments, offices or lofts using, in common, one (1) hall and one (1) or more means of entrance. 
(4)  A building two (2) or more stories high under one (1) roof owned by one customer and having an individual entrance for the ground floor occupants and one (1) for the occupants of the upper floors. 
(5)  A combination of buildings owned by one (1) customer, in one (1) common enclosure, none of the buildings of which is adapted to separate ownership. 
(6)  A public building. 
(7)  A single plat used as a park or recreational area. 
    Property line means the edge or limit of the street, highway, public way or right-of-way, as may be shown or platted on maps of record, before entering on private property of the premises. 
    Public service lateral means the pipe that connects a private sewer lateral to the main and runs between the main and the customer's property line or utility easement. The public service lateral begins at the main and shall terminate at a cleanout. 
    Private sewer lateral means the pipe that runs between the public service lateral cleanout or from the customer's property line or from a utility easement to the premises is the owner's private sewer lateral. 
    STEG system means a septic tank effluent gravity ("STEG") sewer system, including tanks and appurtenances. 
    STEP system means a septic tank effluent pumping ("STEP") sewer system, including tanks, pumps, and appurtenances. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 18-101. - Notice of violations of chapter. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except sections 18-119 and 18-120 and Article V of this chapter, shall be served by the town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Any person who shall continue such violation beyond the time limit provided for in such notice shall be subject to the penalty prescribed for such violation. 
Section 18-102. - General penalty for violations of chapter. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
Section 18-103. - Liability of damages caused by violations of chapter. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable, in addition to any punishment imposed, to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the town by reason of such violation. 
Section 18-104. - Responsibility for construction damage to sewer system. 
    All damage to sewers, mains or service laterals, manholes or other parts of the sewer system caused by any agency in putting in sewers, drains, pipes or in any other construction shall be chargeable to the owner of the premises for whom such work is done or, if no specific owner of the premises is apparent, then the agency causing such damage shall make the repairs to the satisfaction of the town at no cost to the town. 
Section 18-105. - Sewer system finance-Generally. 
(a)  The sewer system shall be operated as an enterprise accounting system with a water and sewer fund established. Sewer system revenue shall include revenue from any source, including, but not limited to, sewer charges, availability fees and other charges and assessments. Sewer system expenditures shall include, but not be limited to, operating costs, extensions, capital improvements, supplies, services, debt services and depreciation. Such revenue and expenditures shall be accounted for in the water and sewer fund. 
(b)  The director of finance shall issue bills, make collections, make disbursements, manage debt services and maintain financial records for the sewer system in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and the Municipal Finance Officers Association. 
Cross reference- Similar provisions relative to water system finances, § 24-105. 
Section 18-106. - Specifications for construction of sanitary sewers. 
(a)  The standards for material, installation, design and equipment of the sanitary sewer system shall be the applicable latest adopted standards of the town, as approved by the town council by resolution and amended as needed by the council. These standards shall be known as the "Town Sanitary Sewer Specifications." 
(b)  The detailed specifications and standards for materials and installation of system components shall be followed, as prepared and on file in the office of the director of engineering and GIS, copies of which may be obtained free of charge. 
(c)  Pipes and other facilities shall be constructed according to all specifications on record as the local, state and federal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 18-107. - When sewer connection required. 
    No person, being the owner or having the right of possession of a house or other building located within two hundred (200) feet of a public sanitary sewer, shall use or allow such house or building to be used as a human habitation or for any business or other purpose, or occupy or lease such for occupancy, until such house or building shall have first been connected with the public sanitary sewer of the town in such a manner as to carry away effectively the human waste or excrement from such house or building into the public sanitary sewer of the town. 
Section 18-108. - Application for sewer service connection; acceptance as contract with town. 
(a)  All applications for sewer service connections shall be made at the office of the finance department, on the form prescribed, and signed by the owner of the premises to be supplied or by his duly authorized agent, stating fully and truly the various substances which shall be discharged into the sewer. If the application is for a new service connection, the charge for the connection must accompany the application. 
(b)  The acceptance by the town of an application under this section shall constitute a contract between the town and the applicant, obligating the applicant to pay the established fees and rates and to comply with all the rules and regulations prescribed by this chapter and subsequent changes, amendments and additions thereto. 
Section 18-109. - Availability fee for any new sewer connections and sewer expansions. 
(a)  For any new sewer connection and for any sewer expansion, to serve improvements located within the town limits, there shall be charged an availability fee based on the meter size, as follows: 
Meter Size Availability 
Fee   5/8 inch $2,500.00 1 inch 6,287.00 11/2 inches 12,598.00 2 inches 20,152.00 3 inches 40,286.00 4 inches 62,953.00 6 inches 125,900.00 8 inches 201,446.00  
(b)  For any other meter size not specifically set forth above, the availability fee, to serve improvements located within the town limits, shall be computed by multiplying the meter equivalent ratio for the other meter by two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) (the availability fee for a five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch meter). The meter equivalent ratio is the ratio of the maximum flow possible through a particular size meter relative to the maximum flow possible through a five-eighths ( 5/8 ) inch meter, as determined by the town manager using recognized engineering standards and technical literature on the other meter. 
(c)  For any new sewer connection and for any sewer expansion, to serve improvements located outside the town limits, there shall be charged an availability fee computed at the same rate as set out in subsections (a) and (b) above, plus a surcharge of seventy-five (75) percent of such rate. 
(d)  For any affordable housing financed with New River Valley HOME Consortium funds, the following shall apply: 
(1)  In lieu of the availability fee imposed pursuant to section 18-109, the fee, regardless of meter size or equivalent residential connections, for connecting a unit of affordable housing to the town sewer system shall be waived. The town manager shall develop an application and review process for such waivers. In the event that a request is denied by the town manager, the decision may be appealed to the town council within thirty (30) days from the date of the manager's decision. 
(2)  As used herein, "affordable housing" means a dwelling unit (i) to be purchased and occupied by an individual or family with a household income at or below eighty (80) percent of the Area Median Income ("AMI") or (ii) one that is developed as rental property for tenants with a household income at or below sixty (60) percent of the AMI. The affordable housing must be substantially funded by the New River Valley HOME Consortium, as evidenced by a written agreement between the applicant and the Consortium, and the waived fees must serve as the town's matching funds required for a Consortium project pursuant to HOME program regulations administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(3)  An applicant requesting a waiver of the sewer availability fee shall agree to pay the difference between the waived fee and the standard availability fee if the dwelling unit ceases to be affordable housing, as defined herein, at any time within ten (10) years from the date the connection to the town sewer system is made. This agreement shall be secured through a deed of trust. 
(e)  For affordable housing developed with federal low-income housing tax credits, the following shall apply: 
(1)  In lieu of the availability fee imposed pursuant to section 18-109, the fee, regardless of meter size or equivalent residential connections, for connecting a unit of affordable housing to the town sewer system may be waived. The town manager shall develop an application and review process for such waiver requests. The town council must approve the waiver request by adopting a resolution finding that the project will serve the town's stated goals for affordable housing and that the waived fees will serve as the town's support for a project eligible for federal low-income housing tax credits administered by the Virginia Housing and Development Authority. 
(2)  As used in this subsection, "affordable housing" means a federal low-income housing tax credit project to develop dwelling units that are developed as rental property for tenants with a household income at or below sixty (60) percent of the Area Median Income. 
(3)  An applicant requesting a waiver of the sewer availability fee shall agree to pay the difference between the waived fee and the standard availability fee if the dwelling unit ceases to be affordable housing, as defined herein, within the affordability period set forth in the resolution approving the waiver. This agreement shall be secured through a deed of trust. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 10, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 1235, § 12, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 1270, § 12, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1329, § 12, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 1356, § 2, 3-9-04; Ord. No. 1627, § 1, 10-11-11; Ord. No. 1772, § 1, 8-11-15 ) 
Section 18-110. - Procedure upon transfer of property served by sewer system. 
(a)  When transfers of property served by the sewer system are made, the transferor should promptly notify, in writing, the finance department of the transfer and give the name and address of the new owner. The new owner must promptly sign a new application for sewer service. 
(b)  The director of finance shall charge a ten dollar ($10.00) transfer fee when sewer records are changed from the name of one person to another person. If such change is made at the same time as a change in the water records, the total amount of such fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
Section 18-111. - Grounds for denial of sewer service. 
    A prospective customer may be refused sewer service if, in the opinion of the director: 
(1)  The size or location of a main is inadequate to provide service until arrangements for such deficiency can be resolved as provided herein. 
(2)  The existing plant capacity is not adequate to provide the necessary treatment. 
(3)  The customer fails to comply with the Blacksburg Sanitary Sewer Specifications. 
Section 18-112. - Separate sewer connection for each dwelling or commercial building. 
    A separate sewer service connection shall be required for each dwelling or commercial building fronting on a street or highway, regardless of ownership. 
Section 18-113. - Unauthorized sewer connections. 
    No person shall, without proper authorization from the director, tap or make any connection with any main or service lateral connected with the sewer system. 
Section 18-114. - Right of access to premises served by sewer. 
    Authorized agents of the town, with identification, shall have the right of access at all reasonable hours to any premises served by sanitary sewer for the purpose of examining laterals and appurtenances, observing the manner of discharging sewage and for any other purpose which is necessary and proper in the conduct of the town's business. 
Section 18-115. - General sewer service standards; notice of interruption of service. 
(a)  The public works department shall exercise reasonable diligence to furnish a continuous and adequate sewer service to its customers and avoid any interruption thereof, except as may be precipitated by acts beyond its control. 
(b)  Whenever the public works department finds it necessary to schedule an interruption to its sewer service, it shall make all reasonable effort to notify all customers to be affected by the interruption, giving the time and anticipated duration of the interruption. 
Section 18-116. - Right to interrupt sewer service for repairs, extensions, etc. 
    The town shall have the right at all times to shut off the sewer service temporarily, without notice, for necessary repairs, extensions or other necessary work connected with the collection system or for causes beyond its control. 
Section 18-117. - Town not liable for accidental or temporary stoppage of sewer service. 
    No person shall be entitled to damages nor to have any portion of a payment refunded for any stoppage of sewer service occasioned by accident to any portion of the sewer works, nor for stoppage for purpose of additions or repairs. 
Section 18-118. - Discontinuance of sewer service generally. 
(a)  Sewer service may be discontinued to customers for the reasons listed below: 
(1)  In the event of a condition determined by the town to be hazardous. 
(2)  In the event the customer's use of equipment is in such manner as to adversely affect the town's equipment or the town's service to others. 
(3)  When the town has discovered clear and convincing evidence that, by fraudulent means, a customer has obtained unauthorized service. 
(4)  In the event of tampering with the equipment furnished and owned by the town. 
(5)  For failure of the customer to permit the representatives of the town reasonable access to its equipment or for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  For failure of the customer to furnish such service equipment, permits or certificates as shall have been specified by the town as a condition of obtaining service or in the event such equipment or permissions are withdrawn or terminated. 
(7)  For failure of the customer to provide access, a protected location and the standards for installation required by the town for service laterals. 
(b)  No service shall be discontinued on Friday of any week or on the day prior to a holiday, except in cases covered by paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) of subsection (a) above. 
(c)  Except in cases covered in paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) of subsection (a) above, the customer shall be permitted at least seven (7) days following the mailing of a notice to comply with the rule before service is discontinued. 
(d)  After sewer service is discontinued for violation of this chapter, such service will not be resumed until reasonable assurance is given that the consumer will comply with the provisions of this chapter and the turn-on fee is paid to the town to cover the cost of turning on the service. Each turn on and each turn-off for any reason other than for the convenience of the town will be charged against the customer. The turn-on and turn-off fee will be determined by the town manager. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall be in addition to those of Section 18-511, and the town may proceed under either section, or both, as applicable. 
Section 18-119. - Trespass on, or damaging, tampering with, etc., sewer system property. 
(a)  No person shall, without permission, enter or remain on any premises of the town used for the pumping or storage of sewage or for the storage of sewer system materials or equipment. 
(b)  No person shall damage, disfigure or tamper with any of the physical property of the town's sewer system. No person shall insert or permit to be inserted any object, material or substance which may cause damage or become hazardous to any pipe which is part of the collection system of the town, or which is directly or indirectly connected to the system; nor shall any person cause the discontinuation of the flow of sewage within such system. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not less than one day nor more than thirty (30) days, by both such fine and imprisonment. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, Title 18.2, § 137, damage to property. 
Section 18-120. - Unlawful disposal of human excrement. 
(a)  No person shall maintain or permit on premises owned or occupied by him any arrangement for the disposal of human excrement which may possibly endanger a source of drinking water or food supply or be accessible to flies or animals. No person shall deposit any human excrement upon the surface of the ground or any place where it may be exposed to flies or animals. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWER SERVICE LATERALS 

Section 18-200. - Installation and ownership from main to property line-Generally. 
    The town shall furnish and install, for the purpose of connecting its sewer system to the customer's premises, the public service lateral from its main to the customer's property line; except that developers shall make such installation in conformance with town standards and subject to inspection and approval. All such public service laterals shall include a cleanout installed at the expense of the property owner at the property line or utility easement; provided, however, that where a lateral is connected directly into a town manhole or a STEP or STEG tank at the property line or a public utility easement, this clean out may be omitted at the discretion of the town engineer. This portion of the service lateral is the property of the town and shall be maintained by the town. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 18-201. - Same-Charge. 
(a)  Applicants for sewer service connections will be charged for the installation of the public service lateral, including tapping of the main, clean out pipe and inspection of service installations. In the event developers or contractors install a public service lateral from the main to the property line and meet all town standards and inspections, the owner, upon application for service, will receive a credit towards the service installation charge. 
(b)  The charge for the installation by the town of a service lateral from an existing main to the property line shall be as follows: 
(1)  Inside the corporate limits: 
a.  Seventy-five (75) feet or less to the nearest property line: Nine hundred fifty-eight dollars ($958.00). 
b.  Over seventy-five (75) feet to the nearest property line: Estimated cost, plus twenty (20) percent, but not less than nine hundred fifty-eight dollars ($958.00). 
(2)  Outside the corporate limits: 
a.  Seventy-five (75) feet or less to the nearest property line: One thousand six hundred seventy-six dollars ($1,676.00). 
b.  Over seventy-five (75) feet to the nearest property line: Estimated cost plus thirty-five (35) percent, but not less than one thousand six hundred seventy-six dollars ($1,676.00). 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 11, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 1235, § 13, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 1270, § 13, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1329, § 13, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 1360, § 21, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1380, § 14, 4-26-05; Ord. No. 1414, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 1447, § 1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 1485, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 1518, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 1678, § 1, 4-23-13 ; Ord. No. 1720, § 1, 4-22-14 ; Ord. No. 1763, § 1, 4-28-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 1789, § 1, 4-12-16 ; Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 5-9-17 ; Ord. No. 1863 , § 1, 4-25-18) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1720 provided that this ordinance shall become effective July 1, 2014, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
Section 18-202. - Installation and maintenance from clean out to discharge point. 
(a)  The customer shall be responsible for furnishing and laying the necessary private service lateral from the clean out to the premises in accordance with the standards and requirements of the current edition of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. In the case of a STEG or STEP sewer system, the customer shall be responsible for furnishing and installing the necessary service lateral from the STEG or STEP tank to the premises, or from the cleanout at the property line to the premises if the tank is not located on the property that it serves. The owner shall relocate or reinstall any service lateral not meeting the standards of the town within sixty (60) days of notification, with reasonable allowance for adverse weather conditions. 
(b)  All installations under this section shall be by licensed plumbers and subject to inspection by the town before backfilling. 
(c)  All repairs to and cost of maintenance of the private sewer lateral from the clean out to the premises shall be at the expense of the customer. If such pipes are not repaired promptly following written notice of the need thereof, the town reserves the right to discontinue the service without further notice. The town shall in no event be responsible for maintenance of the private sewer lateral. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 18-203. - Minimum size for public service lateral. 
    The size of the public service lateral between the town main and the property line shall be as determined by the director of engineering and GIS but not less than four (4) inches' nominal diameter service lateral for conventional sewer and not less than one and one-fourth (11/4) inches for STEG or STEP public service laterals. If the premises are to be used for any purpose other than normal, domestic single-family use, the owner must file with the town the type of occupancy in detail, with sewer requirements, to enable the director of engineering and GIS to determine the required size of the public service lateral. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1467, § 1, adopted July 14, 2009, amended § 18-203 as herein set out. Former § 18-203 pertained to size. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Section 18-204. - Location. 
    The service lateral shall extend along the easiest route of access from the town's sewer main to the street line or the customer's property line. If practical, the pipe shall extend at right angles from the main to the front of the premises to be served. Laterals shall not cross intervening properties. The approval of the director of engineering and GIS or his or her representative shall be secured as to the proper location for the service lateral. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 7, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 18-205. - Unauthorized changing of pipe or fixture. 
    No person shall, without proper authorization from the director of planning and engineer, change any pipe or fixture on a service lateral between the property line or easement boundaries and the sewer main. 
Section 18-206. - Town's shutoff privilege in case of joint use of lateral. 
    In case two (2) or more customers are served through one (1) service lateral, if any of the parties so served shall violate the provisions of this chapter or other town rules or regulations, the town reserves the right to apply its shut-off regulation to the joint service lateral, except that such action shall not be taken until the innocent customer who is not in violation has been given reasonable opportunity to attach the service lateral leading to his premises to a separately controlled service connection. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS 

Section 18-300. - For new development-To be paid for by developer; contractor to submit certain information and documents. 
    All costs for sewer main extensions in and to new development to be built within the town shall be paid for by the developer. "New development" includes residential subdivisions, residential developments, commercial, industrial, business, institutional, civic, religious, or governmental development. Costs for sewer main extensions include the cost of material, equipment, and labor for installing mains in streets from existing mains to the new development. The developer's contractor shall submit to the town a plan of installation and evidence satisfactory to the engineer of experience and qualifications for installing sewer mains, adequate insurance coverage and assumption of liability by the contractor or developer. 
Section 18-301. - Same-Plan. 
    The plan of an installation referred to in section 18-300 shall be submitted to the director of engineering and GIS on a utilities plan at a scale of fifty (50) feet to the inch, showing pipe size and location, manhole locations, final easement or road boundaries and grade and location of service connections, manholes, pump stations and force mains. The plan shall be in conformance with the standards of the town. The pipe sizes, manhole and clean-out locations and STEG or STEP tank locations shall meet the approval of the director of engineering and GIS. On completion and approval of the installation, the plan shall be corrected to an "as built" drawing and filed with the engineering and GIS department on reproducible mylar paper. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 18-302. - Same-Installation standards; acceptance, ownership and maintenance. 
    The materials and installations involved in main extensions in residential subdivisions or developments shall meet the Town Sanitary Sewer Specifications and shall be subject to inspection and testing during installation and before acceptance. Upon acceptance, such mains and all appurtenances to the public system shall become the property of the town and the responsibility of the public works department for maintenance, except failures due to materials or workmanship occurring within twelve (12) months of acceptance, which shall remain the responsibility of the developer. At the time the "as built" drawing is submitted pursuant to section 18-301, the developer will submit a written request for the town to accept ownership of the mains. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Section 18-303. - For residential property owners within corporate limits. 
(a)  This section shall apply to requests by owners of single-unit or two-unit dwellings, or of other purely residential structures, which dwellings or structures existed in 1978 for extension of a sewer main to serve their real estate within this town. All mains installed shall be eight (8) inches in diameter in conventional sewer areas unless otherwise directed by the town manager. The mains for STEG or STEP sewer systems shall conform to the specifications established by section 18-106 of this Code. 
(b)  The person making the request shall apply in writing to the town manager. The town manager shall review such applications to ascertain whether satisfactory grades for the proposed main exist; permanent rights-of-way or easements can be granted to the town for the main; whether the project is consistent with the existing comprehensive plan; and whether funds exist to accomplish the project. 
(c)  The town manager shall prepare a written estimated cost of materials and shall determine whether rock removal will be required. If rock removal is required, the town manager will estimate the cost for removal and include it in the cost estimate. After the applicant has paid the estimated cost of material to the town and the cost of any required rock removal, the town manager shall schedule and complete the project. The town shall procure the materials, construct the project and supply all necessary labor, equipment, and materials. The applicant will pay the cost for any labor or equipment used for rock removal. At the conclusion of the project, if the amount previously paid to the town exceeds by more than fifteen (15) percent of such amount, the actual cost of the materials, the town shall forthwith refund the difference to the applicant. If the amount previously paid to the town is less, by more than fifteen (15) percent of such amount, than the actual cost of materials, the requesting citizen shall forthwith pay the difference to the town. If a main size of more than eight (8) inches in diameter shall be used, the estimated and actual cost of materials shall be based on the cost of an eight-inch main. 
(Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-14-09; Ord. No. 1822, § 1, 4-11-17 ) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to impose assessments for local improvements, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2404; how cost assessed or apportioned, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2406. 
Section 18-304. - [Reserved]. 
Section 18-305. - Extensions outside of corporate limits. 
(a)  All requests for sewer main extensions to serve property on which the improvements to be served are solely outside of the town's corporate limits shall be governed by this section, regardless of the nature of the person making the request, the improvements served, or of the purpose of the request. 
(b)  The person making the request shall apply in writing to the town manager. The town manager shall consider this application in light of the following standards: The feasibility and adequacy of the extension, and the economic, physical, environmental and long-term planning effects the extension would have upon the town. The town manager shall then make a recommendation to the town council and the council shall approve or deny the application. If the council shall approve the request for an extension, the town manager shall determine the administrative arrangements necessary to accomplish the extension. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER SERVICE CHARGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Section 18-400. - Rates generally. 
(a)  The charges for sewer service for a customer who is also served by the town water system shall be a flat billing service charge, plus a rate based on the amount of water passing through and recorded by a meter for the billing period, whether used or wasted as a result of leaks or neglect of the customer, at the following rates: 
(1)  Billing service charge inside corporate limits: Two dollars and ninety-six cents ($2.96) plus five dollars and eighty cents ($5.80) for each one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Billing service charge outside corporate limits: Five dollars and eighteen cents ($5.18) plus ten dollars and fifteen cents ($10.15) for each one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof. 
(b)  Where a customer is not served by the town water system, the sewer service charges shall be as follows: 
(1)  Monthly charge inside corporate limits: Thirty seven dollars and seventy-six cents ($37.76) for each equivalent unit. 
(2)  Monthly charge outside corporate limits: Sixty-six dollars and eight cents ($66.08) for each equivalent unit. 
(c)  The town manager is authorized and directed, on application, to exempt from the payment of the billing service charges imposed by this section, those elderly or disabled citizens who qualify for (but not necessarily participate in) the real estate exemption or deferral program, under chapter 21, article II, Blacksburg Town Code, whom town council finds constitute a separate class of utility service users. These latter provisions shall apply to the exemption here created, with necessary changes, except no requirement of real estate ownership shall exist, the scheduling of the application for exemptions and notification to participants may be flexible, and there shall be no proration of the exemption. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 14, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 1235, § 16, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 1265, § 1, 3-13-01; Ord. No. 1270, § 16, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1329, § 16, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 1360, § 24, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1380, § 17, 4-26-05; Ord. No. 1414, § 2, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 1447, § 1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 1485, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 1518, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1573, § 1, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 1678, § 1, 4-23-13 ; Ord. No. 1720, § 1, 4-22-14 ; Ord. No. 1763, § 1, 4-28-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 1789, § 1, 4-12-16 ; Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 5-9-17 ; Ord. No. 1863 , § 1, 4-25-18) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1720 provided that this ordinance shall become effective July 1, 2014, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
Section 18-401. - Surcharge for industrial wastes of unusual strength. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the terms used herein, including "industrial user," "suspended solids," "BOD," "normal wastewater" and others shall have the meanings ascribed to them in section 18-500. 
(b)  In addition to the charges prescribed in section 18-400, any industrial user of the sewer system who has greater than twenty thousand (20,000) gallons per day of flow and the strength of whose waste exceeds that of normal wastewater shall pay a surcharge for BOD and suspended solids concentration above that of normal wastewater. The surcharge shall be five cents ($0.05) per one thousand (1,000) gallons of flow for every fifty (50) mg/l of BOD or suspended solids or major fraction thereof. 
(c)  The surcharge provided for in this section shall be based on samples collected and analyzed by the town or its duly authorized representative. Samples shall be collected on a periodic basis, but not less than once per year. The cost of collection and analysis of samples shall be borne by the industry sampled. 
(d)  An industry shall notify the town of any significant change in waste characteristics within thirty (30) days of said change. 
Section 18-402. - When to commence. 
    The charge for sewer service shall commence when the service connection is completed for any premises. 
Section 18-403. - Lien on property served. 
    Pursuant to Virginia Code § 15.2-2118, delinquent charges accruing under this article shall be a lien on the property for or to which the service was rendered. Where residential real estate is involved, no lien shall attach (i) unless the user of the sewer service is also the owner or (ii) unless the owner of the real property negotiated or executed the agreement by which sewer service was provided to the property. Notice of such lien shall be provided in accordance with the requirement of Virginia Code § 15.2-104. 
(Ord. No. 1454, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Section 18-404. - Billing; when payable. 
    Except as otherwise provided, the charges for sewer service shall be included on the customer's water bill and shall be due and payable at the same time as the water bill is due and payable. Payment of these charges shall be subject to all applicable provisions of chapter 24, article VI of this Code concerning such bills, including notice of nonpayment, discontinuance of service for nonpayment, interest and penalties for delinquent charges. In the event that a customer is not also served by the town's water system, the sewer charges shall be billed in the same manner as provided in chapter 24, article VI of this Code relating to water charges and shall be subject to the applicable provisions of such article. 
(Ord. No. 1454, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Section 18-405. - Change of billing address. 
    Prompt notice should be given the town of any change in the billing address of the customer. Failure to receive a bill for sewer service does not relieve the customer of the obligation of its payment nor from the consequence of its nonpayment. 
Section 18-406. - No refund for nonuse. 
    No person shall be entitled to any refund of any portion of any sewer charges paid because of nonuse occasioned by absence or any other reason. 
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY (ICR) CHARGES 

Section 18-407. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, "ICR" means industrial cost recovery and the terms "significant industrial user," "BOD," and "suspended solids" shall have the meanings ascribed to it in section 18-500 of this chapter. 
Section 18-408. - Responsibility for paying. 
    Any nongovernmental user of the town's public sewer, as identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, under division A, B, D, E or I, shall be responsible for paying its share of the capital cost of the Blacksburg-VPI Sanitation Authority's wastewater treatment facilities funded by a federal grant after March 1, 1973. Industries which discharge only nonprocess, segregated domestic wastes or waste from sanitary conveniences shall be exempt from ICR charges. 
Section 18-409. - Amount. 
    Billing for ICR charges shall be based on the following: 
(1)  ICR charge for flow: $ 25.61/1000 gallons/day/year. 
(2)  ICR charge for BOD: $ 4.10/pound/day/year. 
(3)  ICR charge for suspended solids: $ 3.39/pound/day/year. 
Section 18-410. - Reading meters and collecting and analyzing samples for computation purposes. 
    The town, in conjunction with the Blacksburg-VPI Sanitation Authority, shall be responsible for reading flow meters and collecting and analyzing samples from significant industrial users. Sampling shall be conducted a minimum of once a year for purposes of computing ICR charges. The cost of collection and analyses shall be borne by the industry sampled. 
Section 18-411. - Flow from sanitary conveniences may be subtracted from calculations. 
    Industries subject to ICR charges may subtract that flow which is attributable to sanitary conveniences from the total flow for purposes of ICR charge calculations. Flow estimates from sanitary conveniences must be approved by the town. 
Section 18-412. - Duration of ICR period. 
    The ICR period shall last for thirty years, beginning July 1, 1979. 
Section 18-413. - Payment by new industries. 
    A "new" industry is defined as one which connects to a treatment works after such treatment works has been put into service. ICR payments by a new industry shall begin on the date use is initiated and shall continue for the unexpired portion of the ICR period or until the industry ceases use of the facility, whichever occurs first. Total ICR recovered from a new industry shall be the federal cost of the capacity used multiplied by the ratio of its period of use to the ICR period. 
Section 18-414. - Discontinuance of the use during ICR period. 
    If an industrial user discontinues use of the treatment works, its payment for ICR will cease. Total ICR recovery from an industry which discontinues use during the ICR period shall be the federal cost of capacity used multiplied by the ratio of its period of use to the ICR period. 
Section 18-415. - Billing; method and time of payment; delinquency. 
(a)  Each significant industrial user subject to ICR charges will be billed by the town annually based on results of sample analysis and meter readings. Each minor industry will be billed by the town on the basis of water usage and estimated strength of wastewater. Payment will be by separate check made payable to the town. 
(b)  ICR charges shall be due thirty days after the bill is rendered. If the bill is not paid within that time, a penalty of ten percent shall be added to the bill. If the bill and penalty was rendered, the bill will become delinquent and, unless the bill and penalty are paid prior to the commencement of any action by an employee or agent of the town in connection with cutting off or discontinuing such service, the service shall be discontinued or shall not be restored until all bills, penalties and a service charge of twenty-five dollars have been paid. 
Section 18-416. - Certification and remittance to sanitation authority. 
    The director of finance will certify to the Blacksburg-VPI Sanitation Authority the date and amount of the ICR payment's to the town. The town will remit payment to the Blacksburg-VPI Sanitation Authority within ten days of receipt of the user's payment. The town will remit all penalties collected by the town to the authority. 
Section 18-417. - Appeals. 
(a)  An industrial user may appeal to the town council on the issues of: 
(1)  Exclusion from ICR on the basis of discharge of primarily segregated domestic waste; or 
(2)  The amount of ICR assessment with regard to flow or BOD and suspended solids concentration. 
(b)  An industry has thirty (30) days from the date that the ICR bill is rendered to file an appeal with the town council. The appeal application must include the industrial user's name, address and a brief statement of the reasons for requesting an appeal and must be filed at the town clerk's office. Sample analysis submitted to substantiate characteristics of discharge must have been performed in a manner approved by the town prior to sampling. 
(c)  The town council shall notify the industry within seven (7) days of receipt of a request for appeal of the date set for hearing. The hearing shall be held within ten (10) days of the mailing of the notification to the industry. The hearing shall be informal and the industry or its representative shall present its argument, evidences, data, etc., in connection with the issues under discussion. A representative of the town shall present its factual basis for inclusion or assessment of ICR charges for the industry in question. The town council shall not be bound by rules of normal evidence taking, but may conduct the hearing in such a manner as to best serve the interest of the industry and the town. The town council shall make its findings and decision known to the industry within ten (10) days of the hearing date. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWER USE STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Section 18-500. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases set forth in this section shall have the following meanings: 
    Approval authority: This term means the director of the Water Division of the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand): The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty (20) degrees centigrade. 
    Building sewer: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge, from soil waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the lateral sewer, which begins at the property line of the building in question. The building sewer extends from the property line to the building in question. 
    CFR: The Code of Federal Regulations. 
    COD (chemical oxygen demand): The measure, expressed in mg/l, of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater, pressing the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific approved test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    COD-BOD ratio: The ratio of the value of COD to BOD as these values are defined above. 
    Composite sample: A combination or resultant sample compiled of individual samples of water or wastewater taken at selected intervals, generally hourly, for a specified period of time. The individual samples may be equal volume or proportional to flow at the time of sampling prior to compositing. 
    Control authority: The Blacksburg-VPI Sanitation Authority, the POTW holding the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit. 
    Control manhole: A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Control point: A point of access to a source of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Entities: The Town of Blacksburg, Montgomery County PSA, and any other jurisdictions that this POTW may serve. 
    EPA: The U. S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
    EPA method: Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes, published by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, most current addition. 
    Garbage: Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Grab sample: A single sample of wastewater taken at either a set time or flow. 
    Incompatible waste: A waste which is not susceptible to adequate treatment by the wastewater treatment plant. 
    Industrial user: Any user that is a source of indirect discharge. Indirect discharge means the introduction of pollutants regulated by Section 307 (b), (c), and (d) of the Clean Water Act, from a non-domestic source into the POTW. 
    Industrial waste: Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
    Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, either: (1) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes, or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal: or (2) therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with all applicable statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations), including but not limited to the following: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Lateral sewer: The extension from the building sewer to the public sewer or other place of disposal. This sewer extends from the property line to the public sewer line. 
    Milligram per liter (mg/l): The same as parts per million when the specific gravity of the liquid is 1.0, and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    New source: Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are hereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(1)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
(2)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(3)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraph (2) or (3) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(1)  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
a.  Any placement assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(2)  Entered into binding contractual obligations for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase, or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Normal use: Any user discharging waste or a strength less than or equal to that of normal wastewater and at a flow rate of less than twenty five thousand gallons per day. 
    Normal wastewater: Wastewater discharged into the public sewer in which all of the following average concentrations and flows are not exceeded: 
(1)  BOD: Less than or equal to two hundred fifty mg/l. 
(2)  Suspended solids: Less than or equal to three hundred mg/l. 
(3)  Flow: Less than twenty-five thousand gallons per day. 
(4)  No toxic or harmful substances are present. 
    NPDES permit: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit; NPDES permit. 
    Overload: The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on the wastewater treatment plant in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
    Pass through: A discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude duration of a violation). 
    pH.: The logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter. 
    Plant: The Blacksburg-VPI Sanitation Authority's wastewater treatment facility. 
    Pretreatment: Application of physical, chemical and biological processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in or alter the nature of the pollutant properties in a wastewater prior to discharging such wastewater into the wastewater collection system. 
    Pretreatment standards: All applicable federal rules and regulations (including specifically those regulations found in 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471) implementing Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and the Clean Water Act of 1977, and including prohibited standard, as amended, as well as nonconflicting state and local standards. In case of conflict or regulations, the most stringent thereof shall be applied. 
    Public sewer: Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted wastewater in which owners or abutting properties shall have the use. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW): This term means town's public sanitary sewerage system, and those sanitary sewerage and treatment facilities owned by Blacksburg-Virginia Polytechnic Institute Sanitation Authority. 
    Sanitary sewer: A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm water, surface water, groundwater and other unpolluted waters are not intentionally passed. 
    Sewer: A pipe or conduit for carrying normal sanitary or industrial wastewater. 
    Significant industrial user: This term means: 
(1)  All categorical industrial users; and 
(2)  Noncategoric industrial users that: 
a.  Discharge twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more of process wastewater per day; or 
b.  Discharge process wastewater which makes up five (5) percent or more of the dry weather average hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment works; or 
c.  Has in control authority's opinion, a reasonable potential to adversely affect the treatment works (causing pass through, interference, sludge contamination or danger to the POTW). 
    Slug: Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal operation. The point of measurement shall be at the control point. 
    Standard methods: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Suspended solids: Solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
    The town: The Town of Blacksburg, Virginia, which may act through its town manager or his or her duly authorized agents. 
    To discharge: Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
    Unpolluted wastewater: Water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil. 
(2)  No acids or alkalis. 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in the receiving water. 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution. 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases. 
(6)  Not more than ten (10) mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD. 
(7)  Color not exceeding fifty (50) units, as measured by the platinum-cobalt method or determination as specified in Standard Methods. 
    User: Any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the public sewer. 
    Waste: Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities. 
    Wastewater: A combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface and storm water that may be present to a small extent. 
    Wastewater treatment system: Includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
(Ord. No. 1348, § 1, 3-9-04) 
Section 18-501. - Notice of violations of this article. 
    The town shall serve persons discharging wastewater into the public sewer in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing for penalties in accordance with the control authority's enforcement response plan. 
Section 18-502. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The town may enforce violations of or deviations from the standards of this article by suit for injunction or other appropriate legal action or suit. 
(b)  The town may seek and recover by legal action or suit from any industrial user monetary compensation for damages to its public sanitary sewage system, and the POTWs treatment system, caused by the industrial user's violation of or deviation from the standards of this article. 
(c)  A person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a maximum fine up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per violation per day and confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months, either or both. In the event of a violation, the town shall also have the right to terminate the sewer and water connections. 
(d)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (c) of this section the town is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it in entitled under authority of state statutes or other ordinances of the town against a person conducting a prohibited discharge or violating a pretreatment standard or requirement, including, without limitation, injunctive relief. 
(e)  Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document riles required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring devices or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a maximum fine of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one (1) year, or both. 
(f)  The town shall be authorized to implement such other program and enforcement mechanisms as are consistent with regulatory guidelines and are deemed appropriate. 
(g)  The town shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the town believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general/ public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the town's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with the compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violations which the town determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(h)  Effluent data provided to the department of environmental quality or to the town shall be available to the public without restriction. Industrial users shall comply with all public access requirements of 40 CFR Section 403.14, incorporated by reference. 
(i)  The town shall implement the control authority's enforcement plan. 
(Ord. No. 1348, § 2, 3-9-04) 
Section 18-503. - Prohibited discharges enumerated. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, cause to be discharged or permit to be discharged into the wastewater treatment system any of the following waters, wastes or effluents: 
(1)  Any waste which, by itself or by interaction with other waste, may: 
a.  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities. 
b.  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
c.  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
d.  Violate any pretreatment standards promulgated by EPA and contained in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 404-471. 
e.  Cause interference, as defined in this article and in 40 CFR 403.3(I) and in S1.1 of the State Water Control regulations VR680-14-01 as amended or as may be amended. 
f.  Any pollutant which, by itself, or by interaction with other wastes, creates, a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including but not limited to, any waste with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
g.  Any pollutant which, by itself, or by interaction with other wastes, results in toxic gases, vapors, or fumes in the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
h.  Any waste which, by itself, or by interaction with other wastes possess a pH less than 5.5. 
i.  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the control authority. 
(2)  Any water or wastewater discharge which contains: 
a.  Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the wastewater treatment system or to the operation of the system. Prohibited materials include but not limited to gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides. 
b.  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit. 
c.  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in publicly owned treatment works resulting in interference, but in any case heat in such quantities that wastewater temperatures at publicly owned treatment works exceed forty (40) degrees Celsius or one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit, unless the approving authority, or competent state or federal authority, as appropriate, on request of the publicly owned treatment works, approves alternate temperature limits. 
d.  Ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tars, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, paper products (other than those used for personal hygiene), slops, chemical residue, paint residue, bones, animal guts, or tissue, spent lime, stone or marble dust, grass clippings, spent grain, spent hops, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oils, bulk solids or any other solid or viscous substance present in sufficient quantities which will obstruct the flow in sewers, interfere with the wastewater treatment processes or cause overloading of the wastewater treatment system. 
e.  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 at any time, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel at the wastewater treatment plant. 
f.  Strong acid or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
g.  Any pollutant which will cause interference or pass through, including any toxic substances in amounts exceeding standards promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 307(a) of Public Law 92-500, and chemical elements or compounds, phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances or other substances which are not susceptible to treatment or which may interfere with the biological processes or efficiency of the wastewater treatment system, or that will pass through the system. 
h.  Antimony. 
i.  Beryllium. 
j.  Bismuth. 
k.  Cobalt. 
l.  Molybdenum. 
m.  Uranium ion. 
n.  Rhenium. 
o.  Strontium. 
p.  Tellurium. 
q.  Radium. 
r.  Herbicides. 
s.  Fungicides. 
t.  Pesticides. 
(3)  Any water or wastewater which exceeds the following limits in any random grab sample or twenty-four-hour composite, all parameters to be determined as prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136: 
a.  Arsenic: 0.05 mg/l. 
b.  Barium: 5.0 mg/l. 
c.  Boron: 1.0 mg/l. 
d.  Cadmium: 0.02 mg/l. 
e.  Chlorides: 250 mg/l. 
f.  Chromium (hexavalent): 1.0 mg/l. 
g.  Chromium (total): 1.57 mg/l. 
h.  Copper: 1.0 mg/l. 
i.  Cyanide: 0.5 mg/l. 
j.  Iron: 5.0 mg/l. 
k.  Lead: 0.30 mg/l average and 0.50 mg/l maximum. 
l.  Manganese: 1.0 mg/l. 
m.  Mercury: 0.005 mg/l. 
n.  Nickel: 1.0 mg/l. 
o.  Phenol: 0.5 mg/l. 
p.  Selenium: 0.02 mg/l. 
q.  Silver: 0.63 mg/l. 
r.  Tin: 1.0 mg/l. 
s.  Zinc: 1.3 mg/l. 
t.  Total dissolved solids (including sodium chloride and sodium sulfate): 750 mg/l. 
u.  Inert solids (Fuller's earth, lime slurries, lime residues, etc.): 250 mg/l. 
v.  Excessive discoloration, as determined by spectrophotometric method 204B, Standard Methods, or the latest approved method for industrial wastewater determinations. This parameter relates to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions but is in no way limited to these discharges. 
w.  Substances causing a chemical oxygen demand (COD) greater than 1,500 mg/l. 
x.  Substances which cause a COD to BOD ratio of greater than five to one. 
y.  In addition, if it is determined that any one of these parameters exceeds the state effluent requirement for the wastewater treatment plant, an adjustment in the given parameter concentration limit will be required. 
z.  No other head metals or toxic materials not previously detailed shall be discharged into the town wastewater treatment system without a permit from the town specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes and other applicable provisions. 
(4)  Any garbage, unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the sewer system. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension are prohibited. The town reserves the right to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-quarter horsepower or greater. 
(5)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes without the permission of the town. The town reserves the right to establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for the discharge of radioactive waste into its wastewater treatment system. 
(6)  Any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof run-off, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater unless specifically authorized by the control authority. 
(7)  Any water or wastewater discharges which contain substances that may: 
a.  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers. 
b.  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment. 
c.  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by the normal wastewater treatment process due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action. 
d.  Deleteriously affect the wastewater treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(8)  Any incompatible waste which: 
a.  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes and facilities employed; or 
b.  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving water; 
c.  Is the cause of or contributes to violations, including increasing the duration or magnitude of violations, of the publicly owned treatment work's national pollution discharge elimination system permit. 
(9)  Any slug discharges of water or wastewater. 
(10)  Any holding tank wastes, unless a permit is issued by the town. 
(11)  Any other substance which the environmental protection agency may, in the future, prohibit by law from being discharged into wastewater treatment systems. 
(12)  The discharge of any pollutant (including oxygen demanding pollutants BOD, COD, etc.) released at a flow rate or concentration which either single or by interaction with other pollutants will cause interference with the POTW. 
(13)  The discharge of a petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 8, 8-14-01) 
Section 18-504. - General powers of the town relative to prohibited discharges. 
(a)  If wastewater discharged or proposed to be discharged into the public sewer has a deleterious affect on the POTW, its treatment facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters; creates a hazard to life or health, creates a public nuisance; or is in violation of section 18-503, the town shall take the necessary action to: 
(1)  Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater; 
(2)  Require the user to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with this article; 
(3)  Require pretreatment, including but not limited to, storage facilities and flow equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable characteristics or substances, so that the discharge will not violate this article; 
(4)  Require the user making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay any additional expenses incurred by the town and/or the control authority for handling and treating overloads imposed on the wastewater treatment plant; or 
(5)  Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or necessary to achieve the purpose of this article. 
(b)  The town and/or the control authority and/or the approval authority shall have the right to determine when a discharge or a proposed discharge is covered by this section. 
(c)  The town shall reject wastewater or terminate wastewater treatment service, when it determines that a discharge, or a proposed discharge, is included under this section and does not meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Upon notification by the town the permittee shall halt immediately any actual or threatened discharge to the POTW that may present an imminent endangerment to public health or the environment or the POTW. Where the health or welfare of persons is threatened, notification will be immediate. Where the environment or the POTW's operations are threatened the permittee will be notified and afforded the opportunity to terminate the discharge and mitigate any damage. 
Section 18-505. - Accidental discharge of prohibited wastes. 
(a)  Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the town for review, and shall be approved before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  If, for any reason, an industrial user does not comply with or will be unable to comply with any prohibition or limitation in this article, the industrial user responsible for such discharge shall immediately notify the town, so that corrective action may be taken to protect the wastewater treatment system. In addition, a written report addressed to the town and the control authority detailing the date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and characteristics of the discharge and corrective action taken to prevent future discharges, shall be filed by the responsible industrial user within five days of the occurrence of the noncomplying discharge. 
Section 18-506. - Approval, maintenance, etc., of pretreatment and flow control facilities. 
(a)  Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flow prior to discharge into any part of the wastewater treatment system is required, plans, specifications and other pertinent data or information relating to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall first be submitted to the town for review and approval. Such approval shall not exempt the discharge or such facilities from compliance with any applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation or order of any governmental authority. Any subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall not be made without due notice to and prior approval of the town. 
(b)  If pretreatment or flow-control is required, the town may, at its discretion, require, review and approve the design and installation of equipment and processes. The design and installation of equipment and processes shall conform to all applicable statutes, town codes, ordinances and other laws. Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. The town and the control authority shall be allowed access to these facilities at all times. The industrial user shall have no more than one hundred twenty days to submit plans and specifications to the town after it receives notification from the town that pretreatment will be required. After approval of plans and specifications by the town, the industrial user shall have no more than one hundred eighty days to have the proposed pretreatment system in operation. 
(c)  Any failure to comply with this section in its entirety will result in the town's rejection of the wastewater for treatment at the wastewater treatment plant by terminating service. 
Section 18-507. - Dilution probation. 
    No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The control authority, as defined in 40 CFR Section 403.12(a), may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
Section 18-508. - Observation, sampling and measuring facilities. 
    When required by the town or the control authority a significant industrial user shall install a suitable control manhole, sampling chamber and flow measurement device to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such facilities shall meet the requirements of applicable town ordinances and codes. Plans and specifications for such facilities shall be submitted to the town for approval sixty days after receiving notification from the town of the requirement. The facilities shall be constructed and in operation within one hundred twenty days after the approval of the plans and specifications. Failure to comply with the time schedules detailed in this section will result in the town's rejection of the wastewater for treatment at the wastewater treatment plant by terminating service. 
Section 18-509. - Sampling, grab samples and analyses. 
(a)  The discharges of each significant user shall be sampled two times annually for purposes of determining user charge costs, industrial cost recovery charges and compliance with this article. In addition, analysis may be required by the control authority if any problem or apparent problem develops with an industrial user's discharge. 
(b)  Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, elide, temperature, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, twenty-four hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The control authority as defined in 40 CFR section 404.12(a) may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any industrial user that demonstrates that flow-proportional composite sampling techniques are infeasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. 
(c)  All sampling and analyses shall be performed as prescribed in 40 CFR Part 6, or in accordance with procedures approved by EPA if 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question. The cost of sample collection and analysis shall be borne by the user sampled. 
(d)  Representative of the POTW shall be authorized to enter the premises of any industrial user in which a discharge source or treatment system is located or which records are required to be kept under this article, to assure compliance with pretreatment standards. Such authority shall be at least as extensive as the authority provided under the Clean Water Act, Section 308 (33 U.S.C. Section 1318). 
(e)  This subsection has been repealed. 
(f)  Within thirty days of approval by EPA of the list of significant industrial users, under 40 CPR 403.80g), the town and/or the control authority shall notify each significant industrial user of its status as such and of all the requirements applicable to it as a result of such status. 
(g)  All industrial users shall promptly notify the town and the control authority in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
(h)  Significant noncategorical industrial users shall submit to the control authority at least once every six months (on dates specified by the control authority) a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the control authority. These reports shall be based on the sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the town determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated and analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and procedures including procedures suggested by the control authority and/or the town and approved by EPA. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the control authority in lieu of the significant noncategorical industrial user. Where the POTW collects all the information required for the report, the noncategorical significant industrial user will not be required to submit the report. 
(i)  The industrial user shall notify the control authority and the town, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and the state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the waste, an estimation of the maw and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve months. All notifications must take place within one hundred eighty days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notification of changed discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12 (j). The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12 N (d) and (e). 
Section 18-510. - Authority of town agents to enter user's premises, etc. 
    The control authority, and duly authorized agents of the town, bearing credentials and identification shall: 
(1)  Be permitted to gain access to such properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(2)  Observe all reasonable and generally accepted safety rules applicable to the premises established by the industrial user or other user. 
(3)  Be permitted to enter all private properties through which the town holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater works lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
Section 18-511. - Termination of service. 
(a)  The town reserves the right to immediately terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when any of the following conditions or circumstances exist: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater. 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the town that effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the user is delivering wastewater to the POTW system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the POTW as normal domestic treatment. 
(3)  The user discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the town and this article. 
(4)  The user discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system. 
(5)  The user fails to pay his bill for water and sanitary sewer services when due. 
(6)  The user repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(b)  If the user's service is discontinued pursuant to subsection (a)(2) above, the town shall supply the user with the governmental agency's report and other pertinent information. Service to the user shall not thereafter be provided until pretreatment facilities approved by the town are in satisfactory operation and the objections specified have been eliminated. 
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE PERMIT FOR SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS 

Section 18-512. - Required. 
    All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or discharge into any part of the wastewater treatment system must first obtain a discharge permit. The fee for such a permit shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) a year. 
(Ord. No. 1360, § 17, 4-27-04) 
Section 18-513. - Application. 
    Significant industrial users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and rile with the town, and the control authority, an application on the form prescribed by the control authority, and accompanied by the applicable fee. In support of this application, the user shall submit the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and SIC number of applicant. 
(2)  Volume of wastewater to be discharged. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those set forth in section 18-503 of this article, as determined by a laboratory approved by the town. 
(4)  Time and duration of discharge. 
(5)  Average and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. 
(6)  A slug discharge control plan containing the elements listed in Section 18-515(5), of this code. 
(7)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. 
(8)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials and types of materials which are, or could be discharged. 
(9)  Each product produced, by type, amount and rate of production. 
(10)  Number and type of employees and hours of work. 
(11)  Any other information deemed, by the town and control authority, to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
Section 18-514. - Evaluation of data and issuance. 
    The town will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the town with concurrence of the control authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions provided in this article. 
Section 18-515. - Conditions. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other regulations, user charges, industrial cost recovery and fees established by the town. The conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced in accordance with this article, and applicable state and federal regulations. Permit conditions will include the following: 
(1)  The average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(2)  Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(3)  Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities and specifications for monitoring programs. 
(4)  Requirements for maintaining and submitting technical reports and plant records relating to wastewater discharge. These reports and their submissions shall meet all of the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12 and Section 7.9, VR 68014-01, incorporated by reference. In particular, the following specific reporting requirements shall be met, as appropriate: 
a.  Notice of potential problems. All categorical and noncategorical industrial users shall notify the town and the control authority immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings, as defined in 40 CFR Section 403.5(b), by the industrial user. 
b.  Notice of change in discharge. AU industrial users shall promptly notify the town and the control authority in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge. 
c.  Report from noncategorical industrial users. The town and the control authority shall require appropriate reporting from those industrial users that are not subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
d.  Signatory and certification requirements. The reports required by this subsection shall include a certification statement as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2), incorporated by reference; and shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user. An authorized representative may be: 
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president if the industrial user is a corporation; or a general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietor respectively; or a duly authorized representative of the individual designated immediately above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the indirect discharge originates. The authorization must be submitted to the town and control authority in writing and must name a responsible person or position. Whenever the authorization of this section is no longer accurate a new authorization must be submitted to the town and control authority prior to or together with any reports to be signed by the authorized representative. Reports submitted to the approval authority by the POTW shall be signed by a principal executive officer, ranking elected official, or other duly authorized employee if such employee is responsible for overall operation of the POTW. 
e.  Record of retention. Any industrial user or POTW subject to these reporting requirements established shall retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results, whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this section, and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the department of environmental quality, and by the town, in the case of an industrial user. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user, or town, or when requested by the department of environmental quality. 
(5)  The town and/or the control authority must randomly sample and analyze the effluent from industrial users and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify, independent of information supplied by industrial users, occasional and continuing noncompliance with pretreatment standards. The town and/or the control authority must sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at least once a year. The town and/or the control authority must evaluate at least once a year whether such significant industrial user a needs a plan to control slug discharges. For the purpose of this subsection, a slug discharge is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. The results of such activity shall be available to the approval authority upon request. If the town and/or the control authority decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
a.  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
b.  Description of stored chemicals; 
c.  Procedures for immediately notifying the town and/or the control authority of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures for follow up written notification within five days; 
d.  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structure or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency responses. 
(6)  Daily average and daily maximum discharge rates, or other appropriate conditions, when pollutants subject to limitations and prohibitions are proposed or are present in the user's wastewater discharge. 
(7)  Compliance schedules. 
(8)  Other conditions to ensure compliance with this article. 
(9)  Control by the town and/or the control authority, through permit, order, or similar means, the contribution to the POTW by the industrial user to insure compliance with the applicable pretreatment standard and requirements. In the case of industrial users identified as significant under 40 CFR 4033(t), this control shall be achieved through permits or equivalent individual control mechanisms issued to each such user. Such control mechanisms must be enforceable and contain in minimum the following conditions: 
a.  Statement of duration (in no case more than five years); 
b.  Statement of nontransferability without, at a minimum, prior notification to the town and/or the control authority and provision of a copy of the existing control mechanism to the new owner or operator. 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards in Part 403 of 40 CM categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and state and local laws. 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record keeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable general pretreatment standards in Part 403 of 40 CFR, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and state and local law. 
e.  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the compliance date beyond the applicable federal guidelines. 
Section 18-516. - Duration; extension; modification. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. The town shall notify the user one hundred eighty days prior to permit expiration. Within ninety days of the notification, the user shall reapply for reissuance of the permit on a form provided by the town. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the town during the life of the permit, as limitations or requirements, as identified in section 18-503, are modified and changed. The significant industrial user shall be informed of any proposed changes in its permit at least thirty days prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
Section 18-517. - Transfer. 
    Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific significant industrial user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed location. 
Section 18-518. - Revocation. 
    Any significant industrial user who violates the conditions or his permit or of this article, or of applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked. Violations subjecting a user to possible revocation of his permit include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Failure of a user to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge. 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations and wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring. 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
Section 18-519. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section: 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which cause them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  (1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the town and the control authority at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the town and the control authority of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The town may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four hours. 
(d)  (1) Bypass is prohibited, and the town may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
(i)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(ii)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment down time. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment down time or preventive maintenance; and 
(iii)  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(2)  The town may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the town determines that it win meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. 
Section 18-520. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (c), below, are met. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the town within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days. 
(i)  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(ii)  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and time or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
(iii)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof, where allowed by law. 
(e)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(f)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is lost, or fails. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1728 , § 1, adopted June 10, 2014, repealed the former article VI, §§ 18-600-18-623, and enacted a new article VI as set out herein. The former article VI pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Section 18-600. - Authority and purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to (1) ensure the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Blacksburg; (2) protect the quality and quantity of state waters from the potential harm of unmanaged stormwater, including protection from land-disturbing activity causing unreasonable degradation of properties, water quality, stream channels, and other natural resoures; and (3) establish procedures whereby stormwater requirements related to water quality and quantity shall be administered and enforced. 
(b)  The authority for this article is provided by the Virginia Stormwater Management Act, contained at Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:27, et seq. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-601. - Definitions. 
    In addition to the definitions set forth in 9VAC25-870-10 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Regulations, as amended, which are expressly adopted and incorporated herein by reference, the following words and terms used in this article have the following meanings unless otherwise specified herein. Where definitions differ, those incorporated herein shall have precedence. 
    Administrator means the director of engineering and GIS of the town and/or the director's duly authorized designee. 
    Agreement in lieu of stormwater management plan means a contract between the town and the owner or permittee that specifies methods that shall be implemented to comply with the requirements of a VSMP for the construction of a single-family residence; such contract may be executed by the administrator in lieu of a stormwater management plan. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an application for a permit or requesting issuance of a permit under this article. 
    Best management practice or BMP means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land-disturbing activities. 
    Clean Water Act or CWA means the federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq.), formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
    Common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules. 
    Control measure means any best management practice or other method used to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to surface waters. 
    Department means the department of environmental quality. 
    Detention means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
    Development means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational, transportation or utility facilities or strucutres or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
    Discharge when used without qualification, means the direct discharge of a pollutant. 
    General permit means the state permit titled "General Permit For Discharges Of Stormwater From Construction Activities" found in Part XIV (9VAC25-880-1, et seq.) of the regulations authorizing a category of discharges under the CWA and the Act within a geographical area of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Hydrologic unit code or HUC means a watershed unit established in the most recent version of Virginia's 6th Order National Watershed Boundary Dataset unless specifically identified as another order. 
    Illicit connection means any connections to the town's storm sewer system that are not authorized by the town, by a valid NPDES or VPDES permit, or as may otherwise be authorized by law. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to the storm sewer system or to the waters of the United States that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges which are exempt pursuant to subsection 18-626(b) of this article. Any discharge in violation of a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or other stormwater discharge permit shall constitute an illicit discharge. 
    Land disturbance or land-disturbing activity means any man-made change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics, including clearing, grading or excavation except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in section 18-602(c). 
    Layout means a conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval. 
    Linear development project means a land development project that is linear in nature such as, but not limited to, (i) the construction of electric and telephone utility lines, and natural gas pipelines; (ii) construction of tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures of a railroad company; (iii) highway construction projects; (iv) construction of stormwater channels and stream restoration activities; and (v) water and sewer lines. Private subdivision roads and streets shall not be considered linear development projects. 
    Maintenance agreement means a legally recorded document that acts as a restriction on property and provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
    Minor modification means an amendment to an existing permit before its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation including, but not limited to, changes to EPA promulgated test protocols, increasing monitoring frequency requirements, changes in minor permit modification or amendment that does not substantially alter permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system or MS4 means all separate storm sewers that are defined as "large" or "medium" or "small" municipal separate storm sewer systems or designated under 9VAC25-870-380(A)(1). 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system management program or MS4 program means a management program covering the duration of a state permit for a municipal separate storm sewer system that includes a comprehensive planning process that involves public participation and intergovernmental coordination to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable, to protect water quality, and to satisfy the appropriate water quality requirements of the CWA and regulations and the Act and attendant regulations, using management practices, control techniques, and system, design and engineering methods, and such other provisions that are appropriate. 
    Natural channel design concepts means the utilization of engineering analysis and fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore, or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating a stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its banks and allows larger flows to access its floodplain. 
    Natural stream means a tidal or non-tidal watercourse that is part of the natural topography. It usually maintains a continuous or seasonal flow during the year and is characterized as being irregular in cross-section with a meandering course. Constructed channels such as drainage ditches or swales shall not be considered natural streams; however, channels designed utilizing natural channel design concepts may be considered natural streams. 
    Nonpoint source pollution means pollution such as sediment, nitrogen and phosphorus, hydrocarbons, heavy metals, and toxics whose sources cannot be pinpointed but rather are washed from the land surface in a diffuse manner by stormwater runoff. 
    Nonpoint source pollutant runoff load or pollutant discharge means the average amount of a particular pollutant measured in pounds per year, delivered in a diffuse manner by stormwater runoff. 
    Operator means the owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under this article. 
    Permit or VSMP authority permit means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the administrator for the initiation of a land-disturbing activity, in accordance with this article, and which may only be issued after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided by the department, if required. 
    Permittee means the person to whom the VSMP authority permit is issued. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Redevelopment means the process of developing land that is or has been previously developed. 
    Regulations means the Virginia Stormwater Management Program Permit Regulations, 9VAC25-870-10, as amended. 
    Runoff or stormwater runoff means that portion of precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one (1) or more waterways. 
    Site means the land or water area where any facility or land-disturbing activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land-disturbing activity. 
    State means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    State board or board means the Virginia State Water Control Board. 
    State permit means an approval to conduct a land-disturbing activity issued by the state board in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the state board for stormwater discharges from an MS4. Under these state permits, the commonwealth imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act and regulations, the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and the regulations. 
    State Water Control Law means Virginia Code Title 62.1, Chapter 3.1 (§ 62.1-44.2, et seq.). 
    State waters means all water, on the surface and under the ground, wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
    Storm sewer system means all facilities, conveyances, structures, and other items located within the town and owned and/or operated by the town that are designed or used for collecting, storing, treating, or conveying stormwater or through which stormwater is collected, stored, treated, or conveyed, including, but not limited to, roads, streets, catch basins, drop inlets, curbs, gutters, ditches, pipes, lakes, ponds, man-made channels, storm drains, outfalls, retention, detention and infiltration basins and other facilities. 
    Stormwater means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface or through conveyances to one (1) or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater management means the use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates. 
    Stormwater management facility means a control measure that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
    Stormwater management plan or plan means a document containing material for describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and methods for complying with the requirements of sections 18-606 and 18-607. 
    Stormwater runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan or SWPPP means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site, and otherwise meets the requirements of this article. In addition, the document shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to, the inclusion of, or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan. 
    Subdivision shall have the meaning contained in section 3-100 of the subdivision ordinance [Appendix B of this Code]. 
    Town or town means the Town of Blacksburg. 
    Total maximum daily load or TMDL means the sum of the individual waste load allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loading and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point versus nonpoint source trade-offs. 
    Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website means a website that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Act or Act means Article 2.3 (§ 62.1-44.15:24, et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1, Virginia Code. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Program or VSMP means a program approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land-disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized in this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article and associated regulations. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Program Authority or VSMP Authority means an authority approved by the state board after September 13, 2011, to operate a Virginia Stormwater Management Program. 
    Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or man-made, that gathers or carries surface water. 
    Watershed means a defined land area drained by a river or stream, karst system or system of connecting rivers or streams such that all surface water within the area flows through a single outlet. In karst areas, the karst feature to which the water drains may be considered the single outlet for the watershed. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-602. - Stormwater permit requirement; exemptions. 
(a)  Pursuant to Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:27, the town hereby establishes a Virginia stormwater management program for land-disturbing activities and adopts the applicable regulations that specify standards and specifications for VSMPs promulgated by the state board for the purposes set out in § 18-600 of this article. The director of engineering and GIS is hereby designated as the administrator of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program. All subdivision, site plan, or land use conversion applications in the town shall comply with the requirements of this article, except for those activities exempt as listed in this section. 
(b)  Unless exempt pursuant to Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:34, linear development projects shall control postdevelopment stormwater runoff in accordance with a site-specific stormwater management plan or a comprehensive watershed management plan developed in accordance with these regulations. 
(c)  The following activities shall be exempt from this article: 
(1)  Permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Virginia Code Title 45.1. 
(2)  Clearing of lands specifically for agricultural purposes and the management, tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops; or livestock feedlot operations including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, de-silting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11 (§ 10.1-1100, et seq.) or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in subsection B of Virginia Code § 10.1-1163. 
(3)  Single-family residences separately built and disturbing less than one (1) acre and not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that is one (1) acre or greater, including additions or modifications to existing single-family detached residential structures. 
(4)  Land-disturbing activities that disturb less than five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(5)  Discharges to a sanitary sewer or combined sewer system. 
(6)  Activities under a state or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use. 
(7)  Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of the project. The paving of an existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and reestablishment of existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this article. 
(8)  Conducting land-disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work required immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the administrator shall be advised of the disturbance within seven (7) days of the commencement of the land-disturbing activity, and compliance with the administrative requirements of section 18-603 of this article must be obtained within thirty (30) days of commencing the land-disturbing activity. 
(9)  Linear development projects disturbing less than one (1) acre. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-603. - Permit requirements; prohibitions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall engage in any land-disturbing activity until a VSMP authority permit has been issued by the administrator in accordance with the provisions of this article or an executed agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan has been approved. 
(b)  The operator must submit a complete and accurate registration statement on the official department form to the town in order to apply for VSMP permit coverage. The registration statement must be signed by the operator in accordance with 9VAC25-870-370. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued by the administrator, until the following plans and submittals have been submitted to and approved by the administrator as prescribed herein: 
(1)  A permit application that includes a state VSMP permit registration statement, if such statement is required (a registration statement is not required for detached single-family home construction within or outside of a common plan of development or sale, but must adhere to the requirements of the general permit); 
(2)  A stormwater pollution prevention plan that meets the requirements of section 18-608 of this article and includes the following: 
i.  An erosion and sediment control plan, approved by the town in accordance with the town's erosion and sediment control ordinance, chapter 10 of the town code; 
ii.  A stormwater management plan that meets the requirements of section 18-607 of this article; 
iii.  A pollution prevention plan that meets the requirements of section 18-609 of this article; 
iv.  Identified control measures to be implemented to ensure discharges are consistent with the assumptions and requirements of any specific waste load allocation for any pollutant established in a TMDL and assigned to stormwater discharges from a construction activity; and 
v.  Any other information deemed necessary by the administrator. 
(d)  No VSMP permit shall be issued until required fees are paid and the surety required by this article has been posted. 
(e)  No VSMP permit shall be issued until evidence of VSMP coverage has been provided, where required. 
(f)  No grading, building or other permit shall be issued for a property unless a stormwater permit has been issued by the administrator. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-604. - Time limits on applicability and grandfathering. 
(a)  Land-disturbing activities that obtain general permit coverage or commence land disturbance prior to July 1, 2014 shall be conducted in accordance with the Part II C technical criteria of 9VAC25-870. Such projects shall remain subject to the Part II C technical criteria for an additional two (2) general permit cycles. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the department. 
(b)  Land-disturbing activities that obtain general permit coverage on or after July 1, 2014 shall be conducted in accordance with the Part II B technical criteria of this chapter. Such projects shall remain subject to the Part II B technical criteria for an additional two (2) general permit cycles except as provided for in subsection D of 9VAC25-870-48. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the department. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at his or her discretion. 
(d)  Any land-disturbing activity shall be considered grandfathered and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP Regulation, provided that: 
(1)  A proffered or conditional zoning plan, zoning with a plan of development, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan, or any document determined by the administrator to be equivalent thereto (i) was approved by the town prior to July 1, 2012, (ii) provided a layout as defined in 9VAC25-870-10, (iii) will comply with the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP Regulation, and (iv) has not been subsequently modified or amended in a manner resulting in an increase in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge, and such that there is no increase in the volume or rate of runoff; 
(2)  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014; 
(3)  Land disturbance did not commence prior to July 1, 2014. 
(e)  Town, state and federal projects shall be considered grandfathered by the VSMP Authority and shall be subject to the Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP Regulation provided: 
(1)  There has been an obligation of town, state or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or the department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012; and 
(2)  A state permit has not been issued prior to July 1, 2014. 
(f)  Land-disturbing activities grandfathered under this article shall remain subject to Part II C technical criteria of the VSMP Regulation for one additional state permit cycle. After such time, portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to any new technical criteria adopted by the board. 
(g)  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical criteria of Part II C of the VSMP Regulation. 
(h)  Nothing in this article shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at his or her discretion. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-605. - Stormwater management plan requirement. 
(a)  No subdivision, site plan, or land use conversion application shall be approved unless the application includes a stormwater management plan, as required by this article, detailing how runoff and associated water qualtity impacts resulting from the activity will be controlled or managed. The stormwater plan shall consist of a concept plan, to ensure adequate planning for the management of stormwater runoff, and a final plan. Both plans must comply with the criteria established in this article. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan shall be developed and submitted to the town. The stormwater management plan shall be implemented as approved or modified by the stormwater program administrative authority and shall be developed in according with the following: 
(1)  A stormwater management plan for a land-disturbing activity shall apply the stormwater management technical criteria set forth in this article to the entire common plan of development or sale where applicable. Individual lots or parcels in new residential, commercial, or industrial developments shall not be considered to be separate land-disturbing activities. 
(2)  A stormwater management plan shall consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater flows converted to surface runoff. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-606. - Stormwater management concept plan. 
    A concept plan should be prepared at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision, rezoning application, or special use permit application or other early step in the development process to identify the type of stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project. The stormwater management concept plan must be approved prior to submission of a stormwater management design plan (as part of the construction or final site plan) for the entire development, or portions thereof. The following information must be included in the concept plan: 
(1)  A narrative that includes the description of current site conditions and final site conditions. 
(2)  A map (or maps) indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural stormwater management and sediment control facilities. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements; the limits of clearing and grading; a written description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required. 
(3)  Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this article and the specifications of the Virginia BMP Clearinghouse website. 
(4)  A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the project site. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(5)  Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges; information on the features to which stormwater is being discharged including surface waters or karst features if present, and the predevelopment and postdevelopment drainage areas. 
(6)  A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete. This description shall include a written description of the required maintenance responsibilities and responsible party for any proposed stormwater management facility. 
(7)  The town may also require a concept plan to consider the maximum development potential of a site under existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum potential. 
(8)  The applicant may be required to include within the stormwater concept plan measures for controlling existing stormwater runoff discharges from development or redevelopment occurring on a previously developed site in accordance with the standards of this article to the maximum extent practicable. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-607. - Stormwater management final plan. 
    After review of the stormwater management concept plan and modifications to that plan as deemed necessary by the town, a final stormwater management plan must be submitted for approval. All stormwater management plans shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional in adherence to all minimum standards and requirements pertaining to the practice of that profession in accordance with Virginia Code Title 54.1, Chapter 4 (§ 54.1-400, et seq.) and attendant regulations certifying that the plan meets all submittal requirements outlined in this article and is consistent with good engineering practice. The final stormwater management plan, in addition to the information from the concept plan, shall include the following: 
(1)  Contact information. The name, address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected. 
(2)  A narrative that includes the description of current site conditions and final site conditions. 
(3)  Topographic base map. A minimum 1? = 20' to maximum 1? = 50' topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet beyond the limits of the proposed development and includes: 
i.  All contributing drainage areas; 
ii.  Existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, floodplains or other significant natural or manmade features not otherwise shown; 
iii.  Soil types, geologic formations if karst features are present in the area, forest cover, and other vegetative areas; 
iv.  Current land use including all existing structures, locations of utilities, roads, and easements; 
v.  Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess the impacts of stormwater from the site on these parcels; 
vi.  The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns on the site; 
vii.  Proposed buildings roads, parking areas, utilities, and stormwater management facilities; and 
viii.  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, including but not limited to planned locations of utilities, roads and easements. 
(4)  A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete including a schedule of detailed maintenance procedures to ensure their continued function described in section 18-619. 
(5)  Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations documenting runoff characteristics and verifying compliance with the water quality and quantity requirements of this article. 
(6)  Information about the proposed stormwater management facilities, including: 
i.  The type of facilities; 
ii.  Location, including geographical coordinates; 
iii.  Acres treated (pervious and impervious); and 
iv.  The surface waters or karst features into which the facility will discharge. 
(7)  Soils information. Geotechnical properties for the hydrologic and structural properties of soils, especially for dam embankments, shall be described in a soils report. The submitted report shall include boring depth, sampling frequency and types and associated laboratory testing with results and conclusions and follow the criteria in the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook. Soil properties for infiltration facilities shall also conform to the guidance and specification outlined in the Virginia Best Management Practice Clearinghouse. Site-specific soil borings are required to support the use of infiltration practices. 
(8)  If an operator intends to meet the stormwater requirements set forth this article through the use of off-site compliance options, where applicable, then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included. 
(9)  Elements of the stormwater management plans that include activities regulated under Virginia Code Title 54.1, Chapter 4 (§ 54.1-400, et seq.) shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(10)  A construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities shall be submitted to the administrator. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-608. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan; contents of plans. 
(a)  A stormwater pollution prevention plan shall include, but not be limited to, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, a pollution prevention plan for regulated land-disturbing activities, and a description of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL WLA assigned to stormwater discharges as described below. 
(b)  An erosion and sediment control plan consistent with the requirements of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law and regulations must be designed and implemented during construction activities. Prior to land disturbance, this plan must be approved by either the local erosion and sediment control program or the department in accordance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law and attendant regulations. 
(c)  A stormwater management plan consistent with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and regulations must be designed and implemented during construction activities. Prior to land disturbance, this plan must be approved by the stormwater program administrative authority, except for land-disturbing activities previously covered under the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities issued July 1, 2009. 
(d)  A pollution prevention plan that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges from the construction site and describe control measures that will be used to minimize pollutants in stormwater discharges from the construction site must be developed before land disturbance commences. 
(e)  In addition to the above requirements, if a specific WLA for a pollutant has been established in a TMDL and is assigned to stormwater discharges from a construction activity, additional control measures must be identified and implemented by the operator so that discharges are consistent with the assumptions and requirements of the WLA in a state water control board approved TMDL. 
(f)  The stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) required by this article must address the following requirements, to the extent otherwise required by local or state law or regulations and any applicable requirements of a VSMP permit: 
(1)  Control stormwater volume and velocity within the site to minimize soil erosion; 
(2)  Control stormwater discharges, including both peak flow rates and total stormwater volume, to minimize erosion at outlets and to minimize downstream channel and stream bank erosion; 
(3)  Minimize the amount of soil exposed during construction activity; 
(4)  Minimize the disturbance of steep slopes; 
(5)  Minimize sediment discharges from the site. The design, installation and maintenance of erosion and sediment controls must address factors such as the amount, frequency, intensity, and duration of precipitation, the nature of resulting stormwater runoff, and soil characteristics, including the range of soil particle sizes expected to be present on the site; 
(6)  Provide and maintain natural buffers around surface waters, and direct stormwater to vegetated areas to increase sediment removal and maximize stormwater infiltration, unless infeasible; 
(7)  Minimize soil compaction and, unless unfeasible, preserve topsoil; and 
(8)  Stabilization of disturbed areas must, at a minimum, be initiated immediately whenever any clearing, grading, excavating, or other land-disturbing activities have permanently ceased on any portion of the site, or temporarily cease on any portion of the site and will not resume for a period exceeding fourteen (14) calendar days. Where drought, arid, or semi-arid exists such that initiating vegetative stabilization measures immediately is unfeasible, alternative stabilization measures shall be specified by the administrator. 
(g)  The SWPPP shall be amended whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP. 
(h)  The SWPPP must be maintained at a central location onsite. If an onsite location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-609. - Pollution prevention plan; contents of plan. 
(a)  The required pollution prevention plan shall be developed, implemented, and updated as necessary and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented, and maintained to achieve the following: 
(1)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and 
(3)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures. 
(b)  The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges: 
(1)  Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control; 
(2)  Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials; 
(3)  Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and 
(4)  Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing. 
(c)  Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-610. - Review of stormwater management plan. 
(a)  The administrator, or any duly authorized agent of the administrator, shall review stormwater management plans and shall approve or disapprove a stormwater management plan according to the following: 
(1)  The administrator shall determine the completeness of a plan in accordance with this article, and shall notify the applicant in writing of such determination within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed to be incomplete, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons the plan is deemed incomplete. 
(2)  The administrator shall have an additional sixty (60) calendar days from the date of the communiation of completeness to review the plan, except that if a determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in susbection (a), then the plan shall be deemed complete and the administrator shall have sixty (60) calendar days from the date of submission to review the plan. 
(3)  The administrator shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved within forty-five (45) calendar days of the date of resubmission. 
(4)  During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the decision communicated in writing to the person responsible for the land-disturbing activity or his or her designated agent. If the plan is not approved, the reason for not approving shall be provided in writing. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's complaince with the requirements of this article. 
(5)  If a plan meeting all requirements of this article is sumitted and no action is taken within the time provided in subsection (2) above for review, the plan shall be deemed approved. 
(b)  Approved stormwater plans may be modified as follows: 
(1)  Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be allowed only after review and written approval by the administrator. The administrator shall have sixty (60) calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request. 
(2)  The administrator may require that an approved stormwater management plan be amended, within a time prescribed by the administrator, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection. 
(c)  The administrator shall require the submission of a construction record drawing or "as-built" plans for permanent stormwater management facilities. The administrator may elect not to require construction record drawings for stormwater management facilities for which recorded maintenance agreements are not required pursuant to this article. 
(d)  "As-built" plans are required for any stormwater management conveyance and facilities upon completion of construction. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Virginia. Acceptance of the as-built and a final inspection by the town are required before the release of any performance securities can occur. A professional engineer shall certify all aspects of the BMP construction, including as-built surveys, as well as geotechnical inspections during subsurface or backfilling, riser and principal spillway installation, bioretention soil placement and compaction activities. If the inspection certification is not performed by the professional engineer who certified the final design specifications, the inspection certification must include certification of the final design specifications. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-611. - General criteria for stormwater management. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified, the prescribed design storms are the one-year, two-year, and ten-year 24-hour storms using the site-specific rainfall precipitation frequency data recommended by the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14. Partial duration time series shall be used for the precipitation data. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified, all hydrologic analyses shall be based on the existing watershed characteristics and how the ultimate development condition of the subject project will be addressed. 
(c)  The U.S. Department of Agriculture's Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) synthetic 24-hour rainfall distribution and models, including, but not limited to TR-55 and TR-20; hydrologic and hydraulic methods developed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; or other standard hydrologic and hydraulic methods, shall be used to conduct the analyses described in this part. 
(d)  For drainage areas of two hundred (200) acres or less, the town may allow for the use of the rational method for evaluating peak discharges and the use of the modified rational method for evaluating volumetric flows to stormwater conveyances. 
(e)  In accordance with Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:28, stormwater harvesting is encouraged for the purposes of landscape irrigation systems, fire protection systems, flushing water closets and urinals, and other water handling systems to the extent such systems are consistent with federal, state, and local regulations. 
(f)  Stormwater management wet ponds and extended detention ponds that are not covered by the impounding structure regulations (4VAC50-20) shall, at a minimum, be engineered for structural integrity for the 100-year storm event. 
(g)  Construction of stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities may occur in karst areas only after a study of the geology and hydrology of the area has been conducted to determine the presence or absence of karst features that may be impacted by stormwater runoff and BMP placement. 
(h)  Discharge of stormwater runoff to a karst feature shall meet the water quality criteria set out in 9VAC25-870-63 and the water quantity criteria set out in 9VAC25-870-66. Permanent stormwater management impoundment structures or facilities shall only be constructed in karst features after completion of a geotechnical investigation that identifies any necessary modifications to the BMP to ensure its structural integrity and maintain its water quality and quantity efficiencies. The person responsible for the land-disturbing activity is encouraged to screen for known existence of heritage resources in the karst features. Any Class V underground injection control well registration statements for stormwater discharges to improved sinkholes shall be included in the SWPPP. Determination of flooding and channel erosion impacts to receiving streams due to land-disturbing activities shall be measured at each point of discharge from the land disturbance and such determination shall include any runoff from the balance of the watershed which also contributes to that point of discharge. 
(i)  Construction of stormwater management facilities or modifications to channels shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations. Evidence of approval of all necessary permits, such as US Army Corps of Engineers and VA DEQ Wetland Permits, VA DEQ VPDES Permits, etc., shall be presented. 
(j)  Pre-development and post-development runoff rates shall be verified by calculations that are consistent with good engineering practices. 
(k)  Land-disturbing activities shall apply the stormwater management technical criteria set forth in this part to the entire common plan of development or sale where applicable. Individual lots or parcels in a residential, commercial, or industrial common plan of development or sale shall not be considered to be separate land-disturbing activities. Instead, the common plan, as a whole, shall be considered to be a single land-disturbing activity. Hydrologic parameters that reflect the ultimate land disturbance shall be used in all engineering calculations. 
(l)  All stormwater management facilities shall have a maintenance plan and agreement, which identifies the owner and responsible party for carrying out the maintenance plan in accordance with this article. 
(m)  Construction of stormwater management impoundment structures within a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) designated 100-year floodplain shall be avoided to the extent possible. When this is unavoidable, all stormwater management facility construction shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations under the National Flood Insurance Program, 44 CFR Part 59. 
(n)  Natural channel characteristics shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. 
(o)  Land-disturbing activities shall comply with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Law (Virginia Code § 62.1-44:15:51, et seq.) and attendant regulations. 
(p)  Residential, commercial or industrial developments shall apply these stormwater management criteria to land development as a whole. Individual residential lots in new subdivisions shall not be considered separate land development projects, but rather the entire subdivision shall be considered a single land development project. Hydrologic parameters shall reflect the ultimate land development and shall be used in all engineering calculations. 
(q)  The design criteria, methodologies and construction specifications for all stormwater management facilities, and structural and nonstructural BMPs shall be those of the BMP clearinghouse website. The design shall be certified by a professional licensed in Virginia to perform such work. 
(r)  Storm drainage easements shall be required on lots or parcels where the conveyance, storage or treatment of stormwater is proposed or can reasonably be expected to occur. Easements may be public or private as established in the maintenance easement agreements and covenants. 
(s)  Safety measures shall be incorporated into the design of all stormwater management facilities in accordance with the stormwater management design manuals. 
(t)  Stormwater management facilities shall be designed to minimize the propagation of insects, particularly mosquitoes, provided that design features proposed will not negatively impact the functions of the facility. 
(u)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article or waivers or exemptions thereto, land development projects shall comply with chapter 10 of this code. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-612. - Installation/extension of stormwater conveyance and facilities. 
(a)  All developments referred to in subsection 18-603(b) shall install all stormwater conveyances, stormwater management facilities, storm drains, inlets, manholes and appurtenances thereto on all streets within the subdivision or development in accordance with the standards established by the town. 
(b)  All stormwater management related infrastructure installed in subdivisions shall be constructed at the expense of the developer and in accordance with plans approved by the administrator. 
(c)  Flows released from runoff conveyances that discharge water onto lots within a subdivision shall be properly managed by the developer, at the developer's expense, to the boundary line of the subdivision or to a natural watercourse in accordance with provisions described in this article. If, in the opinion of the administrator, it is necessary to cross intervening property to reach a natural watercourse, the developer may be required to secure drainage easements and install drainage structures across the intervening property to assure discharge into the natural watercourse. 
(d)  After reasonable notice to the property owner, the town shall have the right to inspect any storm drainage conveyance and/or facility constructed on private property under the policies set forth in this article for the purpose of determining whether or not such provision are working properly. The property owner shall be notified in writing by registered or certified mail if maintenance is necessary. If after such notice has been provided, the property owner fails to perform necessary maintenance within a reasonable time, the town shall have the right to perform necessary maintenance as needed and bill the property owner for all costs incurred. 
(e)  Eligibility for town participation with property owners in the design and installation of stormwater conveyance or facility improvements on private property is dependent on the need to manage stormwater runoff if the failure to do so may cause a threat to public health, public safety or public welfare. Projects that qualify for town participation include properties that exist in part or whole on private property, are in a drainage area of less than one hundred (100) acres and have a problem that consists of stormwater from a drainage area containing impervious public land uses or a public stormwater conveyance system. 
(f)  The town may participate with property owners, in accordance with the preceding subsection, in the design and installation of stormwater conveyance/management on private property provided that the property owner must furnish all pipe and other materials to meet the town's specifications and bear the expense of all associated materials. Town may participate in installation under the following conditions: 
(1)  The storm drainage system to be installed will carry water discharged from existing town streets. 
(2)  The installation of a storm conveyance and/or facility will extend or release to a natural watercourse or across the entire lot in the event there is no natural watercourse on the property. 
(3)  The location of the proposed stormwater management facility/conveyance is accessible to any equipment required for the construction of the project. 
(4)  The property owner grants to the town in advance a public drainage easement in which the improvements are installed. 
(g)  Projects will be prioritized as follows: 
(1)  Existence of potentially life threatening circumstances; 
(2)  Existence of potential damage to habitable structures; 
(3)  Existence of potential damage to property (erosion, flooding, deposition of debris, loss of access); 
(4)  Potential for harm to downstream waterway (erosion, aquatic habitat). 
(h)  The town's agreement to install, and the town's installation thereof, a storm drainage conveyance or facility under these policies shall not constitute a guarantee by the town that the conveyance and/or facility is adequate to accommodate all storm drainage that may flow into the conveyance or facility, nor shall it relieve the property owner of the duty to provide stormwater management measures to accommodate larger flows, if so required. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-613. - Water quantity, channel and flood protection. 
    Compliance with water quantity requirements of this article are as outlined below: 
(a)  Channel protection and flood protection shall be addressed in accordance with the minimum standards set out in this subsection. Compliance with the minimum standards set out in this section shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of Minimum Standard 19 of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations (9VAC25-870-40) and the town's erosion and sediment control ordinance. 
(b)  Channel Protection. Concentrated stormwater flow shall be released into a stormwater conveyance system and shall meet the criteria in subdivision (1), (2) or (3) of this subsection, where applicable, from the point of discharge to a point to the limits of analysis in subdivision (4) of this subsection. 
(1)  Manmade stormwater conveyance systems. When stormwater from a development is discharged to a manmade stormwater conveyance system, following the land-disturbing activity, either: 
i.  The manmade stormwater conveyance system shall convey the post-development peak flow rate from the two-year 24-hour storm event without causing erosion of the system. Detention of stormwater or downstream improvements may be incorporated into the approved land-disturbing activity to meet this criterion, at the discretion of the administrator; or 
ii.  The peak discharge requirements for concentrated stormwater flow to natural stormwater conveyance systems in subdivision (c) of this subsection shall be met. 
(2)  Restored stormwater conveyance systems. When stormwater from a development is discharged to a restored stormwater conveyance system that has been restored using natural design concepts, following the land-disturbing activity, either: 
i.  The development shall be consistent, in combination with other stormwater runoff, with the design parameters of the restored stormwater conveyance system that is functioning in accordance with the design objectives; or 
ii.  The peak discharge requirements for concentrated stormwater flow to natural stormwater conveyance systems in subdivision (c) of this subsection shall be met. 
(3)  Natural stormwater conveyance systems. When stormwater from a development is discharged to a natural stormwater conveyance system, the maximum peak flow rate from the one-year 24-hour storm following the land-disturbing activity shall be calculated either: 
i.  In accordance with the following methodology: 
Q Developed = I.F.*(Q Pre-Developed *RV Pre-Developed )/RV Developed 
Under no condition shall Q Developed > Q Pre-Developed , 
nor shall Q Developed be required to be less than that calculated in the equation (Q Forest *RV Forest )/ RV Developed 
Where I.F. (Improvement Factor) = 0.8 for sites > 1 acre or 0.9 for sites = 1 acre. 
Q Developed = The allowable peak flow rate of runoff in the developed condition. 
RV Developed = The volume of runoff from the site in the developed condition. 
Q Pre-Developed = The peak flow rate of runoff in the pre-developed condition. 
RV Pre-Developed = The volume of runoff from the site in the pre-developed condition. 
QV Forest = The peak flow rate of runoff in a forested condition. 
RV Forest = The volume of runoff from the site in a forested condition; or 
ii.  In accordance with another methodology that is demonstrated by the Administrator to achieve equivalent results and is approved by the board. 
(4)  Limits of analysis. Unless subdivision (3) of this subsection is utilized to show compliance with the channel protection criteria, stormwater conveyance systems shall be analyzed for compliance with channel protection criteria to a point where either: 
i.  Based on land area, the site's contributing drainage area is less than or equal to one (1) percent of the total watershed area; or 
ii.  Based on peak flow rate, the site's peak flow rate from the one-year 24-hour storm is less than or equal to percent (1) percent of the existing peak flow rate from the one-year 24-hour storm prior to the implementation of any stormwater quantity control systems. 
(c)  Flood protection. Concentrated stormwater flow shall be released into a stormwater conveyance system and shall meet one of the following criteria as demonstrated by use of acceptable hydrologic and hydraulic methodologies: 
(1)  Concentrated stormwater flow to stormwater conveyance systems that currently do not experience localized flooding during the ten-year 24-hour storm event: The point of discharge releases stormwater into a stormwater conveyance system that, following the land-disturbing activity, confines the post-development peak flow rate from the ten-year 24-hour storm event within the stormwater conveyance system. Detention of stormwater or downstream improvements may be incorporated into the approved land-disturbing activity to meet this criterion, at the discretion of the administrator. 
(2)  Concentrated stormwater flow to stormwater conveyance systems that currently experience localized flooding during the ten-year 24-hour storm event: The point of discharge either: 
i.  Confines the post-development peak flow rate from the ten-year 24-hour storm event within the stormwater conveyance system to avoid the localized flooding. Detention of stormwater or downstream improvements may be incorporated into the approved land-disturbing activity to meet this criterion, at the discretion of the administrator; or 
ii.  Releases a postdevelopment peak flow rate for the ten-year 24-hour storm event that is less than the predevelopment peak flow rate from the ten-year 24-hour storm event. Downstream stormwater conveyance systems do not require any additional analysis to show compliance with flood protection criteria if this option is utilized. 
(3)  Limits of analysis. Unless subdivision (2)(ii) of this section is utilized to comply with the flood protection criteria, stormwater conveyance systems shall be analyzed for compliance with flood protection criteria to a point where: 
i.  The site's contributing drainage area is less than or equal to one (1) percent of the total watershed area draining to a point of analysis in the downstream stormwater conveyance system; 
ii.  Based on peak flow rate, the site's peak flow rate from the ten-year 24-hour storm event is less than or equal to one (1) percent of the existing peak flow rate from the ten-year 24-hour storm event prior to the implementation of any stormwater quantity control measures; or 
iii.  The stormwater conveyance system enters a mapped floodplain or other flood prone area, as adopted by town ordinance. 
(d)  Increased volumes of sheet flow resulting from pervious or disconnected impervious areas, or from physical spreading of concentrated flow through level spreaders, must be identified and evaluated for potential impacts on down-gradient properties or resources. Increased volumes of sheet flow that will cause or contribute to erosion, sedimentation, or flooding of down gradient properties or resources shall be diverted to a stormwater management facility or a stormwater conveyance system that conveys the runoff without causing down-gradient erosion, sedimentation, or flooding. If all runoff from the site is sheet flow and the conditions of this subsection are met, no further water quantity controls are required. 
(e)  For purposes of computing predevelopment runoff, all pervious lands on the site shall be assumed to be in good hydrologic condition in accordance with the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) standards, regardless of conditions existing at the time of computation. Predevelopment runoff calculations utilizing other hydrologic conditions may be utilized, provided that it is demonstrated to and approved by the administrator that actual site conditions warrant such considerations. 
(f)  Predevelopment and postdevelopment runoff characteristics and site hydrology shall be verified by site inspections, topographic surveys, available soil mapping or studies, and calculations consistent with good engineering practices. Guidance provided in the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and by the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website shall be considered appropriate practices. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-614. - Water quality design criteria requirements. 
(a)  The following minimum design criteria and standards for stormwater management shall be applied to the site. Compliance with the following requirements shall be determined in accordance with the Virginia Runoff Reduction Method or other equivalent methodology approved by the Board. 
(1)  New Development. The total phosphorus load of new development projects shall not exceed 0.41 pounds per acre per year, as calculated pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Development on prior developed lands: 
i.  For land-disturbing activities disturbing greater than or equal to five thousand (5,000) square feet that result in no net increase in impervious cover from the predevelopment condition, the total phosphorus load shall be reduced at least twenty (20) percent below the predevelopment total phosphorus load. 
ii.  For regulated land-disturbing activities disturbing less than five thousand (5,000) square feet that result in no net increase in impervious cover from the predevelopment condition, the total phosphorus load shall be reduced at least ten (10) percent below the predevelopment total phosphorus load. 
iii.  For land-disturbing activities that result in a net increase in impervious cover over the predevelopment condition, the design criteria for new development shall be applied to the increased impervious area. Depending on the area of disturbance, the criteria of subdivisions (i) or (ii) above, shall be applied to the remainder of the site. 
iv.  In lieu of subdivision (iii), the total phosphorus load of a linear development project occurring on prior developed lands shall be reduced twenty (20) percent below the predevelopment total phosphorus load. 
v.  The total phosphorus load shall not be required to be reduced to below the applicable standard for new development unless a more stringent standard has been established by the town. 
(b)  Water quality compliance requirements. Compliance with the water quality design criteria set out in subsection (a) above shall be determined by using the Virginia Runoff Reduction Method or another equivalent methodology that is approved by the board. 
(1)  BMPs to be used to reduce phosphorus load and runoff volume in accordance with the Virginia Runoff Reduction Method shall be limited to those listed on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website at http://www.vwrrc.vt.edu/swc . These approved BMPs include the following: 
i.  Vegetated roof (Version 2.3, March 1, 2011); 
ii.  Rooftop disconnection (Version 1.9, March 1, 2011); 
iii.  Rainwater harvesting (Version 1.9.5, March 1, 2011); 
iv.  Soil amendments (Version 1.8, March 1, 2011); 
v.  Permeable pavement (Version 1.8, March 1, 2011); 
vi.  Grass channel (Version 1.9, March 1, 2011); 
vii.  Bioretention (Version 1.9, March 1, 2011); 
viii.  Infiltration (Version 1.9, March 1, 2011); 
ix.  Dry swale (Version 1.9, March 1, 2011); 
x.  Wet swale (Version 1.9, March 1, 2011); 
xi.  Sheet flow to filter/open space (Version 1.9, March 1, 2011); 
xii.  Extended detention pond (Version 1.9, March 1, 2011); 
xiii.  Filtering practice (Version 1.8, March 1, 2011); 
xiv.  Constructed wetland (Version 1.9, March 1, 2011); and 
xv.  Wet pond (Version 1.9, March 1, 2011). 
(2)  Offsite alternatives where allowed in accordance with section 18-616 may be utilized to meet the design criteria of subsection 18-614(a). 
(3)  BMPs differing from those listed above shall be reviewed and approved by the administrator in accordance with procedures established by the BMP clearinghouse committee and approved by the town. 
(4)  The administrator may establish limitations on the use of specific BMPs following the submission of the proposed limitation and written justification. 
(5)  The administrator shall have the discretion to allow for application of the design criteria to each drainage area of the site. However, where a site drains to more than one (1) HUC, the pollutant load reduction requirements shall be applied independently within each HUC unless reductions are achieved in accordance with a comprehensive watershed stormwater management plan in accordance with 9VAC25-870-92. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-615. - Stormwater management handbook and best management practice clearinghouse website; incorporation of vac provisions. 
(a)  The town will utilize the policy, criteria and information (including specifications and standards) of the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook ("handbook") and the Virginia Best Management Practice Clearinghouse Website ("clearinghouse") for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. All references to the Handbook shall mean the most current edition. The handbook includes additional guidance to accompany the stormwater regulations. The clearinghouse includes a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including the specific design criteria for each stormwater practice. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. Stormwater practices not included on the Clearinghouse website are not suitable for use in meeting the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of 9VAC25-870-93, 9VAC25-870-94, 9VAC25-870-95, 9VAC25-870-96, 9VAC25-870-97, 9VAC25-870-98 and 9VAC25-870-99 are hereby incorporated by reference. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-616. - Offsite compliance options. 
(a)  Offsite compliance options that the town may allow an operator to use to meet required phosphorus nutrient reductions include the following: 
(1)  Offsite controls utilized in accordance with the town's comprehensive stormwater management plan for the watershed within which a project is located; 
(2)  A local pollutant loading pro rata share program established pursuant to Virginia Code § 15.2- 2243 or similar local funding mechanism; 
(3)  The nonpoint nutrient offset program established pursuant to Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:35; 
(4)  Any other offsite options approved by an applicable state agency or state board; and 
(5)  When an operator has additional properties available within the same HUC or upstream HUC that the land-disturbing activity directly discharges to or within the same watershed as determined by the VSMP authority, offsite stormwater management facilities on those properties may be utilized to meet the required phosphorus nutrient reductions from the land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this subsection, and pursuant to Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:35, operators shall be allowed to utilize offsite options identified in subsection 1 of this subsection under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Less than five (5) acres of land will be disturbed; 
(2)  The post-construction phosphorus control requirement is less than ten (10) pounds per year; or 
(3)  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the required phosphorus nutrient reductions are achieved on-site. If at least seventy-five (75) percent of the required phosphorus nutrient reductions cannot be met onsite, and the operator can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town that (i) alternative site designs have been considered that may accommodate on-site best management practices, (ii) on-site best management practices have been considered in alternative site designs to the maximum extent practicable, (iii) appropriate on-site best management practices will be implemented, and (iv) full compliance with postdevelopment nonpoint nutrient runoff compliance requirements cannot practicably be met on-site, then the required phosphorus nutrient reductions may be achieved, in whole or in part, through the use of off-site compliance options. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, offsite options shall not be allowed: 
(1)  Unless the selected offsite option achieves the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the operator's land-disturbing activity. In the case of a phased project, the operator may acquire or achieve offsite nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of each phase of land-disturbing activity in an amount sufficient for each phase. 
(2)  In contravention of town water quality-based limitations at the point of discharge that are (i) consistent with the determinations made pursuant to subsection B of Virginia Code § 62.1-44.19:7, (ii) contained in a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) program plan approved by the department, or (iii) as otherwise may be established or approved by the town. 
(d)  In order to meet the requirements of this article, offsite options described in subdivisions (1) and (2) of subsection (a) of this section may be utilized. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-617. - Maintenance of permanent stormwater facilities. 
(a)  The administrator shall require the provision of long-term responsibility for and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and other techniques specified to manage the quality and quantity of runoff. Such requirements shall be set forth in an instrument recorded in the Montgomery County land records prior to plan approval and shall at a minimum: 
(1)  Be submitted to the administrator for review and approval prior to the approval of the stormwater management plan; 
(2)  Be stated to run in perpetuity with the land; 
(3)  Provide for all necessary access to the property for purposes of maintenance and regulatory inspections; 
(4)  Provide for inspections and maintenance and the submission of inspection and maintenance reports to the administrator; and 
(5)  Be enforceable by all appropriate governmental parties. 
(b)  At the discretion of the administrator, such recorded instruments need not be required for stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an individual residential lot on which they are located, provided it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the administrator that future maintenance of such facilities will be addressed through an enforceable mechanism at the discretion of the administrator. 
(c)  The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained, as well as the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(d)  As provided by Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:28(7), a stormwater management plan approved for a residential, commercial or industrial subdivision shall govern the development of individual parcels, including parcels developed under subsequent owners, and shall be subject to the requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-618. - Inspections. 
(a)  Stormwater management construction inspection shall utilize the final approved plans and specifications for compliance. In addition, the inspection shall comply with latest version of the erosion and sediment control regulations, promulgated pursuant to Virginia Code Title 10.1, Chapter 5, Article 4. 
(b)  The administrator, or any duly authorized agent of the administrator, shall inspect the land-disturbing activity during construction for: 
(1)  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(2)  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Development, updating, and implementation of a pollution prevention plan; and 
(4)  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
(c)  The administrator, or any duly authorized agent of the administrator, may at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(d)  In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the administrator may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land-disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time specified. 
(e)  Pursuant to Virginia Code § 62.1-44.15:40, the administrator may require every VSMP authority permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to VSMP authority permit requirements under this article, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his or her discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article. Post-construction inspections of stormwater management facilities required by the provisions of this article shall be conducted by the administrator, or any duly authorized agent of the administrator, pursuant to the town's inspection program, and shall occur, at minimum, at least once every five (5) years except as may otherwise be provided for in this section. 
(f)  The administrator, or any duly authorized agent of the administrator, shall have authority to make such lawful inspections and conduct monitoring of stormwater outfalls or other components of the storm sewer system as may be necessary or appropriate in the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(g)  The administrator may utilize the inspection reports of the owner of a stormwater management facility as part of an inspection program if the inspection is conducted by a person who is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, landscape architect, or land surveyor pursuant to Virginia Code § 54.1-400, et seq., a person who works under the direction and oversight of the licensed professional engineer, architect, landscape architect, or land surveyor, or who holds an appropriate certificate of competence from the board. 
(h)  If a recorded instrument is not required pursuant to 9VAC25-870-112, the town shall develop a strategy for addressing maintenance of stormwater management facilities designed to treat stormwater runoff primarily from an individual residential lot on which they are located. Such a strategy may include periodic inspections, homeowner outreach and education, or other method targeted at promoting the long-term maintenance of such facilities. Such facilities shall not be subject to the requirement for an inspection to be conducted by the administrator. 
(i)  In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the town shall notify (i) the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the maintenance covenant or, (ii) the property owner(s) by registered or certified mail to the address contained in current land records. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the town, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition and recover the costs from the owner. 
(j)  Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least five (5) years. These records shall be made available to the town during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-619. - Landscaping plan. 
    The applicant must present a detailed landscaping plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used within and adjacent to the stormwater facility. The landscaping plan must also identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a qualified individual familiar with the selection of emergent and upland vegetation appropriate for the selected BMP. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-620. - Comprehensive stormwater management plans. 
    The town may develop comprehensive stormwater management plans to be approved by the department that meet the water quality objectives, quantity objectives, or both and comply with 9VAC25-870-92. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-621. - Performance security. 
(a)  The town shall require the submittal of a performance security or bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit or such other acceptable legal arrangement prior to issuance of a permit in order to insure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. 
(b)  The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus ten (10) percent. 
(c)  The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure, after proper notice, to complete work within the time specified, or to initiate or maintain appropriate actions which may be required of the applicant in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(d)  If the town takes such action upon such failure by the applicant, the town may collect from the applicant the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the security held. 
(e)  Within sixty (60) days of the completion of the requirements of the approved stormwater management plan in the form of certified as-built report and survey, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, except for the landscaping survivability, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
(f)  These requirements are in addition to all other provisions relating to the issuance of such plans and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements for such plans. 
(g)  Within sixty (60) days of the completion of the requirements of the permit conditions, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-622. - Fees. 
(a)  The following total fees to be paid by an applicant apply to (i) any operator seeking coverage under a July 1, 2014 general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities or (ii) on or after July 1, 2014 to any operator seeking coverage under a general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities, a state or federal agency that does not file annual standards and specifications or an individual permit issued by the board. After approval by the town council under the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities, no more than fifty (50) percent of the total fee to be paid by an applicant set out in this part shall be due at the time that a stormwater management plan or an initial stormwater management plan is submitted for review in accordance with 9VAC25-870-108. The remaining total fee balance to be paid by an applicant shall be due prior to the issuance of coverage under the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities. 
(b)  Fees to cover costs associated with implementation of a VSMP related to land-disturbing activities and issuance of general permit coverage and VSMP authority permits shall be imposed in accordance with Table 1. Such fee attributes include the costs associated with plan review, VSMP registration statement review, permit issuance, state-coverage verification, inspections, reporting, and compliance activities associated with land-disturbing activities as well as state program oversight costs. When a site(s) has been purchased for development within a previously permitted common plan of development or sale, the applicant shall be subject to fees ("total fee to be paid by applicant" column) in accordance with the disturbed acreage of the site(s) according to Table 1. 
Table 1: Fees for permit issuance 
Fee type Total fee to be paid by Applicant (includes both VSMP authority and Department portions where applicable) Portion paid to Commonwealth (based on 28% of total fee paid*) General/Stormwater Management-Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre) $290.00 $81.00 General/Stormwater Management-Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 Acres) $2,700.00 $756.00 General/Stormwater Management-Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) $3,400.00 $952.00 General/Stormwater Management-Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) $4,500.00 $1,260.00 General/Stormwater Management-Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $6,100.00 $1,708.00 General/Stormwater Management-Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres) $9,600.00 $2,688.00 *If the project is completely administered by the Department such as may be the case for a state or federal project or projects covered by individual permits, the entire applicant fee shall be paid to the Department.  
(c)  The following fees apply, on or after July 1, 2014 to coverage under the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities issued by the board for a state or federal agency that has annual standards and specifications approved by the board. 
General/Stormwater Management-Phase I Land Clearing ("Large" Construction Activity-Sites or common plans of development equal to or greater than five acres) $750.00 General/Stormwater Management-Phase II Land Clearing ("Small" Construction Activity-Sites or common plans of development equal to or greater than one acre and less than five acres) $450.00  
(d)  Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements from the general permit issued by the state board shall be imposed in accordance with Table 2. If the general permit modifications result in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the town such reviews shall be subject to the fees set out in Table 2. The fee assessed shall be based on the total disturbed acreage of the site. In addition to the general permit modification fee, modifications resulting in an increase in total disturbed acreage shall pay the difference in the initial permit fee paid and the permit fee that would have applied for the total disturbed acreage in Table 1. Fees specified in this subsection go to the town. 
Table 2: Fees for the modification or transfer of registration statements for the General Permit for Discharges of Stormwater from Construction Activities 
Type of Permit Fee Amount General/Stormwater Management-Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre) $20.00 General/Stormwater Management-Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 1 and less than 5 acres) $200.00 General/Stormwater Management-Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) $250.00 General/Stormwater Management-Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) $300.00 General/Stormwater Management-Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $450.00 General/Stormwater Management-Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 100 acres) $700.00  
(e)  The following annual permit maintenance shall be imposed in accordance with Table 3, including fees imposed on expired permits that have been administratively continued. With respect to the general permit, these fees shall apply until the permit coverage is terminated. Fees specified in this subsection go to the town. 
Table 3: Permit Maintenance Fees 
Type of Permit Fee Amount General/Stormwater Management-Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre) $50.00 General/Stormwater Management-Small Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance equal to or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 acres) $400.00 General/Stormwater Management-Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) $500.00 General/Stormwater Management-Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) $650.00 General/Stormwater Management-Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $900.00 General/Stormwater Management-Large Construction Activity/Land Clearing (Sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal to or greater 100 acres) $1,400.00  
(f)  General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be paid annually to the town by the anniversary date of general permit coverage. No permit will be re-issued or automatically continued without payment of the required fee. General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be applied until a notice of termination is effective. 
(g)  The fees set forth in subsections (a) through (c) above, shall apply to: 
(1)  All persons seeking coverage under the general permit. 
(2)  All permittees who request modifications to or transfers of their existing registration statement for coverage under a general permit. 
(3)  Persons whose coverage under the general permit has been revoked shall apply to the department for an individual permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities. 
(4)  Permit and permit coverage maintenance fees outlined under subsection 18-622(c) may apply to each general permit holder. 
(h)  No general permit application fee will be assessed to: 
(1)  Permittees who request minor modifications to general permits as defined in section 18-610. Permit modifications at the request of the permittee resulting in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the administrator shall not be exempt pursuant to this section. 
(2)  Permittees whose general permits are modified or amended at the initiative of the department, excluding errors in the registration statement identified by the administrator or errors related to the acreage of the site. 
(i)  All incomplete payments will be deemed as non-payments, and the applicant shall be notified of any incomplete payments. Interest may be charged for late payments at the underpayment rate set forth in Virginia Code § 58.1-15 and is calculated on a monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A ten (10) percent late payment fee shall be charged to any delinquent (over ninety (90) days past due) account. The town shall be entitled to all remedies available by law in collecting any past due amount. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-623. - Exceptions to stormwater management. 
(a)  The administrator may grant exceptions to the technical requirements of Part II B or Part II C of the regulations, provided that (i) the exception is the minimum necessary to afford relief, (ii) reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so that the intent of the Act, the regulations, and this article are preserved, (iii) granting the exception will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances, and (iv) exception requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created. Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Exceptions to the requirement that the land-disturbing activity obtain required VSMP authority permit shall not be given by the administrator, nor shall the administrator approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse Website, or any other control measure duly approved by the administrator. 
(2)  Exceptions to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall not be allowed unless offsite options otherwise permitted pursuant to 9VAC25-870-69 have been considered and found not available. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall preclude an operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at their discretion. 
(c)  A request for an exception, including the reasons for making the request, may be submitted in writing to the town. Economic hardship alone is not a sufficient reason to request an exception from the requirements of this article. The request for an exception will be reviewed pursuant to this section. 
(d)  A record of all exceptions granted shall be maintained by the town in accordance with 9VAC25-870-126. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-624. - Illicit discharges. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) below, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this article to do any of the following: 
(1)  Cause or allow any illicit discharges, including but not limited to the discharge of sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes, into the storm sewer system, or any component thereof, or onto driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, or any other areas draining to the storm sewer system. 
(2)  Connect, or allow to be connected, any sanitary sewer to the storm sewer system, including any unauthorized sanitary sewer connection to the storm sewer system as of the date of the adoption of this article. 
(3)  Discharge any materials or item other than stormwater to the storm sewer system by spill, dumping, or disposal of any type without a valid federal and/or state permit or unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(4)  Throw, place, or deposit or cause to be thrown, placed, or deposited in the storm sewer system anything that impedes or interferes with the free flow of stormwater therein. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (c), the following activities shall not be unlawful or a violation of this article: 
(1)  De-chlorinated water line flushing; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation; 
(3)  Diverted stream flows or rising groundwater; 
(4)  Infiltration of uncontaminated groundwater; 
(5)  Pumping of uncontaminated groundwater; 
(6)  Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl spaces, or footing drains; 
(7)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(8)  Lawn watering; 
(9)  Residential car washing; 
(10)  De-chlorinated swimming pool discharge; 
(11)  Street, right-of-way, and storm system construction/maintenance activities employing BMPs. 
(12)  Discharges or flows from emergency firefighting activities; or 
(13)  Any activity authorized by a valid Virginia Stormwater Management Program permit (VSMP), a valid VPDES or NPDES permit or a valid Virginia Pollution Abatement (VPA) permit, or as may otherwise be permitted by law. 
(c)  In the event any of the activities listed in subsection (b) above are found to cause pollutants to be discharged into the storm sewer system, the administrator shall so notify the person performing such activities, and shall order that such activities cease or be conducted in such a manner as to avoid the discharge of pollutants into the storm sewer system. The failure to comply with any such order shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-625. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the VSMP authority permit conditions or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the permit conditions by any of the following: verbal warnings and inspection reports, notices of corrective action, consent special orders, and notices to comply. Written notices shall be served by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or by delivery at the site of the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. 
(1)  The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued in accordance with subsection (b) or the permit may be revoked by the administrator. 
(2)  If a permittee fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with this section within the time specified, the administrator may issue an order requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person conducting the land-disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit to cease all land-disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has ceased, or an approved plan and required permits are obtained, and specified corrective measures have been completed. 
(3)  Such orders shall be issued in accordance with this article. Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to his or her address specified in the land records of Montgomery County, or by personal delivery by an agent of the administrator. However, if the administrator finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth or otherwise substantially impacting water quality, it may issue, without advance notice or hearing, an emergency order directing such person to cease immediately all land-disturbing activities on the site and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is not complying with the terms thereof, the administrator may institute a proceeding for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedy provided by this article, if the administrator or the administrator's designee determines that there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this article, the administrator may initiate a stop work order requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person conducting the land-disturbing activities to cease all land-disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has ceased, or an approved plan and permits are obtained, or corrective measures have been completed. Such orders shall be effective upon service. 
(c)  Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any rule, regulation, ordinance, order, approved standard or specification, or any permit condition issued by the administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in Montgomery County Circuit Court to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. 
(d)  Any person who violates any provision of this article or who fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with any order of the administrator shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed thirty-two thousand five hundred dollars ($32,500.00) for each violation within the discretion of the court. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1)  Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this subsection shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
i.  No state permit registration; 
ii.  No SWPPP; 
iii.  Incomplete SWPPP; 
iv.  SWPPP not available for review; 
v.  No approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
vi.  Failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls; 
vii.  Stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed or maintained; 
viii.  Operational deficiencies; 
ix.  Failure to conduct required inspections; 
x.  Incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and 
xi.  Discharges not in compliance with the requirements of Section 9VAC25-880-70 of the general permit. 
(2)  The administrator may issue a summons for collection of the civil penalty and the action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court. 
(3)  In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection, the court may consider the degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to the violator from noncompliance. 
(4)  Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by the town shall be paid into the treasury of the town to be used for the purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters of the town and abating environmental pollution therein in such manner as the court may, by order, direct. 
(e)  Any person who makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any record, report, or other document, either filed or requested pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required or used by the administrator under this article in monitoring discharges, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(f)  Any person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, any order of the administrator, any condition of a permit or any order of a court shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-626. - Hearings and appeals. 
(a)  Any permit applicant, permittee or person subject to the requirements of this article aggrieved by any action of the town taken without a formal hearing, or by inaction of the town, may demand in writing a formal hearing by the town, provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the administrator within thirty (30) days after the administrator gives notice of such action. 
(b)  The hearings held under this section shall be conducted by the town manager or the manager's designee. 
(c)  A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearings may be taken, at the requester's expense, and filed with the administrator by the permit applicant or permittee. 
(d)  Decisions under this section may be appealed to the Circuit Court of Montgomery County. Decisions of the Circuit Court shall be subject to review by the Virginia Court of Appeals. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-627. - Reports and recordkeeping. 
(a)  On a fiscal year basis (July 1 to June 30), the town shall report to the department by October 1 of each year in a format provided by the department the following information: 
(1)  Each permanent stormwater management facility completed during the fiscal year including type of stormwater management facility, geographic coordinates, acres treated, and the surface waters or karst features into which the stormwater management facility will discharge; 
(2)  Number and type of enforcement actions taken during the fiscal year; and 
(3)  Number of exceptions granted during the fiscal year. 
(b)  The administrator shall keep records in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Project records, including approved stormwater management plans, shall be kept for three (3) years after permit termination or project completion. 
(2)  Stormwater management facility inspection records shall be documented and retained for at least five (5) years from the date of inspection. 
(3)  Construction record drawings shall be maintained in perpetuity or until a stormwater management facility is removed. 
(4)  All registration statements submitted in accordance with 9VAC25-870-59 shall be documented and retained for at least three (3) years from the date of project completion or permit termination. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-628. - Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. 
    This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other article, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other article, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Section 18-629. - Severability. 
    If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
( Ord. No. 1728, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 7-1-14 ) 
Sections 18-630-18-699. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Section 18-700. - Authority. 
    The town is authorized by Virginia Code § 15.2-2114 to enact a system of utility fees to support a local stormwater management program consistent with the Virginia Stormwater Management Act (Virginia Code § 10.1-603.1, et seq.) and all other state or federal regulations governing stormwater management. 
( Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 1-1-15 ) 
Section 18-701. - Findings and purpose. 
    The town council finds that an adequate, sustainable source of revenue for stormwater management activities is necessary to protect the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the town. Further, the council finds that property with higher amounts of impervious area contributes greater amounts of stormwater and pollutants to the stormwater management system and waters of the commonwealth and should carry a proportionate burden of the cost. However, stormwater runoff is associated with all improved properties in the town, whether residential or nonresidential, and the individual property impacts of runoff are correlated to the amount of impervious surface on the property and land-disturbing activities on the property. The elements of stormwater management infrastructure provide benefits and services to properties within the town through direct protection of property, control of flooding and protection of the town's natural environment. Therefore, the council determines that it is in the best interests of the public to establish a stormwater management utility and stormwater utility fees that allocate program costs to all property owners based on impervious area. 
( Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 1-1-15 ) 
Section 18-702. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Agricultural property means undeveloped property used for the tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural or forest crops or land used for raising livestock. 
    Common area means land in a residential housing development that is not owned by an individual owner of the development but dedicated for shared use by all owners through a management organization, homeowners organization or cooperative board. 
    Developed property means real property that has been altered from its natural state by the addition of improvements such as buildings, structures, and other impervious surfaces. For new construction, property shall be considered developed pursuant to this section upon (a) issuance of a certificate of occupancy or (b) certification of the final building permit inspection for those facilities not requiring a certificate of occupancy. 
    Developed residential property means a developed lot or parcel containing at least one (1) but no more than four (4) residences or dwelling units, and accessory uses related to but subordinate to the purpose of providing permanent dwelling facilities. Such property may include, but is not limited to, houses, duplexes, triplexes, quadruplexes, townhouses and mobile homes. 
    Developed multifamily residential property means developed property containing more than four (4) residences or dwelling units, and accessory uses related to but subordinate to the purpose of providing permanent dwelling facilities. Such property may include, but is not limited to, apartments and condominiums. 
    Developed nonresidential property means developed property that does not serve a primary purpose of providing permanent dwelling units. Such property shall include, but is not limited to, commercial properties, industrial properties, parking lots, recreational and cultural facilities, hotels, offices and churches. 
    Impervious surface area means a surface that is compacted or covered with material that is highly resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not limited to, most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots, gravel parking lots and roads, and other similar structures. 
    Permanent reduction means the reduction of flow or pollutant load achieved by verifiable stormwater practices. These practices available for use are limited to those contained in the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website and designed with the standards and specifications contained therein. 
    Revenues means all rates, fees, assessments, rentals or other charges or other income received by the stormwater management utility pursuant to this article in connection with the management and operation of the system, including amounts received from the investment or deposit of moneys in any fund or account and any amounts contributed by the town, funds provided by developers or individual residents, and the proceeds from sale of general obligation bonds for stormwater projects or stormwater revenue bonds. 
    SBU rate means the amount charged for a stormwater billing unit. 
    Stormwater billing unit or SBU means the equivalent impervious area of a single-family residential developed property per dwelling unit located within the town based on the statistical average horizontal impervious area of a single-family residence in the town. A billing unit (BU) equals three thousand three hundred (3,300) square feet of impervious surface area. For individually metered residential properties, any associated common areas shall be considered, on a prorata basis, as being included in the SBU, so that no bill will be generated for the common areas. 
    Stormwater management system or system means the stormwater management infrastructure and equipment of the town and all improvements thereto for stormwater control in the town. Infrastructure and equipment shall include structural and natural stormwater control systems of all types, including, without limitation, retention basins, sewers, conduits, pipelines, pumping and ventilation stations, and other plants, structures, and real and personal property used for support of the system. The system does not include private drainage systems. 
    Stormwater management utility or utility means the system of stormwater utility fees and the enterprise fund created by this article to maintain and operate the town's stormwater management system. 
    Stormwater utility fee means the monthly utility charges based upon the SBU rate applied and billed to property owners or occupants of developed residential property, developed multifamily residential property, developed nonresidential property and other property, all as more fully described in section 18-704. 
    Undeveloped property means any parcel which has not been altered from its natural state to disturb or alter the topography or soils on the property in a manner which substantially reduces the rate of infiltration of stormwater into the earth. 
( Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 1-1-15 ; Ord. No. 1795, § 1, 8-9-16 ) 
Section 18-703. - Establishment of stormwater management utility; stormwater utility fee. 
(a)  The stormwater management utility is hereby established to provide for the general health, safety and welfare of the town and its residents. 
(b)  A stormwater utility fee is hereby imposed on every parcel of developed real property in the town that appears on the real property assessment rolls as of December 31 of each year. All stormwater utility fees and other income from the charges shall be deposited into the stormwater management enterprise fund. 
(c)  The SBU rate to be used for calculating the stormwater utility fee shall be six dollars ($6.00) per month. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the impervious area for a property shall be determined by the town using aerial photography, as-built drawings, final approved site plans, field surveys or other appropriate engineering and mapping analysis tools. 
(e)  Notwithstanding subsection (b) above, and consistent with Virginia Code § 15.2-2114, the stormwater utility fee shall be waived in its entirety for the following: 
(1)  A federal, state, or local government, or other public entity, that holds a permit to discharge stormwater from a municipal separate storm sewer system; except that the waiver of charges shall apply only to property covered by any such permit; 
(2)  Public roads and street rights-of-way that are owned and maintained by state or local agencies including property rights-of-way acquired through the acquisitions process; and 
(3)  Cemeteries. 
(f)  In the event that a stormwater utility bill is issued in error and a refund is necessary, no refund or proration shall be issued for any period less than one (1) month. 
( Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 1-1-15 ; Ord. No. 1795, § 1, 8-9-16 ) 
Section 18-704. - Stormwater utility fee calculation. 
    Adequate revenues shall be generated to provide for a balanced operating and capital improvement budget for expansion and maintenance of the stormwater management system, as well as compliance with regulatory requirements by setting sufficient levels of stormwater utility fees. Income from stormwater utility fees shall not exceed the costs incurred in providing the services and facilities described in this article. These fees shall be billed to owners of all property in the town subject to the stormwater utility fee; provided, however, where a tenant or occupant is the person to whom water or sewer service, or both, are billed, the utility fees may be billed to such tenant or occupant. 
(a)  For purposes of determining the stormwater utility fee, all properties in the town are classified into one (1) of the following classes: 
(1)  Developed residential property; 
(2)  Developed multifamily residential property; 
(3)  Developed nonresidential property; 
(4)  Undeveloped property; or 
(5)  Agricultural property. 
(b)  The monthly stormwater utility fee for developed residential property shall equal the SBU rate. However, where more than one (1) residence or dwelling unit is located on a single lot or parcel the owner of the lot or parcel shall be charged a stormwater utility fee that is equal to the SBU rate multiplied by the number of residences or dwelling units (up to four (4)) located on the lot or parcel. 
(c)  The monthly stormwater utility fee for developed multifamily residential property shall be the SBU rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious surface area of a developed multifamily residential property by one (1) SBU, as set forth in the tiered rate structure shown in subsection (h). The minimum charge for any developed multifamily property shall equal the SBU rate. 
(d)  The monthly stormwater utility fee for developed nonresidential property shall be the SBU rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total impervious surface area of a developed nonresidential property by one (1) SBU, as set forth in the tiered rate structure shown in subsection (h). The minimum charge for any developed nonresidential property shall equal the SBU rate. 
(e)  The stormwater utility fee for vacant developed property, both residential and nonresidential, shall be the same as that for occupied property of the same class. 
(f)  Undeveloped property shall be exempt from the stormwater utility fee; provided, however, that any impervious areas on the property greater than three hundred (300) square feet shall be subject to the monthly stormwater utility fee for developed nonresidential property, as set forth above in subsection (d). 
(g)  Agricultural property shall be exempt from the stormwater utility fee; provided, however, that (i) each developed residential unit situated on a parcel devoted to agricultural use shall be charged a stormwater utility fee equal to the SBU rate and (ii) other impervious areas on the property greater than three hundred (300) square feet shall be subject to the monthly stormwater utility fee for developed nonresidential property, as set forth above in subsection (d). 
(h)  Tiered rates. 
Square Feet of Impervious Surface Area Monthly Stormwater Utility Fee 301 3,300 $6.00 3,301 6,800 $6.00 6,801 10,000 $12.36 10,001 20,000 $18.18 20,001 30,000 $36.36 30,001 40,000 $54.55 40,001 50,000 $72.73 50,001 60,000 $90.91 60,001 70,000 $109.09 70,001 80,000 $127.27 80,001 90,000 $145.45 90,001 100,000 $163.64 100,001 125,000 $181.82 125,001 150,000 $227.27 150,001 175,000 $272.73 175,001 200,000 $318.18 200,001 250,000 $363.64 250,001 300,000 $454.55 300,001 350,000 $545.45 350,001 400,000 $636.36 400,001 450,000 $727.27 450,001 500,000 $818.18 500,001 600,000 $909.09 600,001 700,000 $1,090.91 700,001 800,000 $1,272.73 800,001 900,000 $1,454.55 900,001 1,000,000 $1,636.36 1,000,001 or greater $1,818.18  
( Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 1-1-15 ; Ord. No. 1795, § 1, 8-9-16 ) 
Section 18-705. - Stormwater utility fee credits and exemptions. 
(a)  The town council shall adopt by resolution a system of credits in accordance with Virginia Code § 15.2-2114(D) that will provide for full or partial waivers of stormwater utility fees for any persons who install, operate, and maintain a stormwater management facility that achieves a permanent reduction in stormwater flow or pollutant loadings. The amount of the waiver shall be based in part on the percentage reduction in stormwater flow or pollutant loadings, or both, from pre-installation to post-installation of the facility. The system of credits may also, in accordance with Virginia Code § 15.2-2114(E), provide for full or partial waivers of stormwater utility fees for public or private entities that implement or participate in strategies, techniques, or programs that reduce stormwater flow or pollutant loadings, or decrease the cost of maintaining or operating the public stormwater management system. 
(b)  The department of engineering and GIS will develop written policies, to be approved by the town council, to implement the system of credits. A copy of the approved policies shall be on file with the department of engineering and GIS. Nothing shall prevent the town council from modifying the adopted system of credits, and such modifications may apply to holders of existing credits. Credits shall not be issued retroactively. 
(c)  Except for new construction, applications for credits shall be made each year by January 1, with any approved credit to be effective on the following July 1. Applications for credits received after January 1 will be accepted but not reviewed until the following year. 
( Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 1-1-15 ; Ord. No. 1795, § 1, 8-9-16 ) 
Section 18-706. - Stormwater management enterprise fund. 
(a)  The stormwater management enterprise fund is hereby established as a dedicated enterprise fund. The fund shall consist of revenues generated by stormwater utility fees, as well as all other revenues as defined in section 18-702. 
(b)  The stormwater management enterprise fund shall be dedicated special revenue used only to pay for or recover costs for the following: 
(1)  The acquisition, as permitted by Virginia Code § 15.2-1800, of real and personal property, and interests therein, necessary to construct, operate, and maintain stormwater control facilities; 
(2)  The cost of administration of the stormwater management program; 
(3)  Planning, design, engineering, construction, and debt retirement for new facilities and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities, whether publicly or privately owned, that serve to control stormwater; 
(4)  Operation and maintenance of facilities that serve to control stormwater; 
(5)  Monitoring of stormwater control devices and ambient water quality; and 
(6)  Other activities consistent with the state or federal regulations or permits governing stormwater management, including, but not limited to, public education, watershed planning, inspection and enforcement activities, and pollution prevention planning and implementation. 
( Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 1-1-15 ) 
Section 18-707. - Billing, enforcement, and interest. 
(a)  The stormwater utility fee is to be paid by the owner of each lot or parcel subject to the utility fees. However, where a tenant or occupant is the person to whom water or sewer service, or both, are billed, the stormwater utility fee may be charged to such tenant or occupant. In any case in which a tenant or occupant fails to pay the utility fee, the delinquent utility fee shall be collected from the owner of the property. All properties subject to the utility fee shall be issued bills or statements for stormwater utility fees. As permitted by Virginia Code § 15.2-2114(G), such bills or statements may be combined with sewer and water bills levied pursuant to chapters 18 and 24, provided that all charges shall be separately stated. The combined bill shall be issued for one (1) total amount. The director of finance is hereby authorized and directed to create policies and procedures for the efficient billing and collection of the combined bill, including a policy for allocating payments to the separate charges stated on the combined bill. The bills or statements shall include a date by which payment shall be due. All bills for stormwater utility fees prescribed by this article shall be due and payable twenty (20) days from the date of the bill and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid in full within such time. 
(b)  Delinquent stormwater utility fees, in accordance with Virginia Code § 15.2-105, shall be subject to a penalty thereon of ten dollars ($10.00) or an amount not exceeding ten (10) percent of the amount then due, which penalty shall be added to the amount due from such person. No penalty shall be imposed if such failure was not in any way the fault of the customer. Fault shall be determined by the director of finance, who may consider affidavits or other evidence. Interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per year on the balance of the account shall be imposed and collected on all such delinquent fees from the date after the expiration of twenty (20) days after the date of billing. 
(c)  A delinquent stormwater utility fee, along with penalty and interest, shall constitute a lien on the property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes and shall be collected in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid taxes or otherwise permitted by law. 
( Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 1-1-15 ) 
Section 18-708. - Petitions for adjustments. 
(a)  Any property owner may request an adjustment of a stormwater utility bill by submitting a request in writing to the director of engineering and GIS within sixty (60) days after the date the bill is mailed or issued to the property owner. Grounds for adjustment of stormwater utility fees are limited to the following: 
(1)  An error was made regarding the square footage of the impervious area of the property; 
(2)  The property is exempt under the provisions of section 18-703(e); 
(3)  There is a mathematical error in calculating the stormwater utility fee; 
(4)  The identification of the property owner invoiced is in error; or 
(5)  An approved credit was incorrectly applied. 
(b)  The property owner shall complete a stormwater utility fee adjustment application form available on the town's website or supplied by the director. 
(c)  If the application alleges an error in the amount of the impervious area, a plan view of the property's impervious area will be provided by the town depicting all impervious areas within the property boundaries, including buildings, patios, driveways, walkways, parking areas, compacted gravel areas, and any other separate impervious structures identified in the town's impervious area database. This assessment will be the town's initial response to the request for adjustment. 
(d)  If the applicant is not satisfied with this initial response, the applicant may: 
(1)  Request a meeting with the director; and/or, 
(2)  Submit an appeal with a revised plan signed and sealed by a professional engineer or professional land surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia attesting to the accuracy of the impervious area measurements. 
(e)  The requirement for a plan view of the property's impervious area required in subsection (c) above may be waived by the director, if at the sole discretion of the director the error is obvious and is the result of a technical error or oversight by the town. In such case, the town shall be responsible for recalculating the impervious area of the property. 
(f)  The director shall make a determination within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a complete submittal for the request for adjustment. In the event that the director finds that the appeal is deficient or incomplete, the director shall offer the owner sixty (60) days to supply the missing information. The 45-day time for a decision will begin at such time as the requested information is provided. If the information requested is not provided to the director within sixty (60) days of the original request, the petition will be deemed withdrawn. 
(g)  The director's decision on a stormwater utility fee adjustment petition is a final decision from which an aggrieved party may appeal to the Montgomery County Circuit Court. 
( Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 1-1-15 ) 
Section 18-709. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article shall be deemed severable; and if any of the provisions hereof are adjudged to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining portions of this article shall remain in full force and effect and their validity unimpaired. 
( Ord. No. 1723, § 1, 6-10-14, eff. 1-1-15 ) 
Chapter 19 - SOLICITORS 

Section 19-100. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set out below: 
    Charitable: Patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal. 
    Charitable organization: Any person who is or holds himself out to be organized or operated for any charitable purpose, or any person who solicits or obtains contributions from the public. 
    Solicitor: A person traveling from door to door, taking or attempting to take orders for goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature for future delivery or for services to be furnished in the future, whether or not such person utilizes samples and whether or not such person is collecting advance payment for such sales. The term "solicitor" shall not include "direct sellers," "itinerant merchants," and "peddlers" as defined in Chapter 11, Town Code. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 57-48 
Section 19-101. - License Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for a solicitor to engage in such activity within the town without first obtaining a license. Any person wishing to solicit subscriptions for books, magazines or other publications must also obtain a permit from the Commissioner of Labor and Industry, as required by § 40.1-112, Code of Virginia. 
Section 19-102. - Exemptions [Va. Code Sec. 57-60]. 
(a)  Any church, convention, or association of churches primarily operated for non-secular purposes and no part of the net income of which inures to the direct benefit of any individual; 
(b)  Charitable and civic organizations registered with the Commissioner of Agriculture and Consumer Services under § 57-49, Virginia Code; and those persons exempt from registration under § 57-60, Virginia Code. Such charitable and civic organizations shall register with the chief of police the name of the organization, the names of their solicitors and the dates and times that they will be soliciting in the town. [Va. Code Sec. 57-63] 
(c)  Montgomery County school children when soliciting for school-sponsored activities. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 57-60. 
Section 19-103. - Application form; fee. 
    Applicants for permit and license under this chapter must file with the director of finance a sworn, written application, in duplicate, and pay an application fee of $30.00. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, description, and social security number of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of applicant; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with the information establishing the exact relationship; 
(5)  Length of time for which the right to solicit is desired; 
(6)  Place where the goods or products proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where the goods or products are located at the time of the application, and the proposed method of delivery; 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
Section 19-104. - Applicant's photograph and fingerprints. 
    All applicants for a permit under this chapter shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the Blacksburg police department. 
Section 19-105. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The original application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall investigate the applicant as deemed necessary for the protection of the citizens of the town. 
(1)  The license may be denied and the director of finance shall notify the applicant that no license will be issued, if the investigation reveals that the applicant has: 
(a)  been convicted (including pleas of nolo contendere and forfeitures) of a crime involving a breach of the peace or danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public, or a felony; a violation of the laws of any jurisdiction relating to selling, vending, soliciting, peddling, hawking or canvassing; a crime involving a fraud upon any person whether or not such fraud was perpetrated in the course of conducting a solicitation activity; more than one misdemeanor, excluding motor vehicle code violations; and/or 
(b)  made a false, fraudulent or misleading material statement in the application. 
(2)  The chief of police may determine that the circumstances related to a conviction are such that no real threat would be posed to the health, life or property of the citizens if the applicant were granted a license. Such determination when made shall be in writing and shall be based on such considerations as the nature and gravity of the offenses for which the applicant was convicted, the length of time since the last conviction, and the work history and general background of the applicant. 
(3)  If the chief of police approves the application, the director of finance shall, upon payment of the license fee, issue the license and badge. 
Section 19-106. - License: fee, terms, badge. 
(a)  The license fee shall be $30.00 per year and shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued. Thereafter, the license shall be issued on a calendar year basis. There shall be no abatement of the license fee for any portion of a year in which the license was not utilized. 
(b)  The license shall show the name, address, and photograph of the licensee, the kind of goods to be sold, the date of issuance, the license number and any other identifying description of any vehicle used by the solicitor. 
(c)  The director of finance shall issue to the licensee a badge containing the words "Licensed Solicitor," the period for which the license is issued, and a license number. Such badge shall be displayed constantly on the front of the solicitor's outer garment in such a way as to be conspicuous. Solicitors are required to exhibit their license at the request of any citizen. 
(d)  No person shall solicit within the corporate limits of the town between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(e)  No person shall solicit upon any premises posted with the legend "NO SOLICITORS" and/or "NO TRESPASSING." 
Section 19-107. - Record of violations; revocation of license; hearing notice. 
(a)  The chief of police shall report to the director of finance all convictions for violation of this chapter and the director of finance shall maintain a record for each license issued and record the reports of violation therein. 
(b)  Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the town manager after notice and hearing for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying out business as a solicitor; 
(2)  Soliciting in an unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; 
(3)  Any violation set forth in Section 19-105(1) of this chapter. 
(c)  Notice of a hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specific grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee's last known address at least five days prior to the hearing. 
Section 19-108. - Right of appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by the denial of a license as provided in Section 19-105, or the action of the town manager in revoking a license as provided in Section 19-107, may appeal such denial or revocation to the town council in writing. Such appeal shall be filed with the town clerk within fourteen days after notice of the action complained of was mailed to the solicitor's last known address, and shall state fully the grounds for the appeal. Council shall set the time and place for the hearing of such appeal and notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the appellant's last known address at least five days prior to the hearing. The decision of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
Section 19-109. - Penalty. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each day a person solicits without a license as required by this chapter shall be a separate violation. 
Chapter 20 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1306, § 1, adopted June 11, 2002, repealed Ch. 20, Solid Waste in its entirety. Subsequently, § 2 of said ordinance reordained ch. 20 to read as herein set out. Formerly, said chapter pertained to similar subject matter. 
Cross reference- Authority of town manager relative to garbage disposal facilities, § 2-300; disposition of dead animals and fowl, § 5-114; building regulations, ch. 6; littering, § 14-104; unlawful accumulations of trash, § 14-201; abatement of fire hazards caused by accumulations of solid waste, § 17-213 et seq.; outdoor rubbish fires, § 17-301; handling and storage of combustible solid waste, § 17-304; sewers and storm drainage, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to require property owners to remove garbage and refuse and town's right to operate a garbage and refuse collection and disposal service, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-901, 15.2.927. 

ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION AND DEFINITIONS 

Section 20-100. - Definitions. 
    "Accessory apartment" shall have the same meaning as defined in the Town Zoning Ordinance, Appendix A of the Town Code. 
    "Apartment or condominium complex" shall mean a building or portion thereof which contains three or more dwelling units for permanent occupancy. This term shall have the same meaning as a "multi-family dwelling" in the Zoning Ordinance, Appendix A of the Town Code. 
    "Business" means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. 
    "Bulky rubbish" is nonputrescible solid waste consisting of combustible or noncombustible waste materials from dwelling units which are either too large or too heavy to be safely and conveniently loaded in the standard solid waste container. Bulky rubbish shall not include unacceptable waste. 
    "Brush" shall mean tree or bush limbs or trunks six inches or less in diameter and seven feet or less in length. 
    "Dusk" shall mean the time just before sunset on any given day, when the sky is darkening, but not yet completely dark. Twilight is another good description of this time of day. 
    "Front building line" shall have the same meaning as defined in the Town Zoning Ordinance, Appendix A of the Town Code. 
    "Industry" means a business defined as light, medium, or heavy industry, under the terms of the Town Zoning Ordinance, Appendix A to the Town Code. 
    "Residential solid waste" shall mean solid waste resulting from the maintenance and operation of a dwelling unit or units. This term does not include unacceptable waste. 
    "Single family dwelling," shall have the same meaning as defined in the Town Zoning Ordinance, Appendix A to the Town Code. 
    "Solid waste" or "trash" shall mean any garbage, refuse, and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations, or community activities, but does not include (i) solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, (ii) solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows or in industrial discharges which are sources subject to a permit from the Virginia State Water Control Board, (iii) hazardous waste, as that term is defined in Virginia Code section 10.1-1400, or (iv) source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
    "Trash corral" shall mean a structure built for the purpose of containing one or more trash containers, out-of-doors, as a storage area between weekly trash collection, or as a storage area for collection day. 
    "Two-family dwelling" shall have the same meaning as defined in the Town Zoning Ordinance, Appendix A to the Town Code. 
    "Unacceptable waste" shall include, without limitation, any regulated quantity of a hazardous waste or hazardous substance as defined by federal, state or local laws or regulations; containerized wastes, the contents of which are not able to be identified; sludges; waste from a pollution control process or cleanup of a spill of a chemical substance or commercial product; any dead animal or animal part; biohazards or regulated medical waste; friable asbestos, construction and demolition waste, soil, sod, tree stumps, paint, motor oil, or any item too large or heavy to be loaded into the standard cart without assistance. Unacceptable wastes shall include car batteries. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-101. - [Reserved]. 
Section 20-102. - General requirements for vehicles transporting solid waste. 
    All vehicles used for the transportation of solid waste shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary condition and shall be so constructed, maintained and operated as to prevent spillage of solid waste therefrom. Every such vehicle shall be constructed with a watertight body and with a cover which shall be an integral part of the vehicle or shall be a separate cover of suitable material with fasteners designed to secure the vehicle in transporting solid waste, or as an alternative, the entire body thereof shall be enclosed, with only the loading hopper exposed. No solid waste shall be transported in the loading hopper. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-103. - Interference with collection equipment or collectors. 
    It shall be unlawful and a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person to interfere in any manner with solid waste collection and transportation equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties as such, whether such equipment or collector shall be those of the town or those of a solid waste collection agency operating under contract with the town. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-104. - Termination of collection service to vacant premises. 
    The collection of solid waste and the service charge there for shall be terminated upon presentation of satisfactory proof to the director of finance that any dwelling unit or other establishment is unoccupied for a minimum period of 120 days, and they shall be recommenced upon renewed occupancy thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Sec. 20-105. - Prohibition on scavenging in or removing solid waste placed in containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge in, remove or otherwise take possession of any solid waste that has been placed in any bag, container, dumpster or receptacle by another person for temporary storage or collection. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to (i) any town employee, any person employed by the town on a temporary basis, or any other person designated by the town to remove solid waste or otherwise acting in the performance of his or her official duties, or (ii) any person licensed by the town to provide solid waste collection services or recycling services while performing such services. 
(Ord. No. 1393, § 1, 8-9-05) 
Sections 20-106-20-119. - [Reserved]. 
Section 20-120. - Residential solid waste fees. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed, for the collection, recycling, and disposal of solid waste, for the payment of the Montgomery Regional Solid Waste Authority tipping fee, and for the improvement of the general public health and environment, a solid waste collection service charge for each dwelling unit generating residential solid waste and required by section 20-200 to participate in curbside collection. The amount of the collection charge shall be established in section 20-206. 
(b)  The fee for a lost, defaced, or destroyed container shall be eighty-seven dollars ($87.00). 
(c)  After January 1, 2003, there shall be a delivery fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for delivery of a substitute standard container, after the delivery of the initial container to the residence. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 1420, § 1, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1811, § 1, 1-10-17 ) 
Section 20-121. - Bulky rubbish ("special collection") fee. 
    There is hereby established a fee of sixty-five dollars ($65.00) for each load or part of a load of bulky rubbish collected by the town at the request of a residential solid waste customer. The fee required by this section shall be paid at the time of the request for a special pick-up. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 1420, § 2, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1518, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 4-24-12) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1643 provided for an effective date that shall become effective July 1, 2012, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
Sections 20-122-20-129. - [Reserved]. 
Section 20-130. - Violations of chapter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  In lieu of criminal penalties, any person found to be in violation of section 20-142, section 20-301, section 20-402 or section 20-403 shall be subject to a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation. This penalty shall only be imposed after a written notice of violation has been issued, as provided by section 20-131, to the offending individual, owner, lessee, tenant or agent. Any person who continues to be in violation of either section after the appeal process has concluded or the time to file an appeal has expired shall be subject to a civil penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each subsequent violation. No person shall be cited for a violation more than once in any ten-day period, and no person shall be fined more than a total of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for all violations arising out of the same set of facts in any calendar year. Civil penalties shall be imposed by the issuance of a civil summons by the director of public works or the director's designated representative. Any person served with a summons shall have ten (10) days in which either to (i) pay the civil penalty fine to the director of finance or (ii) appeal the violation to the general district court. The town shall also have available to it all lawful remedies to require compliance, including, but not limited to, seeking injunctive relief. 
(c)  In lieu of criminal penalties, violations section 20-203(c) or section 20-402(c) (not removing solid waste containers or recycling containers) shall be punishable by a civil penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) per violation. Notice of a violation shall be attached to the solid waste and/or recycling container. The civil penalty may be imposed for any second or subsequent violations that occur within six (6) months of a violation. The solid waste customer shall have ten (10) days to appeal the imposition of the civil penalty to the town manager or the manager's designee. The civil penalty shall be added to the collection charges imposed by section 20-206. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 1600, § 1, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 1647, § 1, 5-8-2012; Ord. No. 1798, § 1, 8-9-16 ; Ord. No. 1811, § 1, 1-10-17 ) 
Section 20-131. - Inspections to enforce chapter; notice of and order to correct violations. 
(a)  In order to ensure compliance with the laws of this state, this chapter, and rules and regulations authorized herein, the director of public works or the director's designee is authorized to inspect all phases of solid waste management within the town. No inspection shall be made in any residential unit unless authorized by the occupant or by due process of law. In all instances where such inspections reveal a violation of this chapter, the rules and regulations authorized herein for the storage, collection, transportation, processing or disposal of solid waste or the laws of the state, the director of public works or the director's designee shall issue notice for each such violation stating therein the violation found and ordering the correction of such violation within a specified time. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by any notice of violation or order issued pursuant thereto may, within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, appeal directly to the town manager in writing, setting forth, in a concise statement, the act being appealed and the grounds for its reversal. The town manager, or the manager's designee, shall review the appeal and uphold, dismiss or modify the notice of violation or order as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 1600, § 1, 3-8-11) 
Sections 20-132-20-139. - Reserved. 
Section 20-140. - Private solid waste collection. 
    All occupants of real property located within the town, for whom residential solid waste collection services are not provided by the town, shall contract privately for the safe, legal, and timely collection and disposal of their solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-141. - Containers. 
    All solid waste containers placed for private trash collection shall be covered with a tight-fitting lid, and shall be screened per the requirements of the town zoning ordinance, appendix A of the Town Code, section 5330. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-142. - Solid waste and recycling reports. 
(a)  Each occupant of real property who contracts privately for solid waste collection and disposal (including the owner or unit owners' association of each apartment or condominium complex) shall report to the town, on forms provided by the director of public works, information to include, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name and address of reporting party; 
(2)  Number of units; 
(3)  Total number of residents; 
(4)  Names of all haulers or hauling companies contracted to provide recycling services at the property. 
(c)  For existing properties, the reports required by this section shall be submitted within six (6) months after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived (January 1, 2017) and each four (4) years thereafter. Properties receiving a certificate of occupancy after January 1, 2017 shall provide reports between twelve (12) and fifteen (15) months after the certificate of occupancy is issued and each four (4) years thereafter. However, the director or the director's designee may request, in writing, reports more frequently as reasonably needed to address complaints about recycling service. All reports shall be submitted to the director of public works or the director's designee. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 1600, § 1, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 1811, § 1, 1-10-17 ) 
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE 

Section 20-200. - Curbside collection. 
(a)  Any resident of a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, or accessory apartment, or any multi-family dwelling containing four (4) or fewer units, located on a lot which abuts a public or private right-of-way within the town shall participate in the curbside collection program. 
(b)  Each dwelling unit shall have at least one (1) container for curbside collection. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-201. - Residential solid waste to be collected. 
    The town shall provide for weekly curbside collection of residential solid waste within the town. The town may provide the collection service by contracting with a person or political subdivision or a combination thereof, for the entire town or for portions thereof. The town manager may develop such rules and regulations, supplementary to the provisions herein, as may be reasonable or necessary for the curbside collection program. Any such rules or regulations shall be on file with the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-202. - Weight limit for containers. 
    The weight limit for each ninety-six (96) gallon container shall be three hundred (300) pounds. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-203. - Placement for collection. 
(a)  All residential solid waste from premises to which collection services are provided by the town shall be placed at the curb or edge of the street for collection, unless the residents of the dwelling unit have been exempted from such requirement under subsection (d). 
(b)  All residential solid waste placed for collection shall be in the standard container provided by the town. No waste outside the standard container or containers will be collected through the weekly curbside collection program. 
(c)  Solid waste containers shall be placed at the curb or edge of the street no earlier than dusk on the day before collection day and no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. They shall be removed from the curb or edge of the street no later than 7:00 p.m. on the regularly scheduled collection day. In no event shall solid waste containers be left on sidewalks. 
(d)  The town manager may exempt the residents of any dwelling from the placement requirements of this section upon the filing of an application stating that the residents are sixty-five (65) years of age or older and unable to place waste at the curb, or are disabled by a medically determinable physical or mental impairment which would render the residents unable to place such waste at the curb or edge of the street, with documentation as appropriate. 
(e)  On or after July 1, 2002, no person shall construct a trash corral in front of the front building line. Any trash corral in existence on or after July 1, 2002, which is not behind the front building line, must be removed from the property or relocated to comply with this section no later than July 1, 2005. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 1798, § 1, 8-9-16 ) 
Section 20-204. - Containers. 
(a)  The town or its waste hauler shall issue each customer one (1) standard garbage container of ninety-six (96) gallons. At the customer's option, a sixty-four (64) or thirty-five (35) gallon container will be issued. The standard container shall remain the property of the town, and shall remain at the property when the customer moves. 
(b)  Solid waste containers shall be kept covered at all times except when depositing waste therein or removing the contents thereof. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the resident of every dwelling unit to maintain such containers in good repair at all times, and to maintain such containers and the area surrounding them in a clean, neat and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-205. - Entry upon private property for collection. 
    Solid waste collectors employed by the town or under contract with the town are hereby authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this chapter. Solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential buildings for the purpose of collecting residential solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-206. - Collection charges. 
    There is hereby imposed, for the collection, recycling, and disposal of solid waste, for the payment of the county tipping fee, and for the improvement of the general public health and environment, a solid waste collection service charge for each dwelling unit and commercial or residential establishment generating solid waste within the town and required by section 20-200 to participate in the curbside collection and curbside recycling program. The service charge for collection of Class A residential solid waste and Class II bulky rubbish shall be twenty-three dollars and forty-eight cents ($23.48) per calendar month. The service charge for collection of light commercial solid waste shall be twenty-three dollars and forty-eight cents ($23.48) per establishment, in both cases, for up to one (1) solid waste container, or its equivalent, excluding recycling containers, and twenty-three dollars and forty-eight cents ($23.48) for each additional unit or its equivalent, excluding recycling containers, per calendar month. The service charge for all other generators of other types of solid waste contracting with the town for curbside refuse and recycling service under this chapter shall be twenty-three dollars and forty-eight cents ($23.48) per dwelling unit or per establishment, as appropriate, per calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 1329, § 18, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 1360, § 26, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1414, § 3, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 1447, § 1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 1485, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 1518, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1573, § 1, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 1678, § 1, 4-23-13 ; Ord. No. 1720, § 1, 4-22-14 ; Ord. No. 1811, § 1, 1-10-17 ; Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 5-9-17 ; Ord. No. 1863 , § 1, 4-25-18) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1720 provided that this ordinance shall become effective July 1, 2014, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
Section 20-207. - Storage of solid waste containers. 
    After 7:00 p.m. on the regularly scheduled collection day, until dusk on the day before collection day, all solid waste containers shall be stored on the property, behind the front building line of the residence or principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-208. - Unacceptable wastes. 
    Solid waste customers shall not place "unacceptable wastes" in the container for collection. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-209. - Unlawful use of another's waste container. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit solid waste in any solid waste container of another, without the written consent of the owner of such container, or with the intent of avoiding payment of the service charge provided in this chapter for residential solid waste collection and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
Sections 20-210-20-219. - Reserved. 
Section 20-220. - Brush collection. 
(a)  The town may provide monthly brush collection services for all curbside collection customers. Brush must be placed at the curb or edge of the street or alley before 7:00 a.m. the Monday of the scheduled pick up date. 
(b)  No bagged or boxed brush, pressure treated lumber, loose leaves or other yard waste shall be accepted for brush collection. 
(c)  The town may limit collection to one dump truck load of brush per address per collection cycle. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-221. - Bulky rubbish collection. 
(a)  A residential solid waste customer's bulky rubbish may be collected by town crews as available. 
(b)  The customer may make a request for bulky rubbish collection ("special collection") to the director of public works, who shall establish a procedure, rules, and timetable for collecting bulky rubbish. 
(c)  Bulky rubbish service is not available to any person who has received a current written notice of violation under Chapter 14, Article II, "Weed and Trash Abatement," of this Code. 
ARTICLE III. - DOWNTOWN RECYCLING AND REFUSE RECYCLING 

Section 20-300. - Downtown refuse and recycling collection. 
(a)  The town manager is authorized to establish a recycling program for residences and businesses within the Downtown Commercial District, or "District," including the types of waste to be accepted for recycling, the location of recycling collection facilities, and the time and frequency of collection. 
(b)  Each business in the district shall provide, either through contract with the town or under private contract, for the proper collection and disposal of all solid waste generated by the business. 
(c)  If requested, the town may provide, through a contract with a private provider, for the collection of recyclable materials and/or solid waste and may offer to businesses in the district an organized means for the collection and disposal of such materials through the contract. The program may include recycling and solid waste collection either through centralized location(s) or appropriate containers, safe and sanitary maintenance, and periodic collection and lawful disposal of refuse and recycling materials. Upon demonstrated need for such services for businesses located in the general commercial district, the town manager may also offer such businesses the same opportunity to utilize the contracted solid waste and recycling collection services. 
(d)  Service may consist of centralized solid waste and recycling collection locations, either on private or public property, or collection that may occur along alleyways or streets. Service may include dumpsters, roll-offs, or wheeled containers to allow for maximum flexibility. Other arrangements may be required to maintain the appropriate collection of materials in the district. The dumpsters, containers, and all other mechanisms or facilities used to provide the services described in this section may only be utilized by persons or businesses that have contracted with the town. Unauthorized use of such facilities shall be unlawful and punishable by the civil penalties described in subsection 20-130(b). 
(Ord. No. 1640, § 1, 3-12-12) 
Section 20-301. - Required reports. 
(a)  Each person in the district who contracts privately for recycling or solid waste collection and disposal shall report to the town, on forms provided by the director of public works, information to include, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name and address of reporting party; 
(2)  Volume or weight of materials collected for recycling; 
(3)  Total quantity recycled; 
(4)  Total solid waste collected, excluding amount recycled; 
(5)  Names of all haulers or hauling companies contracted to provide recycling services. 
(b)  As authorized by Virginia Code § 15.2-939, each company that collects or transports recyclable materials or solid waste in the district shall be required to submit reports documenting the types of materials and tonnage collected, and the location where such materials were taken. Each company shall also be required to annually provide a list of its customers in the town. Forms for these reports shall be provided by the director of public works. 
(c)  The reports required by this section shall be submitted twice to the director of public works annually, within thirty (30) days of the close of the previous six (6) months reporting period. 
(d)  If a change in haulers or hauling companies occurs, the director of public works should be notified within ten (10) business days from the date of the change. 
(Ord. No. 1640, § 1, 3-12-12) 
Section 20-302. - Fees. 
(a)  Service fees charged for the collection and disposal of solid waste and recycling in the district as described in subsection 20-300(c) shall be billed monthly and be based on the actual apportioned cost of the contracted services, plus an additional administrative charge and maintenance charge. The administrative and maintenance charge shall consist of twenty (20) percent of the actual apportioned monthly cost of the service. 
(b)  Any person failing to pay fees owed for collection service described in this section within twenty (20) days after the date of billing shall, on the date after the expiration of the twenty (20) day period, incur a penalty thereon of ten dollars ($10.00) or an amount not exceeding ten (10) percent of the amount then due, which penalty shall be added to the amount due from such person. No penalty shall be imposed if such failure was not in any way the fault of the customer. Interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per year on the balance of the account shall be imposed and collected on all such delinquent accounts from the date after the expiration of twenty (20) days after the date of billing. 
(c)  Bills rendered for service fees shall be due and payable twenty (20) days from the date of billing. A final notice shall be mailed at the end of twenty (20) days from the date of billing. In the event of unpaid bills, the right to participate in the collection service shall be terminated after seven (7) days following the date of mailing of the final bill. Any person who wishes to resume service shall make a deposit in an amount equal to the outstanding bill, and pay a service charge of thirty dollars ($30.00) before service will be restored. The deposit and service charge must be paid in addition to the total amount of the delinquent bill. 
(Ord. No. 1640, § 1, 3-12-12) 
ARTICLE IV. - RECYCLING 

Section 20-400. - Purpose. 
    The town's recycling program is established for the purpose of reducing the residential solid waste stream and the associated costs of solid waste disposal, conserving landfill space, and conserving natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-401. - Town manager to establish program. 
    The town manager shall create and implement a recycling program for town residential refuse customers. The program shall be designed to comply with state law requirements and guidelines. The program may set forth rules for the types of recyclables to be collected, the frequency of collection, the day of collection, separation requirements, and any other provisions which are necessary or reasonable for the implementation of the program. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02) 
Section 20-402. - Voluntary residential program. 
(a)  All town residential refuse customers may participate in the town-wide residential recycling program by: 
(1)  Collecting all of their recyclable materials; and 
(2)  Placing appropriate materials in recycling containers at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on the designated day for collection of those materials; or 
(3)  Bringing appropriate recyclable materials to a town or county recycling drop-off site. 
(b)  The recycling container shall be the standard bin issued by the town. 
(c)  No customer shall place his or her recycling container at the curb or edge of the street earlier than dusk on the day preceding the scheduled collection. Each customer shall remove his or her container from the curb or edge of the street to behind the front building line as soon as practical after the container has been emptied, but in no case later than 7:00 p.m. the day of collection. 
(d)  Once a customer places recyclable materials in a recycling container at the curb or edge of the street, title to those materials shall be deemed to be vested in the town or its designated agent. No person shall remove, take, collect or transport any recyclable material that has been placed in a recycling container from any curbside, street right-of-way, alley or other designated collection point without the express authority of the town. 
(e)  No person shall use recycling containers for anything but participation in the town's curbside recycling program. No person may place garbage or other refuse in a recycling container. It shall be unlawful for any person to borrow, steal, damage or otherwise remove any recycling container from use in the curbside recycling program. 
(f)  The standard green curbside recycling container is the property of the town, and shall remain at the residence when the resident moves. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 1798, § 1, 8-9-16 ) 
Section 20-403. - Apartment/multifamily dwelling recycling. 
(a)  Owners, or unit owners' associations in the case of condominiums, of each apartment or condominium complex shall provide, either through contract with the town or under private contract, for a recycling program for their tenants or owners similar to the recycling program offered to residential refuse customers who receive town curbside recycling service. To facilitate apartment recycling, the town also may provide for the collection of recyclable materials accepted by the regional solid waste authority. This program shall provide for the collection of the same recyclable materials as the town's recycling program (curbside and centralized collection) and shall offer to the tenants or residents convenient and organized facilities within a walkable distance to collect and dispose of recyclable materials. The program shall include onsite recycling facilities, regular sanitary maintenance, and periodic collection and lawful disposal of recyclable materials at recycling facilities. Specifically, the program shall include the following: 
(1)  An available service capacity of twelve (12) gallons of recycling volume per bedroom per week,* 
(2)  Collection receptacles that are designed for single-stream recycling and which minimizes exposure to the elements; 
(3)  Clear, intuitive labeling on each recycling receptacle to minimize contamination and maximize proper diversion of recyclable materials from the refuse waste stream; 
(4)  A resident education program to make residents aware of the location of the nearest recycling receptacles and how to properly recycle; and 
(5)  Distributed siting of recycling receptacles throughout the complex that will maximize convenience for residents. 
* This level of service capacity does not need to be provided during periods of demonstrated lower service demand, such as university holidays or summer breaks. 
(b)  Owners, or unit owners' associations in the case of condominiums, of each apartment or condominium complex shall also be required to establish a written recycling plan demonstrating how the property will comply with the requirements of this section. The recycling plan shall address, but not be limited to, the following components: 
(1)  Name of waste and recycling hauler; 
(2)  Locations of recycling containers; 
(3)  Number of bedrooms within the development; 
(4)  Documentation of appropriate service capacity; and 
(5)  A copy of resident educational materials. 
For existing apartments or condominium complexes, an initial recycling plan shall be submitted to the director of public works by July 1, 2017. The director shall develop forms, as needed, to facilitate filing recycling plans. The director or the director's designee shall review the recycling plans and determine if the requirements of this section have been met. A willful failure to comply with the requirement to submit a plan or take good faith measures for recycling plan approval shall constitute a violation of this section. 
The approved recycling plan shall be available for inspection by town officials, tenants and owners, and it shall also be posted on any website serving the community. An approved plan shall be valid for four (4) years. 
(c)  Apartment or condominium complexes built after January 1, 2017, in addition to the requirements listed in the preceding sub-sections (a) and (b), shall be designed and built to provide recycling facilities co-located at each place where refuse is collected to maximize convenience and provide walkable access for residents. Existing complexes shall have a one-year period (from January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017) to make site changes necessary to comply with the recycling program requirements in this section. 
(d)  (1)  In cases of unusual site conditions or where strict adherence to the requirements of this section would result in substantial hardship (and where the situation or level of hardship is atypical), the director of public works or the director's designated representative, as appropriate, may vary any of the provisions of this section to lessen the hardship while adhering to the intent of this section. No variance shall be granted that is illegal or that would prejudice the health and safety of citizens of the town. 
(2)  Each request for a variance from the terms of this section shall be made in writing and state specifically: 
i.  The provision from which the variance is requested; and 
ii.  The reasons supporting the variance request, including all background or technical information required by the director to understand and act on the variance. 
(3)  The director shall take action on a request for a variance within sixty (60) days after the application is filed. Any grant or denial shall be in writing, stating the reasons therefor. 
(e)  Any person aggrieved by the director's decision on a variance or a recycling plan may appeal the action to the town council on written application filed with the town clerk within fourteen (14) days from the date of the decision. The town council shall act by resolution to approve or deny the variance within thirty (30) days from the receipt of the application for appeal. The decision of the town council in any case shall be final. 
(f)  Alternative refuse and recycling collection service, such as door-to-door valet service, may be approved as an alternative if they otherwise meet or exceed the requirements detailed in this section for convenience, appropriate service capacity and resident education. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 1600, § 1, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 1811, § 1, 1-10-17 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1600, § 1, adopted March 8, 2011, amended § 20-403 title to read as herein set out. Former § 20-403 title pertained to apartment recycling. 
Section 20-404. - Apartment/multifamily dwelling charges. 
    For the collection and disposal of recyclable materials at apartments, condominiums or other multifamily dwellings as described in section 20-403, services may be obtained through the town's contract for such services or through other recycling collection services. 
(Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 1640, § 1, 3-12-12; Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 1678, § 1, 4-23-13 ; Ord. No. 1811, § 1, 1-10-17 ) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1678 provided for an effective date that shall become effective July 1, 2013, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
Chapter 21 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Acquisition and disposition of property and acquisition of property for streets under eminent domain power, § 2.04; assessments for local improvements, § 6.13. 
Cross reference- General authority of Town Manager relative to streets and sidewalks, § 2-300; responsibility of department of public works relative to construction and maintenance of streets, § 2-420; building regulations, ch. 6; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; littering streets and sidewalks, § 14-401; parades and other outdoor assemblies, ch. 15; vehicles for hire, ch. 23; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- General authority of town relative to streets and sidewalks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2100. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 21-100. - Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance opening, relocating, closing, altering or naming any streets or alleys, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Section 21-101. - Street names. 
    The names of the streets, as shown on a street index map maintained by the department of engineering and GIS, shall be the true names of the streets of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
State Law reference- § 15.2-2019. 
Section 21-102. - General design and construction standards for streets. 
    All public streets and roads constructed in the town shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the subdivision ordinance, Appendix B. This requirement shall apply to all phases of road and street construction. All entrances constructed from a new or existing street or road shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications set forth in the Town's Subdivision Ordinance. 
Section 21-103. - Street construction plans. 
    A certified professional engineer or certified land surveyor licensed by the state shall prepare plans for all public streets and roads to be constructed within the jurisdiction of the town. Such engineer or surveyor shall provide a space on the first sheet of such plans for the written approval of the town engineer and town planner . No construction may begin until this written approval has been received. These plans shall also contain a certificate, signed by the engineer or surveyor, that the plans have been prepared in accordance with the design standards and specifications of the town as contained in the subdivision ordinance. On completion and approval of the street, the plan shall be constructed to an "as built" drawing and filed with the engineering and GIS department on reproducible mylar paper. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 21-104. - Grade, alignment, etc., of streets and curbs. 
(a)  When a street line, grade of centerline or curb of any street shall be established by the town council or its duly appointed committee or by a town officer duly designated for such purpose, such grade and alignment shall be official. No person shall change such grade or alignment so fixed. 
(b)  The situation, range, height, width and pitch of the curb and gutter and pavements shall be established and determined by the town council or its duly appointed committee or by a town officer duly designated for such purpose. 
Section 21-105. - Structures to conform to street line and grade. 
    No person shall be permitted to erect any structure or other permanent improvement on any street where the property line and grade line have been officially established, without having first ascertained the true street line and grade, and such structure or other improvement shall be erected so as to conform therewith. 
Cross reference- Building regulations, ch. 6. 
Section 21-106. - Construction of pavement crossings. 
    Whenever it is necessary to cross the pavement, such crossing shall be constructed by the Town with material suitable for the purpose. The cost of such crossing, over and above the ordinary cost of the pavement, shall be paid by the property owner. 
Section 21-107. - Street trees. 
    The town manager, subject to policy established by the town council or its duly authorized committee, shall have control over the planting and removal of trees on the streets and in the public places of the town. 
Section 21-108. - Barbed and electric wire fencing prohibited on or along street or sidewalk. 
    No person shall erect or maintain barbed wire or electric fencing along or on any street or sidewalk of the town, except in areas zoned for agriculture uses or those in which an agricultural use has nonconforming status under the zoning ordinance. 
Section 21-109. - Removal of paving, curbing or improvement. 
(a)  No person shall remove any paving, curbing or other improvement on any street or sidewalk, without a written permit from the town manager or an officer designated by him for such purpose. 
(b)  Any person obtaining a permit to remove the paving, curbing or other improvement shall agree to restore the street or sidewalk to a condition as good, in the opinion of the director of engineering and GIS, as before such removal. In making this decision, the director of engineering and GIS shall be guided by the standards contained in "Road and Bridge Standards" of the Virginia Department of Transportation (January 1993), or later version thereof. If the street or sidewalk is not properly restored, the town manager may require the street force personnel of the town to restore the street or sidewalk to its former condition and charge the actual cost of such work to the person who obtained the permit. Such charge shall be collected in the same manner as town taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 21-110. - Deposit of injurious or hazardous material on street and removal of same therefrom. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be deposited upon any street or highway any glass bottle, glass, nail, tack, wire, can or any other substance likely to injure any person or animal, or damage any vehicle upon such street or highway, nor shall any person throw or deposit or cause to be deposited upon any street or highway any soil, sand, mud, gravel or other substances so as to create a hazard to the traveling public. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street or highway any destructive, hazardous or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street or highway from such vehicle. 
Cross reference- Littering, § 14-104. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-324. 
Section 21-111. - Duty of property owners to keep sidewalk clean. 
    Property owners shall keep the sidewalks abutting their property clean and free from weeds, filth, shrubbery and vines. 
Section 21-112. - Duty of property owners and tenants to remove snow from sidewalks. 
(a)  Within twenty-four (24) hours after a snowfall, each property owner shall remove the snow from the sidewalk abutting his or her property. If the property is rented, the tenant shall remove the snow. 
(b)  If snow is not removed from an abutting sidewalk within twenty-four (24) hours of a snowfall, the town manager or the manager's designee shall either: 
(1)  Hand deliver to the property owner or tenant; or 
(2)  Post on the property notice that the town will clear the sidewalk at the owner or tenant's expense if the sidewalk is not cleared in twenty-four (24) hours. 
(c)  If the snow is not removed from the sidewalk within twenty-four (24) hours after notice is delivered, the town may clear the snow and collect the costs from the owner or tenant of the property in question in any manner provided by law for the collection of local taxes. Decisions to clear snow from sidewalks in this manner shall be based on established pedestrian travel priorities developed by the town manager's office. 
( Ord. No. 1799, § 1, 8-9-16 ) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1115. 
Section 21-113. - Fee for processing application to vacate street or other public way. 
    There is hereby prescribed and shall be charged an application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for processing an application for closing or vacating any street, alley, easement or other public way. Such fee shall accompany each such application. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2007. 
Section 21-114. - Purchase by applicant as condition to vacation of street or other public way. 
(a)  No application for the vacation of a public street, alley, easement for public passage, or other public way shall be accepted by the town council unless it conforms to the following requirements: 
(1)  One or more persons owning property abutting the public street, alley, easement for public passage, or other public way to be vacated shall join in and sign the application, listing their names and addresses. 
(2)  Written documentation or written verification that the applicant or applicants have notified all other property owners abutting the public street, alley, easement for public passage, or other public way to be vacated, of the application and afforded them the opportunity to join in or file separate applications for vacation. The notice shall be in writing, mailed or delivered to the last known address of such owners, and be provided at least fourteen (14) days prior to the Town's processing of the application. 
(3)  The application shall contain a certification that, if town council effects the vacation, the applicants, or any one (1) or other number of them, shall pay to the town for its interest in the area vacated, the value of such interest. The price shall be no greater than the fair market value of the land vacated or its contributory value to the abutting property, whichever is greater, or the amount agreed to by the applicant or applicants and the town. A valuation shall be based on a fee simple ownership interest and shall be determined as provided in subsection (b) below. No such vacation shall be concluded until the agreed price has been paid. If any abutting property owner does not make such payment for such owner's fractional portion within one (1) year, or other period made a condition of the vacation, the vacation shall be void as to any such property owner. 
(4)  The application shall contain a certification that the applicants agree as to the value of the interest so determined and agree to pay such purchase price to the town upon the town's delivery to them, or any one (1) or other number of them, of a quit-claim deed, on such form approved by the town attorney, conveying the town's interest to the applicant or applicants who shall have been designated in the application. It is the applicant's responsibility to ascertain what interest, if any, the town may have in the area vacated and to satisfy him or herself of the town's title to this interest. Town shall make no warranties of title, or any other warranties, with respect to any interest of town sold under this section. 
(5)  The application shall contain a designation as to which applicants should be grantees in any quit-claim deed of the town's interest in the street. In the absence of agreement among the applicants as to the division of the public street, alley, easement for public passage, or other public way, the town council shall allocate to each abutting landowner applying for the vacation the town's interest, if any, in that portion of the area, adjacent to the applicant's land and extended to the center line of the area vacated. 
(b)  On request of the applicants prior to the filing of the application, the town manager shall compute the value of the street by comparison with the assessed value of land abutting or comparable to the street, making any necessary prorations; and adjustments fairly to represent the value of the street. 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2008. 
Section 21-115. - Skating, skateboards, and bicycles on downtown streets, sidewalks, and parking areas. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety, and welfare of all visitors to the Central Downtown District of Blacksburg. The combination of roller skate, in-line skate, and skateboard traffic with automobile and pedestrian traffic poses an unreasonable risk of harm in this heavily traveled district. Likewise, the combination of bicycle traffic with pedestrians using downtown sidewalks poses an unreasonable risk of harm. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "downtown street" shall be defined to include the following streets: 
Church Street between Clay and Jackson Streets 
Clay Street between Draper Road and Church Street 
College Avenue between Otey and Main Streets 
College Avenue Extension between Main and Wilson Streets 
Draper Road between College Avenue and Miller Streets 
Faculty Street between Main and Progress Streets 
Jackson Street between Draper Road and Church Street 
Lee Street between Draper Road and Church Street 
Main Street between Clay and Turner Streets 
Progress Street between Jackson and Turner Streets 
Roanoke Street between Draper Road and Church Street 
Turner Street between Main and Progress Streets 
Washington Street between Draper Road and Church Street 
Wilson Avenue between Main and Progress Streets 
(c)  No person shall use roller skates, in-line skates, or skateboards on any downtown street. 
(d)  No person shall use roller skates, in-line skates, skateboards, or bicycles on the sidewalks of any downtown street. 
(e)  No person shall use roller skates, in-line skates, or skateboards on any public parking lot or parking area owned, leased or operated by the town that is contiguous to any sidewalk covered by this section or contiguous to any downtown street, as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  Any person violating this section shall be liable to the town for a civil penalty of fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 13, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 1480, 3-11-08) 
Section 21-116. - Skating and skateboards on pedestrian walkways. 
(a)  No person shall use roller skates, in-line skates, or skateboards on the pedestrian walkway known as the Bicentennial Greenway. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be liable to the town for a civil penalty of fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 14, 8-10-99; Ord. No. 1480, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 1804, § 1, 10-11-16 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1804, § 1, adopted October 11, 2016 , amended § 21-116, to read as set out herein. Previously § 21-116 was titled "Skating, skateboards, and bicycles on pedestrian walkways." 
Section 21-117. - Civil penalties. 
    Any ticket for a violation of sections 21-115, 21-116 or 21-118 shall inform the violator that he or she may avoid a trial by paying this penalty to the town by mail or in person at the office of the director of finance within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of the ticket. 
    If a person charged with a violation does not elect to pay the civil penalty within fourteen (14) calendar days, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1480, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 1810, § 1, 1-10-17 ) 
Section 21-118. - Signs in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  No person shall erect, place or maintain any sign in, over or upon any public street, sidewalk, public right-of-way or other public property in the town, except for the following signs: 
(1)  Signs of a noncommercial nature erected on public property authorized or required by law, including, but not limited to, directional signs, regulatory signs, warning signs, and informational signs. 
(2)  Other signs expressly allowed to be located on public property by ordinance or resolution of the town council. 
(b)  Any sign permitted by this section shall be subject to all applicable codes, ordinances, standards, specifications and other requirements of law pertaining to the sign. 
(c)  The town manager or the manager's designee shall have the authority to remove any sign determined to be in violation of this section. After reasonable notice, unclaimed signs may be destroyed. In addition, a violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an infraction punishable by a civil penalty in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each day that a violation continues. 
( Ord. No. 1810, § 1, 1-10-17 ) 
ARTICLE II. - STREET NAMING, ADDRESS NUMBERS, MAINTENANCE AND POSTING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1580, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 10, 2010, repealed Art. II, §§ 21-200-21-202, which pertained to street numbers for buildings and derived from Ord. No. 1264, §§ 1, 2, 3-13-2001. 

Section 21-200. - Purpose. 
    This article may be cited as the "Addressing Ordinance." Its purpose is to provide for uniformity in street names and addresses within the town. A uniform system of properly posted street names and addresses is essential for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1580, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-2010) 
Section 21-201. - Authority and responsibilities. 
    The town manager shall designate an address coordinator, who shall be responsible for the administration of the regulations contained in this article. These regulations shall apply to all lots, parcels, buildings, occupied units, public streets and private means of egress, parking lots and driveways. 
    The addressor coordinator will (i) assign, approve, change or delete addresses, and (ii) transmit new and changed addresses to the property owner, local post office, utility companies, finance departments, and emergency services. The address coordinator shall establish and maintain a map showing such numbers and street names. The address coordinator shall also review proposed street names to insure that the proposed name is unique, and does not duplicate or sound like existing streets within the town or nearby jurisdictions. 
    The address coordinator will maintain in conjunction with the local telephone company an index of streets, which shall be known as the Master Street Address Guide (MSAG). This MSAG shall be shared with all nearby jurisdictions to avoid street name and address duplication within the region. 
(Ord. No. 1580, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-2010) 
Section 21-202. - Street names. 
(a)  As part of any subdivision, site plan, or building permit application that creates new streets, the applicant shall propose street names in accordance with the subdivision ordinance. Private parking lots, private roads and other paths of egress that support more than three (3) occupied structures must be named and addressed. 
(b)  The town council must, by resolution, approve any renaming of public streets, alleys and roads. Any person may file an application with the address coordinator for a renaming. Prior to consideration by the town council, proposed street name changes shall be reviewed by the address coordinator and the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1580, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-2010) 
Section 21-203. - Numbering plan. 
(a)  Buildings located on streets in the town shall be numbered according to the centenary and quadrant plan. Beginning at the axis of reference and moving therefrom, the building and lots upon any particular street shall be numbered from one hundred (100) upwards, allowing, in general, one (1) number for each twenty-five (25) feet. A new hundred shall begin whenever the particular street is crossed by another street. 
    The north-south aids of reference shall be Main Street and the east-west reference shall be Roanoke Street. The quadrants shall be designated NE, SE, NW and SW. From the intersection of Roanoke and Main Streets in any direction to the corporate limits, odd numbers shall be placed upon the left side of the street and even numbers on the right side of any such street. 
(b)  When new development or building construction is proposed on established addressed streets, the applicant (and adjacent property owners, as necessary) shall be notified of any address issues during the town's development review process. The address coordinator shall implement mandatory address changes only after considering all viable alternatives. If an existing address must change, the landowner shall be notified by mail and will have sixty (60) days to post the new address. The address coordinator shall communicate site address changes to the local postmaster, utility companies, finance departments, and emergency services. For mailing address changes, the landowner shall file a change of address form with the local post office. 
(Ord. No. 1580, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-2010) 
Section 21-204. - Street signage. 
(a)  In new subdivisions and developments that create new streets, the subdivider or developer shall be responsible for fabricating and installing all street signs in accord with the town's street sign standards. The public works department shall be responsible for developing standards for street signs. These street sign standards shall be on file in the public works department. The public works department also shall be responsible for maintaining street signs on public streets. 
(b)  Street signs shall be placed at intersections in the corners of roads within the public right of way. Each street sign shall identify the street name and block number. Private streets, parking lots, or other paths of egress that require name and addressing shall be the responsibility of the landowner or designated property manager. Signs for use on private properties within the town may be purchased from the public works department. Street signs on private properties, whether purchased from the town or private sign companies, must follow the town's standards. 
(Ord. No. 1580, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-2010) 
Section 21-205. - Address posting. 
(a)  An address display must be established before a building permit is issued. During construction, an address may be temporarily posted until the building is occupied. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the address must be displayed in a permanent manner. Addressing on buildings must be clearly visible at all times from the road from which it is addressed. If the building is not visible from the road, the address must be displayed at the entrance to the property. On corner lots, the address must be displayed in a manner visible to the street from which the structure is addressed. Buildings shall have address numbers placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road frontage. The public works department and the address coordinator shall be responsible for developing standards and specifications for the style and size of address numbers. 
(b)  For commercial buildings and for residential apartments, building address should be posted clearly on the exterior of the building and apartment or suite assignments displayed on the entrance to the unit. In complexes that have multiple entrances, an address range of these units should be displayed at the entrance in a manner that is clearly visible and identifies the units within that area of the building. In complexes with multiple driveway or parking lot entries, addressing should be posted at the entrance to identify the building addresses or units within that area of the complex. The public works department and the address coordinator shall be responsible for developing standards and specifications for the style and size of address signs. These standards shall apply to public and private developments, both commercial and residential. 
(c)  In the case of reassigned or new number, the owner or person in charge of the premises shall post the new number within sixty (60) days of the date of written notice of the new number. 
(Ord. No. 1580, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-2010) 
Section 21-206. - Penalty. 
(a)  (1)  Any person who shall refuse to number a house, unit or structure, or replace private street names in accordance with these standards will be subject to a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(2)  Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a violation of this article shall be informed that he or she may avoid a trial by paying this penalty to the town by mail or in person at the office of the director of finance within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of the notice of violation. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty established for the offense charged. Any such persons shall be informed of his or her right to stand trial and that a signature to an admission of liability will have the same force and effect as a judgment of court. If a person charged with a scheduled violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(b)  If any refusal to comply with the standards and requirements creates a condition that endangers life or public safety, the address coordinator may utilize the procedures for abating public nuisances provided in chapter 14, article III of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1580, §§ 1, 2, 8-10-2010) 
ARTICLE III. - OBSTRUCTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS 

Section 21-301. - Obstructions generally. 
(a)  No obstructions shall be allowed to remain upon the sidewalks or streets, unless authorized as provided for in this article. If an obstruction is not removed within a reasonable time after delivery of notice as provided for below, the town may proceed to remove it, with the costs thereof being charged to the owner. The removal costs may be collected in any manner provided by law for the collection of state or local taxes. 
(b)  When the town manager determines that an obstruction exists that constitutes a violation of this article, the manager shall deliver written notice to the owner, via one (1) or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Written notice thereof to the owner, at the owner's address as determined from public records, via certified mail; 
(2)  Written notice thereof to the occupant, at the address where the obstruction is observed, via certified mail; or 
(3)  Hand-delivered written notice to the owner or occupant personally, noting the date, time and place of personal delivery. 
(c)  The notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the obstruction; 
(2)  The address of the real property where the obstruction exists (street address or reasonable alternative description); 
(3)  A demand for the removal of the obstruction; and 
(4)  Notice that if the obstruction is not removed within a specified reasonable time of the delivery of the notice, the town will proceed to remove it, with the costs thereof being charged to the owner. 
(d)  The owner or occupant may request a hearing with the town manager concerning the alleged obstruction. The request shall be made by filing with the town manager's office, within the time period set forth in the notice, a written request for a hearing. In the event the owner or occupant requests a hearing, the town manager shall set a hearing and notify the owner or occupant of the time and location of the hearing, which shall be held within five (5) days from the date of the manager's receipt of the request for a hearing. The town will postpone any enforcement action until after the date and time set for the hearing, unless, in the judgment of the manager, public safety requires immediate enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 5-13-08) 
State Law reference- Obstructions or encroachments, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2009, 15.2-2012. 
Section 21-302. - Encroachments and projections generally. 
(a)  Improvements generally. No house, porch, bay window, fence, steps or any other improvement to private property shall be allowed to encroach upon the public streets, pavements, sidewalks or public places. 
(b)  Projecting eaves, air conditioning units, etc. All buildings and structures built so that the eaves thereof project over the sidewalks or other ways, and all air conditioning units and other devices whatsoever which project from buildings or structures over the sidewalks or other ways shall be provided with gutters or downspouts so that no water or other fluid shall flow or drip upon any sidewalk or way. Such gutters and downspouts shall at all times be maintained in good repair and shall be constructed so as to discharge water or other fluid, where practicable, under the sidewalk or way in a suitable pipe. 
(c)  Signs, figures and ornaments. Signs, figures, ornaments or other objects projecting over a pavement or sidewalk in the town must be securely attached to a wall or doorway, must be at least eight (8) feet above such pavement or sidewalk and shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches over the pavement or sidewalk. The town council may, at its discretion and by resolution, exact fees for such use of public streets. 
(d)  Swinging awnings. Swinging awnings shall be securely attached to the building, must be at least seven (7) feet above the sidewalk and must not extend beyond the curbline. 
(e)  Cellar doors and openings into cellars. Openings into cellars and other places, which openings are not enclosed, shall be guarded in such manner as to protect the public from accidents. A cellar door in any sidewalk shall be, as nearly as possible, level and of even grade therewith. Cellar doors in streets shall be closed at dark and kept closed at night. 
(f)  Tree limbs overhanging from private property. It shall be the duty of property owners to maintain trees growing on their property in such a manner that no limbs thereof project over any street at a height of less than fourteen (14) feet, or sidewalk at a height of less than eighty (80) inches. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to permit awnings, fire escapes, etc., to overhang streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2011. 
Section 21-303. - Nonconforming structures, obstructions; additions thereto. 
    No additions shall be made to any structure or other obstruction not in compliance with the provisions of this article on the date of its enactment which increases or prolongs its noncompliance. When any such obstruction shall be demolished or more than fifty (50) percent damaged or destroyed by fire, wind, storm or any other disaster, said condition shall not be repaired or reconstructed, except in a manner which complies with sections 21-304 and 21-305 of this article. 
Section 21-304. - Sight triangles established; obstructions therein prohibited. 
    At all street intersections, sight obstructions that create a traffic hazard, as determined by the town manager, shall be prohibited. No obstructions within a site triangle, except for buildings existing at the date of passage of this article, shall be permitted at more than three and one-half (31/2) feet in height measured from the level of the street at the edge of the pavement on which the obstruction lies. Such triangle shall be defined as shown in Figure 1 below. The town manager, however, may determine, in accordance with standard engineering practices, that a site obstruction exists outside the site triangle thus creating a traffic hazard. 
Figure 1 
Cross reference- Sight triangles established, app. A. 
Section 21-305. - Obstruction by vegetative material, fences, walls or structures unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any landowner, tenant, firm or corporation to own or maintain, either on private property or a public street right-of-way, vegetative material, wire, fences, walls or similar structures which create a sight obstruction in violation of section 21-304. Any such obstruction may be removed by the town through the process established in section 21-301. 
(Ord. No. 1491, § 1, 5-13-08) 
Section 21-306. - Obstruction by unloading operations. 
    No person shall unload any merchandise or other material in such manner as to block traffic on the streets or sidewalks of the town, except by permission of the chief of police. 
Section 21-307. - Obstruction of water in street, gutter or drain. 
    No person shall obstruct or impede the flow of water in any street, gutter or drain. 
Section 21-308. - Dispersal of crowds obstructing use of street or sidewalk. 
    Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the town shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move on when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to so disperse or move on when so directed by a police officer as herein provided. 
Cross reference- Dispersal of bystanders at scene of picketing, § 15-206. 
Section 21-309. - Placement of building material on streets. 
(a)  Contractors or builders may, for a reasonable time, place building material upon one-half (1/2) of the street in front of premises upon which a building or wall is being erected. If buildings or walls are being erected on premises on opposite sides of the street at the same time, the material must be so placed as to leave one-half (1/2) of the street unobstructed. 
(b)  When sand, mortar or other like building material shall be placed on the streets for use for building purposes, the contractor or builder shall provide suitable receptacles for such materials. 
Cross reference- Building regulations, ch. 6. 
Section 21-310. - Temporary street, sidewalk or trail closure for maintenance or construction of adjoining property. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall close or obstruct access to or the use of a town street, sidewalk or trail without a permit from the director of engineering and GIS. The director of engineering and GIS is hereby authorized to issue permits for temporary closures of town streets or sidewalks as required for approved development or construction projects, or as necessary for maintenance of adjoining properties. The director may, if public safety requires, grant immediate permission to a person to make a necessary closure provided that a permit is obtained on the next business day. 
(b)  Issuance of the permit shall be conditioned upon the applicant's indemnification of the town, its officers, agents, employees, and volunteers against any and all claims, demands, suits, losses, liabilities or expenses of any kind that arise out of or result in any way, in whole or in part, from the negligent acts or omissions or willful misconduct of the applicant, or the applicant's officers, employees, agents, or contractors in connection with applicant's use of the street or sidewalk. 
(c)  There is established for a street, sidewalk and trail closure permit a fee of forty-five dollars ($45.00), per day for each two hundred (200) linear feet. To encourage fiber optic installation, the rate for closing a street, sidewalk or trail for such work shall be forty-five dollars ($45.00) per day for each six hundred (600) linear feet. This fee shall not apply to activities permitted by franchise agreements for the use of public rights-of-way. The town council may, by resolution, waive this fee, completely or partially, if the closure is for the purpose of constructing or re-constructing streets or sidewalk at private expense. 
( Ord. No. 1704, § 1, 1-14-14 ) 
Section 21-311. - Investigation and correction of violations. 
    The town manager, or his or her designated representative, shall investigate all alleged violations of this article and shall determine if an obstruction to the view exists as set out in this article. The town manager, or his or her designated representatives, shall notify the violator, in writing, of the violation and allow for one (1) week from the date of the letter for compliance. If compliance is not obtained within the time specified, it shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be a separate offense for each and every day that such violation is continued. Such violation shall be punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
ARTICLE V. - EXCAVATIONS 

Section 21-501. - Permit required; bond. 
(a)  No person shall open any ditch, trench, or other opening in a street, sidewalk, public utility easement, or other public place, without a permit from the director of engineering and GIS except in case of an emergency. The director may, if public safety requires, grant immediate permission to a person to make a necessary excavation or opening within the public right-of-way provided that a permit is obtained on the next business day. 
(b)  The director of engineering and GIS may require, as a condition precedent to issuance of any such permit, that the applicant therefor post bond with corporate surety and payable to the town in such amount as may be reasonably necessary to reimburse the town for expenses which may be incurred by the town should the permittee fail to restore the excavation to a condition satisfactory to the director of engineering and GIS, using the standards contained in the current version of "Road and Bridge Standards" of the Virginia Department of Transportation or this article. In lieu of such bond, a cash deposit may be made with the director of finance. 
(c)  There is established for an excavation permit a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), and each permit shall be limited to one thousand five hundred (1,500) linear feet. This fee shall not apply to those entities paying the town a public right-of-way fee established under town code section 21-615. To encourage fiber optic installation, a permit for such work may be issued for up to one mile; the fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 1281, § 2, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 1360, § 18, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 1704, § 1, 1-14-14 ) 
Section 21-502. - Participation in Miss Utility. 
    Any person installing utility facilities within a public right-of-way must participate in the Miss Utility system and respond to and stake or locate underground utilities within the rules and regulations as prescribed by the Miss Utility system and hold the town harmless for any damage to pipe lines, wires, cables, fibers, conduits, and like facilities which may be damaged as a result of the town repairing or maintaining its utility system located in any public right-of-way if due to untimely or incorrect locations being staked or identified; provided that the town exercises due care to protect its underground facilities. 
Section 21-503. - Placement of facilities. 
    The placement of utility facilities shall be as determined and designated by the director of engineering and GIS. In addition to applicable state and federal standards, the following standards shall apply to installations: 
(1)  Five (5) foot horizontal clearance is required from a water main; 
(2)  Three (3) foot horizontal clearance is required from the edge of any sanitary or storm sewer pipe; 
(3)  Two (2) feet horizontal clearance is required from any vault or manhole at the edge of any town sewer, water, or storm drain pipe; 
(4)  Two (2) feet minimum depth; provided that drop or service wires may be located at a minimum eighteen (18) inches; 
(5)  Above ground facilities shall not obstruct the view of the right-of-way; 
(6)  Screening may be required for above ground facilities, excluding poles and wires. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 21-504. - Barricades and other safety precautions. 
    All openings, excavations or obstructions in a public right-of-way shall be properly barricaded and illuminated with barriers and flashing beacons as required by the current edition of the Virginia Department of Transportation "Work Zone Safety" Manual to prevent injury or damage to persons or vehicles. Flashing beacons shall be installed at all construction sites to provide adequate notice and warning to both pedestrians and vehicular traffic. 
Section 21-505. - Compliance with OSHA and statewide building code requirements. 
    All openings, excavations and tunnels in a public right-of-way shall be properly shored and braced in accordance with all standards promulgated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Virginia Occupational Safety and Health Administration (VOSHA) to insure the safety of all workers and prevent cave-ins and washouts which would likely cause damage to the surface grade of the street or adjoining portions of the right-of-way. 
Section 21-506. - Non-metallic materials. 
    Facilities constructed of non-metallic material are required to have a traceable metallic wrap or accompanying wire for the purpose of tracing and locating with conventional locating equipment. When placed in the public right-of-way utilities or other franchised facilities constructed of material susceptible to breakage (i.e. fiber optic wire, plastic line) may be encased in a protective shell as approved by the town. 
Section 21-507. - Inspection of work; suspension or revocation of permit. 
    All work done pursuant to any permit issued pursuant to this article shall be inspected by the town to determine that the work conforms with the applicable Town Code provisions. The town may suspend or revoke any permit where the workmanship or materials used do not conform to the approved plans and specification and the applicable provisions of this code or other applicable ordinances. Violation of the terms and conditions contained in this article or any other applicable ordinance or code provision may result in the permit being revoked. It shall be unlawful to perform any work authorized by any permit or cause any work to be performed after the permit has been suspended or revoked. 
Section 21-508. - Restoration of the excavation. 
    Any person obtaining a permit under this article shall agree to restore the excavation to a condition as good, in the opinion of the director of engineering and GIS, as before such opening. If the excavation is not properly restored, the director of engineering and GIS may require the street force personnel of the town to restore the excavation to its former condition and charge the actual cost of such work to the person who obtained the permit. The current version of "Road and Bridge Standards" of the Virginia Department of Transportation plus such additional or supplemental town standards shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 21-509. - Submission of "as-built" maps. 
    The applicant shall provide "as-built" maps of all facilities within the town right-of-way on an annual basis. When and if this information is available in a geographical information system format, compatible with the town's GIS, this information shall be submitted in a digital format in lieu of the paper map. 
ARTICLE VI. - USE OF STREETS BY PRIVATE PERSONS FOR CIVIC AND COMMERCIAL PURPOSES 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Section 21-610. - In general. 
    The public streets of this town are designed to serve the public's need for efficient, safe, and convenient vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle transportation. Yet, at times, these streets may be temporarily used for private interests under terms and conditions imposed by the town. During such use, the streets shall maintain their character as public rights-of-way, except as otherwise provided in this division. 
Section 21-611. - Block parties. 
(a)  On application in writing to the town, the town manager may authorize the blocking-off of a street or part of a street for up to twelve (12) hours to enable citizens living near or on the street the opportunity to conduct a block party, neighborhood gathering, or neighborhood festival. In making the decision as to whether or not to authorize such a use, the town manager shall consider, among any other relevant factors, the safety of the traveling public and the participants in the proposed event, the magnitude of use, the importance of the route to be blocked off, and the availability or not of alternate routes of travel. 
(b)  The town manager should only disapprove an application for a block party, neighborhood gathering or neighborhood festival, where there exists as a basis for the disapproval a clear and present health, safety or transportation reason for doing so. 
(c)  After the authorization to block off the street for this purpose, the town manager, shall cause barricades, signs and any other safety devices as appropriate and necessary to be erected with respect to the blocking off of the street. 
Section 21-612. - Street festivals. 
(a)  The town manager may authorize, in the matter provided by town code section 15-101 for special events, the temporary use of public promenades, sidewalks or streets for street festivals or other such uses involving other than public purposes. These uses shall be confined to areas in the downtown commercial zoning district. In determining whether or not to authorize the festival or other such use, the manager shall consider the nature and purpose of the event, it being council's general policy to afford private use of public promenades, sidewalks or streets only where there exists a direct public benefit to be derived from such use (and that the use is not primarily for one group or organization's private use); the safety of the festival participants and patrons; the effect on traffic circulation; and the effect on existing residential and commercial uses in the vicinity. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor for any person to drive a motor vehicle (except service vehicles related to the event or vehicles that have been designated as part of the event) or to ride a bicycle, skateboard, moped or similar device within the parts of the streets designated and marked as being part of the festival or other use. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to possess or bring into such area any pet, reptile, bird, or other animal (except animals that are a part of an exhibition or element of the festival), such being deemed to cause injury and annoyance and to be dangerous, offensive, or unhealthy with respect to the event. 
(d)  If any person shall take a drink of alcoholic beverage or shall tender a drink thereof to another, whether accepted or not, on parts of the streets designated for the festival or other use during such festival or other use, such person shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. This section shall not apply to festival areas that have been designated as areas where alcohol may be lawfully consumed. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1562, § 2, 1-12-10; Ord. No. 1707, § 1, 1-14-14 ) 
Section 21-613. - Unlawful use of public promenades, sidewalks or streets. 
    It shall be unlawful and constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor for any person, without authorization as provided by town code sections 15-101 or 21-612 or as otherwise authorized by town council, to use the public promenades, sidewalks or streets for (i) buying, selling or displaying any goods or (ii) offering or providing any services. This section shall supplement the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1493, § 1, 6-10-08; Ord. No. 1562, § 2, 1-12-10; Ord. No. 1707, § 1, 1-14-14 ) 
Section 21-614. - Adoption of public rights-of-way use fee. 
    The town adopts the public rights-of-way use fee as set forth in Virginia Code (1950) § 56-468.1, as amended. Beginning July 1, 2002, any certificated provider of local exchange telephone service within the town shall collect and remit the fee in accordance with the provisions of Virginia Code (1950) § 56-468.1. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 9, 8-14-01) 
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISES 

Section 21-620. - Franchise required. 
    A franchise shall be required of any utility provider who desires to occupy the public rights-of-way of the town for the purpose of providing utility services to persons or areas within the town. This division sets terms which shall be incorporated into franchises, unless town council modifies these terms for good cause shown. 
Section 21-621. - Application. 
    The application for a franchise shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The identity of the franchise applicant. 
(2)  A description of the utility services that are or will be offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed facilities. 
(3)  The area or areas of the town the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area. 
(4)  Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities. 
(5)  Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the utility facilities described in the application. 
(6)  Evidence that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities. 
(7)  Such further information as may be required by the town. 
Section 21-622. - Review of application. 
    Town council shall consider the following criteria when reviewing an application: 
(1)  The financial and technical qualifications of the applicant. 
(2)  The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities. 
(3)  The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility facilities if the franchise is granted. 
(4)  The service that the applicant will provide to the community and region. 
(5)  The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise requested is granted. 
(6)  Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the public ways will serve the community interest. 
Any determination to deny an application shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for the denial. 
Section 21-623. - Advertising, acceptance of bids. 
    Before granting any franchise for a term in excess of five (5) years, the town shall, after due advertisement, publicly receive bids therefor, as required by Virginia Code § 15.2-2100 et seq. 
Section 21-624. - Rights granted; grant nonexclusive. 
    No franchise granted under this article shall convey any right, title or interest in the public rights-of-way, but shall be deemed a franchise only to use and occupy the public rights-of-way for the limited purposes and term stated in the franchise. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of title. No franchise shall confer any exclusive right or privilege to occupy the public rights-of-way of the town. 
Section 21-625. - Nondiscrimination. 
    A franchisee shall make its services available to any customer within its service area who shall request such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for franchisee's services; provided, however, that nothing shall prohibit a franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. 
Section 21-626. - Compensation for public rights-of-way. 
    The Town shall set a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to a franchisee within each franchise. This compensation shall be separate from, and additional to, any and all federal, state, and Town taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a utility provider, its customers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of utility services. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 10, 8-14-01) 
Note- It should be noted that Ord. No. 1274, § 10, shall be effective July 1, 2002. The Town Attorney shall notify all affected certificated providers of local exchange telephone service of the adoption of the public rights-of-way fee no later than March 15, 2002. 
Section 21-627. - Insurance and Bond Requirements. 
(a)  The franchise grantee shall, at its expense, obtain and maintain during the life of the franchise, the insurance and bonds required by this section. Any required insurance or bond shall be effective prior to the beginning of any work within the Town. Grantee shall maintain: 
(1)  One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any one (1) person; 
(2)  Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident; 
(3)  Three Million Dollars ($3,000,000.00) for all other types of liability. 
(b)  All insurance shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The franchisee shall furnish the Town a certificate or certificates of insurance showing the type, amount, effective dates and date of expiration of the policies. Certificates of insurance shall include any insurance deductibles. 
(2)  The required certificate or certificates of insurance shall include substantially the following statement: "The insurance covered by this certificate shall not be canceled or materially altered, except after thirty (30) days written notice has been received by the Town of Blacksburg." 
(3)  Insurance coverage shall be in a form and with an insurance company approved by the Town which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any insurance company providing coverage shall be authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(c)  At the end of ten (10) years, the Town shall have the right to require increases in the amounts of insurance specified above. Any adjustments shall bear a reasonable relation to any change in the cost of living or cost of repair or replacement, as measured by changes in the Consumer Price Index of the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics applicable to the Commonwealth of Virginia or comparable measure if the Consumer Price Index is no longer being used. 
(d)  The grantee shall post and maintain for the life of its franchise a performance bond in favor of the Town in the amount set by the franchise ordinance . The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance by grantee of all terms and conditions of the franchise. The bond shall be issued by a bonding company licensed to do business in the state of Virginia. 
(e)  So long as the grantee has either (i) assets in excess of $25 million or (ii) annual gross revenue in excess of $20 million, the grantee may elect, upon notice to the Town, to meet the insurance requirements shown in subsections (a) through (d), inclusive, through a program of corporate risk management that combines self-insured retention and commercial insurance. If the grantee makes this election, the grantee shall provide the Town a written description of its corporate risk management program, including the breakdown between self-insured retention and commercial insurance. 
Section 21-628. - Liability. 
    The franchise grantee shall agree to indemnify, keep and hold the Town free and harmless from liability on account of injury or damage to persons or property growing out of or directly or indirectly resulting from: (a) grantee's use of the public streets of the Town; (b) the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, erection, installation, operation, maintenance, repair or extension of grantee's utility facilities; (c) the exercise of any right or privilege granted by or under this article or the franchise or (d) the failure, refusal or neglect of grantee to perform any duty imposed upon or assumed under the franchise. In the event that any suit or proceeding shall be brought against the Town at law or in equity, either independently or jointly with grantee on account thereof, grantee, upon notice given to it by the Town, will defend the Town in any such action or other proceeding, at the cost of the grantee. In the event of a final judgment being awarded against the Town, either independently or jointly with grantee then grantee will pay such judgment or will comply with such decree, pay all costs and expenses of whatsoever nature and hold the Town harmless therefrom. 
Section 21-629. - Relocation or removal of facilities. 
    Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Town, a franchisee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocation, change or alter the position of any of its facilities within the public ways whenever the Town shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the Town's operations or for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any Town facilities or other public improvement within the public ways. 
Section 21-630. - Open air dining. 
(a)  The town manager, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to issue licenses or permits to provide for seasonal private use of town sidewalk spaces for the purpose of open air dining in town owned rights-of-way in the downtown commercial zoning district. The manager or designee shall develop written policies for the regulation of open air dining in town owned rights-of-way that encourage open air dining while ensuring that sidewalks are not over crowded. These policies, once approved by the town manager, will govern the issuance of licenses or permits, the cost of such licenses or permits, and the general operation of open air dining in publicly owned rights-of-way. 
(b)  Applications for all such open air dining licenses or permits shall be made on forms provided by the town. The issuance of such licenses or permits shall be conditioned upon the licensee or permittee complying with all applicable policies, regulations, ordinances or laws. Violations of these policies, regulations, ordinances or laws may result in revocation of a license or permit. The applicant shall agree to provide adequate insurance and to hold the town harmless for the use of town sidewalk spaces. 
(c)  The denial of an application for an open air dining license or permit may be appealed to the town council. The appeal must be filed within twenty-one (21) days from the date of the denial and heard by the town council within forty-five (45) days. 
( Ord. No. 1814, § 1, 3-14-17 ) 
Chapter 22 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance appropriating funds, levying or imposing taxes or relating to an annual budget saved from repeal, § 1-103(4); administration, ch. 2; tax imposed on licenses, § 11-200 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 22-100. - Definitions. 
    The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affidavit: A sworn, signed, written statement. 
    Agent: Every dealer, seller or other person authorized by the director to purchase and affix stamps to packages of cigarettes, or to cancel stamps in connection with the sale of cigarettes, under the provisions of this article. 
    Bank: Any incorporated bank, banking association or trust company organized by or under the authority of the laws of the Commonwealth and any bank or banking association organized by or under the authority of the laws of the United States, doing business or having an office in the town. 
    Caterer: A person who furnishes meals on the premises of another for compensation. 
    CCF: The volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of one hundred (100) cubic feet. 
    Cigarette: A roll of finely cut tobacco enclosed in paper. 
    Commercial or industrial user: The owner or tenant of property used for commercial or industrial purposes, including the owner of master metered apartment buildings who pays for utility service for such property. 
    Dealer: Every manufacturer, jobber, wholesaler or other person who supplies a seller or agent with cigarettes for sale within this town. 
    Director or director: The director of finance of the town and/or his or her designee. 
    Fiscal year: July 1 to June 30. 
    Hotel: Any hotel, inn, bed and breakfast, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, rooming house, travel campground or other lodging place within the town. (Va. Code 58.1-3819, B.C. 21-111.) 
    Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered: One thousand (1,000) watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Code of Virginia, § 56-594, it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
    Local telephone service shall mean switched local exchange access service. 
    Master antenna television system (MATV): An antenna system that serves a concentration of television sets such as an apartment building, hotel or motel. 
    Lodging: Room or space furnished any transient. 
    Meal: Any prepared food or drink, including alcoholic beverages, offered or held out for sale by a restaurant or caterer for the purpose of being consumed by an individual or group of individuals at one time to satisfy the appetite. All such food and drink shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
Meal shall not include food or beverages sold through vending machines or any tangible personal property purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture or with drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children. 
    Mobile local telecommunication service: Two-way mobile or portable local telecommunication service, including cellular mobile radio telecommunication service and specialized mobile radio. 
    Net capital: A bank's net capital computed pursuant to section 58.1-1205 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or successor provision. 
    Package: Every container or wrapper containing or facilitating sale of cigarettes to the ultimate consumer or utilized with the sale of cigarettes to the ultimate consumer. 
    Permanently and totally disabled: A person is totally and permanently disabled if such person is unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of such person's life. 
    Person: Any individual, corporation, company, or other entity. 
    Pipeline distribution company: A person, other than a pipeline transmission company which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light. 
    Purchaser: Every person to whom title to any cigarette is transferred within the town by a seller. 
    Residential consumer: The owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including, but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
    Restaurant: Any place or thing in town from which or in which meals are sold, including but not limited to places of business known as bars, cafes, cafeterias, coffee shops, clubs, delicatessens, diners, dining rooms, eateries, grills, lunch counters, restaurants, snacks bars, grocery stores and convenience stores. Restaurant also means pushcarts or other mobile facilities from which meals are sold or furnished. 
    Sale or sell at retail: Every act or transaction, regardless of the means employed, including the use of vending machines, by which title to any cigarette is transferred in this town from the seller to the purchaser as the ultimate consumer. These terms shall include every mode, tense or related variation of these terms. 
    Satellite master antenna television (SMATV): A private cable system located on private property and serving private dwellings. Satellite programming is obtained via an earth station, amplification and a distribution system. 
    Seller: Every person engaged in this town in selling cigarettes at retail. In the case of the sale of cigarettes from vending machines, the seller shall be deemed the dealer, agent or seller supplying the cigarettes to the vending machine; or, if none of these persons shall have paid the tax required by this article, the seller shall be deemed the person in control of the premises where the vending machines if found at the time of the cigarette sale. 
    Service address: The location of the subscriber's primary use of the telecommunication equipment within the licensed service area. A mobile service provider may obtain a signed statement for a consumer indicating which county, city or town within the licensed service area is the location of the consumer's primary use of the telecommunication equipment. A mobile service provider shall be entitled to rely absolutely on a consumer's signed statement and shall remit the taxes collected to the county, city or town identified by the consumer. In the absence of a signed statement by a consumer, a mobile service provider shall identify the county, city or town of the consumer's primary use and shall remit the tax to such county, city or town based on any other reasonable method, including, without limitation, the consumer's billing address, service address, or telephone number within the licensed service area. 
    Service provider: A person who delivers electricity to a consumer or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas to a consumer. 
    Stamp: A gummed piece of paper or decal to be sold by the director and to be affixed to every package of cigarettes sold at retail in the town. The stamp shall denote an insignia or symbol as directed by the director. A print or other mechanical marking or metered imprint, when approved and authorized by the director, may also serve as a stamp. 
    Taxable real estate: Land and the improvements thereon. This term includes a leasehold interest in every case in which the land or improvements, or both, as the case may be, are exempt from assessment for taxation to the owner. 
    Transient: Any person who, for a period of not more than ninety (90) consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging or the use of any space at any hotel, for which lodging or use of space a charge is made. 
    Used primarily: Relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
    Utility service: Local telephone service and cable television service or satellite master antenna television service or master antenna television system service furnished within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1253, § 1, 10-10-00; Ord. No. 1360, § 19, 4-27-04) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217, definition of permanently and totally disabled. 
Section 22-110. - Director of finance to administer. 
    The director of finance of the town shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The director may designate responsible persons to assist in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. The town attorney shall assist the director in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
Section 22-111. - [Reserved]. 
Section 22-112. - Refund of taxes. 
    No refund of taxes may be made except upon orders of the town council. Any request for a tax refund shall be made in writing to the town council. Interest shall be paid to taxpayer on overpayments due to erroneously assessed taxes at the same rate as the interest charged to the taxpayer for delinquent taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1225, § 15, 8-10-99) 
Section 22-120. - Financial penalty for failure to file a return when due. 
    If any person shall fail to file a tax return, required by this chapter, when due, the director shall assess a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax assessable on such return, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax assessable. The penalty shall be assessed on the day after such return is due. Any such penalty shall become a part of the tax. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Section 22-121. - Financial penalty for failure to pay tax when due. 
    If any person shall fail to pay a tax, imposed by this chapter, when due, the director shall assess a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax past due, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater; provided, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of tax due. The penalty for failure to pay the bank franchise tax, however, shall be not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Penalty for failure to pay any tax shall be assessed on the day after the tax is due. Any such penalty shall become a part of the tax. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Section 22-125. - Interest on delinquent taxes. 
    In addition to the penalty on delinquent taxes, there shall be added to such tax by the director interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum on the taxes and penalty. The interest shall commence on the first day following the day such taxes are due and shall continue until all such taxes and penalty are paid. For real estate taxes, interest shall be imposed for the second and subsequent years of delinquency, for any past due installment, at the rate of interest established pursuant to section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Section 22-127. - Waiver of penalty and interest. 
    Penalty and interest for failure to file a return or to pay a tax shall not be imposed if such failure was not the fault of the taxpayer, or was the fault of the director, as the case may be. The failure to file a return or to pay a tax due to a medically determinable physical or mental impairment on the date the return or tax is due shall be presumptive proof of lack of fault on the taxpayer's part, provided the return is filed or the taxes are paid within thirty (30) days of the due date; however, this provision shall not apply if there is a committee, legal guardian or other fiduciary handling the individual's affairs. The director shall make determinations of fault. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Section 22-128. - Extension of time for payment of real estate taxes. 
    The director may permit a reasonable extension of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, for the payment of real estate taxes, whenever good cause exists. The director shall keep a record of every such extension. In any taxpayer who has been granted an extension of time for filing his or her return fails to file the return within the extended time, the case shall be treated the same as if no extension had been granted. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Section 22-129. - Collection fees. 
(a)  To cover the administrative costs of collecting delinquent taxes or other delinquent charges, there is hereby imposed upon the person or persons owing the tax or charge an administrative fee not to exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) for taxes or other charges collected after notice of delinquent taxes or charges has been provided; or thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for taxes or charges collected subsequent to judgment. 
(b)  As authorized by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3958, the director of finance is authorized to contract with attorneys or collection agencies to collect delinquent taxes or other delinquent charges. A fee to cover reasonable attorney or collection agency fees is hereby imposed on a delinquent taxpayer in cases where an attorney or collection agency must be used to collect delinquent taxes or other delinquent charges. The attorney or collection agency fees shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the taxes or other charges so collected. 
(c)  Collection under this section shall not occur if an appeal has been filed and the limitations of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3958 are applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1420, § 3, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1849 , § 1, 1-9-18) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3958. 
Section 22-130. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to file a return for tax purposes, as required by this chapter, at the time or times required herein. It is unlawful for any person to make a false statement with intent to defraud in any such return. If the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, the penalty shall be that prescribed for a Class 3 misdemeanor. If the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the penalty shall be that prescribed for a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor for any person to forge, alter, steal or use without paying for any stamp or metered insignia described in this chapter. Conviction shall not relieve any person from payment of the tax as provided in this chapter. Each violation shall be a separate offense. 
(c)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection, or remittance of the tax as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1244, § 17, 10-2-00) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916.1. 
Section 22-140. - Record-keeping requirements. 
    It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the town of any bank franchise tax, utility tax, transient lodging tax, meals tax, or cigarette tax to keep and preserve for a period of two (2) years such records as may be necessary to determine the correct amount of such tax. The director of finance shall have the right to inspect such records at all reasonable times. 
Section 22-150. - Failure to collect and report taxes; assessment by director. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to collect any utility tax, transient lodging tax, or meals tax, or to make any report or remittance of such tax within the time prescribed by this chapter, the director of finance shall determine and assess against such person such tax and penalty and interest, based upon facts and information available to the director. The director shall have the power to examine the records of the taxpayer for the purposes of assessing the tax. The director shall notify the taxpayer of the assessed tax, penalty and interest by certified mail sent to his or her last known address. The total amount shall be payable within ten (10) days of mailing of such notice. 
ARTICLE II. - REAL ESTATE TAXES 

Section 22-200. - Real estate taxes levied; rate. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied, and there shall be collected, for each calendar year, a tax upon all real estate and improvements thereon not expressly exempt from taxation. The rate of taxation for each calendar year shall be stated in the annual budget ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 3, 4-27-99) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3200. 
Section 22-201. - When due and payable. 
    All town real estate taxes shall be due and payable in two (2) approximately equal installments as follows: One-half (1/2) on or before June fifth and one-half (1/2) on or before December fifth. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Section 22-202. - By whom payable. 
    Real estate taxes shall be paid by the person who owns the real estate. In the event that a transfer of real estate occurs, the town manager may invalidate a real estate tax bill sent to the prior owner and reissue the bill to the new owner. The new owner shall not be subject to penalty for late payment if the tax is paid within two (2) weeks after the bill is reissued. If the tax is not paid within that time, then penalty and interest shall apply to the delinquent tax from the new due date. 
Section 22-203. - Land in newly annexed areas. 
    Land in newly annexed areas shall become subject to this tax beginning the first January 1 immediately after the effective date of the annexation, unless stated otherwise in the annexation decree. 
Section 22-220. - Exemption or deferral for elderly or disabled persons. 
    The director shall, upon application made and within the limits as hereinafter provided, order exemption of tax on real property owned by and occupied as the sole dwelling house of a person or persons not less than sixty-five (65) years of age or a person or persons less than sixty-five (65) years of age determined to be permanently and totally disabled, upon the terms and conditions hereinafter set out. A dwelling jointly owned by a husband and wife may qualify for exemption if either spouse is over sixty-five (65) years of age or is disabled. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210. 
Section 22-221. - Financial eligibility. 
(a)  To be eligible for this exemption, the total combined income received from all sources during the preceding calendar year by (i) owners of the dwelling who use it as their principal residence and (ii) owners' relatives who live in the dwelling shall not exceed fifty-one thousand dollars ($51,000.00) provided that the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of income of each relative other than the spouse of the owner who is living in the dwelling and the first ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of income for an owner who is permanently disabled shall not be included in such total. 
(b)  Furthermore, the net combined financial worth, including equitable interest, as of December 31 of the immediately preceding calendar year, of the owners and of the spouse of any owner, excluding the value of the dwelling and furnishings in the dwelling including furniture, household appliances and other items typically used in a home and the land, not exceeding one (1) acre, upon which it is situated, shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1351, § 1, 1-13-04; Ord. No. 1377, § 1, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 1431, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 1479, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 1512, § 1, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 1553, § 1, 12-8-09; Ord. No. 1595, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11; Ord. No. 1633, § 1, 1-10-12, eff. 1-1-12; Ord. No. 1667, § 1, 12-11-12, eff. 1-1-13) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3211. 
Section 22-222. - Amount of exemption. 
    The amount of exemption from the annual real estate tax shall be determined by the following table: 
Annual Income Percentage of Tax 
Which May Be Exempted $     0-32,600 100  32,601-40,800  60  40,801-51,000  40  
(Ord. No. 1199, § 1, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 1351, § 2, 1-13-04; Ord. No. 1377, § 2, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 1431, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 1479, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 1512, § 1, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 1553, § 1, 12-8-09; Ord. No. 1595, § 1, 11-9-10, eff. 1-1-11; Ord. No. 1633, § 1, 1-10-12, eff. 1-1-12; Ord. No. 1667, § 2, 12-11-12, eff. 1-1-13) 
Section 22-223. - Certificate of disability. 
    For the purposes of this article, a person shall be determined to be permanently and totally disabled if he or she has a certificate from the social security administration, the veteran's administration or the railroad retirement board. If such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two (2) medical doctors who are either licensed to practice medicine in the commonwealth or are military officers on active duty who practice medicine with the United States Armed Forces, to the effect that the person is permanently and totally disabled will be accepted. The affidavit of at least one (1) of the doctors shall be based upon a physical examination of the person by such doctor. The affidavit of one (1) of the doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the civil service commission which is relevant to the standards for determining permanent and total disability. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3213(D). 
Section 22-224. - Applicant's affidavit. 
(a)  A person claiming an exemption must file a real estate tax exemption affidavit with the director between January 1 and March 1, inclusive. Such affidavit shall be filed annually, or, in lieu thereof, such affidavit may be filed on a three (3) year cycle with an annual certification by the taxpayer that no information contained on the last preceding affidavit filed has been changed to violate the limitations and conditions of eligibility. 
(b)  The affidavit shall state: 
(1)  Names of related persons occupying the dwelling for which the exemption is claimed; 
(2)  That the gross combined income of the owners and relatives living in the dwelling on such property for the preceding calendar year does not exceed the eligibility criteria set forth in this article; 
(3)  That the total combined net worth of the owner and the spouse of the owner does not exceed the eligibility criteria set forth in this article. 
(c)  The person shall attach certification of disability, if disability exemption is claimed. 
(d)  The director has the discretion to accept late filings of first time applicants or for hardship cases until the thirty-first day of December of the taxable year. 
(Ord. No. 1199, § 2, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 1512, § 1, 1-13-09) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3213. 
Section 22-225. - Change in status. 
(a)  Changes in income, financial worth, ownership of property or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which the affidavit is filed, and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided in this article shall nullify any relief of real estate tax liability for the then current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following. 
(b)  The transfer of ownership of the property from a qualifying spouse to a spouse who is less than sixty-five (65) years of age and not permanently and totally disabled, when such transfer results solely from the death of the qualifying spouse, shall result in a prorated exemption for the then current taxable year. Such prorated portion shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction of which the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such exemption or deferral is the numerator and the number twelve (12) is the denominator. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3215. 
Section 22-226. - Notice to those previously qualified. 
    The director shall, between January 1 and April 1 of each year, notify all individuals who have previously qualified for the exemption of real estate taxes that they must file a real estate exemption affidavit or certification with the town in order to maintain eligibility. 
Section 22-227. - Exemption from taxes on property for disabled veterans. 
(a)  As provided by Article X, Section 6-A of the Constitution of Virginia and Virginia Code § 58.1-3219.5, the town hereby exempts from taxation the real property, including the joint real property of husband and wife, of any veteran who has been rated by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs or its successor agency pursuant to federal law to have a one hundred (100) percent service-connected, permanent and total disability, and who occupies the real property as his or her principal place of residence. The qualifying dwelling pursuant to this section and the land, not exceeding one (1) acre, upon which it is situated shall be exempt. 
(b)  The surviving spouse of a veteran eligible for the exemption set forth in this section shall also qualify for the exemption, so long as the death of the veteran occurred on or after January 1, 2011, the surviving spouse does not remarry and the surviving spouse continues to occupy the real property as his or her principal place of residence. 
(Ord. No. 1612, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Section 22-228. - Application for exemption. 
(a)  The veteran or surviving spouse claiming the exemption under section 22-227 shall file with the director of finance on forms to be supplied by the county or town an affidavit or written statement: (i) setting forth the name of the disabled veteran and the name of the spouse, if any, also occupying the real property, (ii) indicating whether the real property is jointly owned by a husband and wife, and (iii) certifying that the real property is occupied as the veteran's principal place of residence. The veteran shall also provide documentation from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs or its successor agency indicating that the veteran has a one hundred (100) percent service-connected, permanent and total disability. The director of finance may accept copies of applications for exemption and related documents filed with the Montgomery County Commissioner of the Revenue. 
(b)  The veteran shall be required to re-file the information required by this section only if the veteran's principal place of residence changes. In the event of a surviving spouse of a veteran claiming the exemption, the surviving spouse shall also provide documentation that the veteran's death occurred on or after January 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 1612, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Section 22-230. - Deferral of real estate taxes. 
(a)  Any taxpayer eligible for an exemption under this article may, at his or her sole option, choose to defer payment of the tax, in lieu of exemption. One hundred (100) percent of the tax levied on the qualifying dwelling and land, or such lesser amount as the taxpayer may designate, may be deferred under this option. During the period of deferral, the deferred taxes are not subject to penalty or interest. 
(b)  All taxes deferred shall constitute a lien against the real estate as if they had been assessed without regard to the deferral permitted by this section. However, to the extent that they exceed in the aggregate ten (10) percent of the price for which the real estate is sold, they are inferior to all other liens of record. 
(c)  All taxes deferred shall be paid, without penalty or interest, to the director by the seller upon the sale or transfer of the dwelling, or from the estate of the decedent within one (1) year after the death of the last owner thereof who qualifies for tax deferral. 
Section 22-231. - Partial tax exemption for rehabilitated structures within an historic district. 
(a)  A real estate tax exemption is hereby authorized for any residential or commercial structure, located within the Blacksburg Historic Overlay District, at least twenty (20) years of age, which has undergone substantial rehabilitation, renovation, or replacement in compliance with the design guidelines for the district. 
(b)  No real estate tax shall be levied upon the additional assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation, renovation, or replacement of the structure. 
(c)  The duration of the real estate tax exemption shall be for a period of twelve (12) years, commencing on December first of the first year in which a tax re-assessment for the property is effective, subsequent to the completion of the rehabilitation, renovation or replacement. The real estate tax exemption shall run with the real estate for this period. 
(d)  Substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement for the purposes of this section shall mean the restoration, repair or replacement of the interior or exterior of a structure, the cost of which is at least five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), which does not increase the total square footage of the structure by more than fifteen (15) percent. Strictly cosmetic work, which does not contribute to the structural integrity or architectural character of the structure, is not included in this term. 
(e)  Any person seeking the tax exemption provided by this section shall file an application with the finance director. The application shall state generally the nature of the work and shall certify the approximate cost of the work. The application shall include a certificate from the historic or design review board that the work complies with the design guidelines for the district, a copy of a building permit issued for the work, and a copy of the certificate of occupancy or completion from the building inspector certifying that the work was completed appropriately. 
(Ord. No. 1229, § 1, 12-14-99) 
ARTICLE III. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX 

Section 22-300. - Bank franchise tax imposed; amount. 
    Each bank shall pay an annual franchise tax measured by its net capital as defined in Code of Virginia (1950), § 58.1-1205, as amended, or successor provision. The rate of taxation shall be eighty (80) percent of the state rate of franchise tax set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1204. 
Section 22-301. - Apportionment. 
    In the event that any bank located within the boundaries of the town is not the principal office but is a branch extension or affiliate of the principal office located outside the corporate limits, the tax shall be apportioned as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1211. 
Section 22-302. - Filing of return. 
(a)  Each bank located within the corporate boundaries shall prepare and file a return with the director, between January 1 and March 1 of each year, inclusive. The return shall be in a form prescribed by the Virginia Department of Taxation. The return shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, tit. 58.1, ch. 12. 
(b)  In the event that a bank has additional offices located outside the town, the bank shall file with the director a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items which are required by Code of Virginia, tit. 58.1, ch. 12. 
Section 22-303. - Payment of tax. 
    Every bank, whether principal or branch office, located within the corporate limits of the town shall, on or before the first day of June of each year, pay to the director of finance all taxes imposed pursuant to this article. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAX ON PURCHASERS OF UTILITY SERVICES 

Section 22-400. - Tax levied; amount. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the town upon every purchaser of a utility service within the corporate limits of the town an annual tax in the amount of twenty (20) percent of the charge made by the seller against the purchaser with respect to each utility service; provided, that in case any monthly bill submitted by any seller for residential utility service shall exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a residential user, there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00). In case any monthly bill submitted by any seller for commercial or industrial service shall exceed fifty dollars ($50.00), there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the town on each purchaser of mobile local telecommunications service with a service address within town limits, a tax of ten (10) percent of the monthly gross charge; provided the tax is not applicable to any amount so charged in excess of thirty dollars ($30.00) per month. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, bills shall be considered monthly bills if submitted twelve (12) times annually each for a period of approximately one (1) month. In case bills are submitted by any seller for two (2) months' service, there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) for residential utility service or one hundred dollars ($100.00) for commercial or industrial service. 
(e)  Where one (1) single commercial or industrial user is serviced by more than one (1) meter, the said maximum amount of charge subject to tax shall be computed as to each meter. 
(Ord. No. 1253, § 2, 10-10-00; Ord. No. 1644, § 1, 4-24-12) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1644 provided for an effective date that shall become effective July 1, 2012, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
Section 22-401. - Collection from purchasers. 
    The utility and mobile telephone tax shall be collected by the seller from the purchaser at the time payment is made. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust until they are remitted to the director of finance. 
Section 22-402. - Report of collection and remittance of tax. 
(a)  The director shall prescribe or approve a tax collection return form(s), which shall show the amount of charges collected and the tax required to be collected. The form(s) shall contain an appropriate signature block and shall call for such other information as the director may require. 
(b)  Every person collecting the utility or mobile telephone tax shall complete a tax collection return and submit it and the remittance of the tax to the director on or before the fifteenth day of the month. Each return shall cover the amount of tax due and collected during the preceding month. 
Sections 22-403-22-409. - Reserved. 
Section 22-410. - Electric utility consumer tax. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: Such tax shall be the rate of $0.01135 on each kWh delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider, not to exceed three dollars ($3.00) monthly. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers: Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of nonresidential consumers as set forth below: 
(i)  Commercial consumers: such tax shall be the rate of $0.01115 on each kWh delivered monthly to commercial consumers not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) monthly. 
(ii)  Industrial consumers: such tax shall be the rate of $0.012000 on each kWh delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) monthly. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this ordinance to monthly kWh delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions: The following consumers of electricity are exempt from the tax imposed by this ordinance. 
(1)  Bills submitted for electric service for heating water, where a separate meter is used solely for water heating service or on bills submitted for unmetered electric service. 
(2)  The United States of America, the Commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, paragraphs F and G, and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. 
    Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this ordinance if submitted twelve (12) times per year of approximately one (1) month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bi-monthly bill (approximately sixty (60) days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the kWh will be divided by two (2); (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; (iii) the tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by two (2); (iv) the tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax". 
(Ord. No. 1253, § 3, 10-10-00; Ord. No. 1644, § 1, 4-24-12) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1644 provided for an effective date that shall become effective July 1, 2012, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
Section 22-411. - Natural gas utility consumer tax. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities classified by "class of consumers" as such term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814 J., as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: Such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall be the rate of $0.1891 on CCF delivered monthly to residential consumers, not to exceed three dollars ($3.00) per month. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers: Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month shown for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution company or a gas utility for the classes as set forth below: 
(i)  Commercial consumers: such tax shall be the rate of $0.07955 on each CCF delivered monthly to commercial consumers, not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) monthly. 
(ii)  Industrial consumers: such tax shall be the rate of $0.07955 on each CCF delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed ten dollars ($10.00) monthly. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this ordinance to monthly CCF delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following consumers of natural gas shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section: 
(1)  Bills submitted for gas service for heating water, where a separate meter is used solely for water heating service or on bills submitted for unmetered gas service. 
(2)  The United States of America, the Commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers natural gas and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, paragraphs H and I, and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for natural gas billed but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. 
    Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this section if submitted twelve (12) times per year of approximately one (1) month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bi-monthly bill (approximately sixty (60) days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the CCF will be divided by two (2); (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; (iii) the tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by two (2); (iv) the tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax". 
(Ord. No. 1253, § 4, 10-10-00; Ord. No. 1644, § 1, 4-24-12) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1644 provided for an effective date that shall become effective July 1, 2012, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
ARTICLE V. - TRANSIENT LODGING TAX 

Section 22-500. - Transient lodging tax imposed; amount. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed on each transient obtaining lodging or the use of space at any hotel, or other place offering lodging to transients, a tax equal to seven (7) percent of the total amount paid for such lodging or the use of space by or for any such transient. 
(Ord. No. 1360, § 20, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1380, § 13, 4-26-05; Ord. No. 1807, § 2, 12-13-16 ) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3840, 58.1-3819. 
Section 22-501. - Collection from transients. 
    The transient lodging tax shall be collected by the hotel, or any other place offering lodging to transients, from the transient or from the person paying for the room rental, at the time payment for the room rental is made. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust until they are remitted to the director of finance. As used in this article, "transient" means any person who, for any period of not more than ninety (90) consecutive days, either at his or her own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging at any hotel or place offering lodging. 
( Ord. No. 1807, § 2, 12-13-16 ) 
Section 22-502. - Report of collection and remittance of tax. 
(a)  The director shall prescribe a transient lodging tax collection return form, which shall show the amount of lodging, charges collected and the tax required to be collected. The form shall contain an appropriate signature block and shall call for such other information as the director may require. 
(b)  Every person collecting the transient lodging tax shall complete a transient lodging tax collection return and submit it and the remittance of the tax to the director on or before the twentieth day of each month. Each return shall cover the amount of tax due and collected during the preceding month. 
(c)  Every collector shall be allowed two (2) percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his or her monthly return, provided the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 4-28-09) 
Section 22-503. - Exceptions for governmental employees on official business. 
    No tax shall be payable hereunder with respect to any payment for lodging or the use of space paid by or for any federal, Virginia, or Blacksburg official or employee when on official business. 
Section 22-504. - Exceptions for transients at places of lodging at public institutions. 
    With respect to those places of lodging at public institutions whose operating costs are financed by legislative appropriations, no tax shall be payable hereunder with respect to any payment for lodging or the use of space paid by or for: 
(1)  Any person obtaining lodging at such places in connection with or as a part of any bona fide educational conference or program arranged by such public institution; or 
(2)  Any person who is an invited guest of the public institution where such payment was made by said public institution. 
Section 22-505. - Cessation of business; tax due immediately. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the town a tax imposed by this article shall cease to operate, go out of business, or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax then payable to the town shall become immediately due and payable, and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due to the director of finance. 
ARTICLE VI. - LAND USE TAXATION PROCEDURES 

Section 22-600. - Finding; land use plan; taxation of certain land. 
    The council finds that the preservation of real estate devoted to agricultural, horticultural, forest and open space uses within the town's boundaries is in the public interest. As set forth herein, the council has adopted a land use plan and eligible real estate shall be taxed in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3229 et seq., and the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1856 , § 1, 1-9-18) 
Section 22-601. - Application by owner. 
    The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3230 and 58.1-3233, may, at least sixty (60) days preceding the tax year for which such taxation is sought, apply to the Montgomery County Commissioner of the Revenue ("commissioner") for the classification, assessment and taxation of such property for the next succeeding tax year on the basis of its use under the procedures set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3236. Such application shall be on forms provided by the Virginia Department of Taxation and supplied by the commissioner and include such additional information as may be required by the commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 1856 , § 1, 1-9-18) 
Section 22-602. - Qualification of property. 
    The commissioner must determine whether the subject property meets the criteria for taxation hereunder. If the commissioner determines that the subject property does meet such criteria, he or she shall determine the value of such property for its qualifying use as well as its fair market value. 
(Ord. No. 1856 , § 1, 1-9-18) 
Section 22-603. - Use value, fair market value; effect. 
    The use value and fair market value of any qualifying property shall be placed on the land book before delivery to the director of finance and the town tax for the next succeeding tax year shall be extended from the use value. 
(Ord. No. 1856 , § 1, 1-9-18) 
Section 22-604. - Change from qualifying use. 
    There is hereby imposed a roll-back tax, and interest thereon, in such amounts as may be determined under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3237 by the commissioner upon any property in the town as to which the use changes from a qualifying use. 
(Ord. No. 1856 , § 1, 1-9-18) 
Section 22-605. - Roll-back taxes generally; misstatements. 
(a)  The owner of any real estate liable for roll-back taxes or rezoned, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3237 (D), shall, within sixty (60) days following a change in use, report such change to the commissioner on such forms as may be prescribed. The commissioner shall determine and assess the roll-back tax. Any roll-back taxes due to the town shall be paid to the director of finance within thirty (30) days of assessment. 
(b)  On failure to report the change in use within sixty (60) days following such change in use and/or failure to pay within thirty (30) days of assessment, the property owner shall be liable for an additional penalty equal to ten (10) percent of the amount of the roll-back tax and interest, which penalty shall be collected as a part of the tax. In addition to such penalty, there is hereby imposed interest of one-half (0.5) percent of the amount of the roll-back tax, interest and penalty for each month or fraction thereof during which the failure continues. 
(c)  Any person making a material misstatement of fact in any application filed pursuant hereto shall be liable for all taxes, in such amounts and at such times as if such property had been assessed on the basis of fair market value as applied to other real estate in the taxing jurisdiction, together with interest and penalties thereon, and he or she shall be further assessed with an additional penalty of one hundred (100) percent of such unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1856 , § 1, 1-9-18) 
ARTICLE VII. - MEALS TAX 

Section 22-700. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have for the purposes of this article, the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cater. The furnishing of food, beverages, or both, on the premises of another, for compensation. 
    Collector. The director of finance, or his/her designee. 
    Director. The director of finance and any duly designated deputies, assistants, inspectors or other employees. 
    Food. All food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or off, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Food establishment. Any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold, or distributed in the town, including but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
    Meal. Meal shall mean any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 7-11-00) 
Section 22-701. - Levy. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied on each person a tax at the rate of six (6) percent on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 1333, § 1, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 1486, § 1, 4-28-08) 
Section 22-702. - Collection of tax by seller. 
    Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this article from the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made; provided, however, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the department for the visually handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. All tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust for the town. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 7-11-00) 
Section 22-703. - Report of collection and remittance of tax. 
(a)  The director shall prescribe a meals tax collection return form, which shall show the amount of charges collected for meals and the tax required to be collected. The form shall contain an appropriate signature block and shall call for such other information as the director may require. 
(b)  Every person collecting the meals tax shall complete a meals tax collection return and submit it and the remittance of the tax to the director on or before the close of business on the twentieth day of each month. Each return shall cover the amount of tax due and collected during the preceding month. 
(c)  Every collector shall be allowed three (3) percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his or her monthly return; provided that no meals taxes are delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 1517, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1781, § 1, 3-8-16 ) 
Section 22-704. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature served for on or off-premises consumption. 
(b)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and factory-prepackaged items of essentially the same nature; 
(2)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on-premises consumption (e.g., a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream). A bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption. 
(3)  Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers. 
(4)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the food stamp program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children. 
(5)  Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the Federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. § 2012, as amended except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the Federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and nonfactory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subparagraphs (d)(3), (4) and (5) below. 
(c)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(d)  The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages: 
(1)  Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)  Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees. 
(3)  Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the Commonwealth, any political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the United States. 
(4)  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof and the spouses and children of such persons. 
(5)  Food and beverages furnished by a public or private non-profit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the Commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(6)  Food and beverages sold by a non-profit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for non-profit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(7)  Food and beverages sold through vending machines. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 7-11-00) 
Section 22-705. - Gratuities and service charges. 
    The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on (i) that portion of the amount paid by the purchaser as a discretionary gratuity in addition to the sales price of the meal or (ii) that portion of the amount paid by the purchaser as a mandatory gratuity or service charge added by the food establishment in addition to the sales price of the meal, but only to the extent that such mandatory gratuity or service charge does not exceed 20 percent of the sales price. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 7-11-00; Ord. No. 1418, § 5, 7-11-06) 
Section 22-706. - Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the town the taxes imposed by this article to make a report thereof setting forth such information as the director may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. Such records shall be kept and preserved for a period of five (5) years. The director or his or her duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 7-11-00) 
Section 22-707. - Violations; liability of corporate or partnership officer. 
    Any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 2, 7-11-00) 
ARTICLE VIII. - EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM TAX 

Section 22-800. - E-9-1-1 tax imposed; amount. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed a tax on each purchaser of local telephone service. The rate of this tax shall be one dollar and forty-one cents ($1.41) per line per month. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 16, 4-27-99) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813. 
Section 22-801. - Collection from purchasers. 
(a)  The E-9-1-1 tax shall be collected by the seller from the purchaser at the time payment for the local telephone service is made. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust until they are remitted to the director of finance. 
(b)  In the event the purchaser pays the cost of local telephone service on a periodic basis other than a month, the monthly tax charges set out above shall be prorated or cumulated, as necessary, to realize a monthly tax of one dollar and forty-one cents ($1.41) per line. 
Section 22-802. - Report of collection and remittance of tax. 
(a)  The director shall prescribe an E-9-1-1 tax return form, which shall show the amount of charges collected for local telephone service and the tax required to be collected. The form shall contain an appropriate signature block and shall call for such other information as the director may require. 
(b)  Every person collecting the E-9-1-1 tax shall complete a tax collection return and submit it and the remittance of the tax to the director on or before the last day of each month. Each return shall cover the amount of tax due and collected during the preceding month. 
(c)  Every collector shall be allowed three (3) percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his or her monthly return, provided the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
Section 22-803. - Exemptions. 
(a)  There shall be no tax imposed on federal, state and local governmental agencies. 
(b)  This tax shall not apply to any local telephone service where a periodic bill is not rendered. 
ARTICLE IX. - CIGARETTE TAX 

Section 22-900. - Tax levied. 
    There is levied a tax at the rate of $0.015 per cigarette on each cigarette upon or before that cigarette is sold at retail in the town. The seller, dealer or other agent involved in the sale of the cigarette shall pay this tax to the town by purchasing and affixing a stamp or stamps in appropriate denominations to each package of cigarettes sold at retail in the town, prior to the sale, or by paying the tax directly to the town in cases where unpackaged cigarettes may be sold. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 1, 4-25-89; Ord. No. 1084, § 17, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 1332, § 1, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 1364, § 1, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 1383, § 1, 4-26-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1364, § 4, adopted June 8, 2004, provided for an effective date of July 1, 2004. 
Section 22-901. - Sale and use of stamps. 
(a)  No package of cigarettes not bearing the stamp required by this article shall be sold in this town. No cigarette not in a package shall be sold in this town unless the seller shall have first paid the tax required by this article to the town by purchasing from the director and canceling the requisite number of stamps. 
(b)  The director shall acquire, keep and sell necessary stamps to agents for use in the taxation of cigarettes in this town. Only dealers and sellers who, on accepted application to the town, have become agents may purchase and affix stamps. No dealer, seller or other person shall sell cigarettes in this town unless such person is an agent, unless the packages of cigarettes have already been stamped under the provisions of this article or unless the tax shall have otherwise been paid, the packages of cigarettes stamped or the stamps purchased and canceled. The stamps affixed to the packages of cigarettes sold or canceled shall be of such denominations and quantities as may be necessary for the payment of the tax imposed by this article. 
(c)  In the sale of such stamps, the director shall allow to the person purchasing the stamps a discount of six-tenths of one percent of the purchase price of the stamps. This discount shall cover the cost incurred by the agent in affixing the stamps to packages of cigarettes. 
(d)  The director may provide for the issuance and exclusive use of stamps of a certain design, change the design and forbid the use of stamps of any other design. The director may redeem unused stamps or make refunds for destroyed stamps, but this official shall not in any case refund more than ninety (90) percent of the face value of redeemed or destroyed stamps. 
Section 22-902. - Duties of agent. 
(a)  Every dealer, seller or agent shall purchase necessary stamps from the director to pay the tax imposed by this article. These persons shall affix a stamp or stamps of the monetary value of the appropriate tax to each package of cigarettes upon receipt of the cigarettes and prior to their sale in this town. In the case of unpackaged cigarettes, every dealer, seller or agent shall, prior to their sale, purchase and cancel the stamp or stamps evidencing payment of the tax for the unpackaged cigarettes sold. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to a seller as to cigarettes for which the dealer or agent has previously complied with those requirements. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to a dealer as to cigarettes for which an agent has previously complied with those requirements. Dealers and sellers may authorize and employ an agent to purchase and affix stamps for them, or they and the agents may use a stamp meter machine instead of stamps to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Dealers, sellers and agents, as appropriate, shall place on each package of cigarettes stamps in such a manner to be readily visible or shall cancel stamps with respect to unpackaged cigarettes upon their sale. 
(c)  Every seller shall determine that each package of cigarettes sold or offered for sale in this town shall have the proper stamp affixed to the package in compliance with this article. 
(d)  No purchaser shall purchase in the town any package of cigarettes that does not bear the stamp required by this article or as to which, in the case of unpackaged cigarettes, the seller or someone for him has not purchased and canceled stamps in appropriate denominations. 
(e)  Upon the discovery of unstamped or improperly stamped packages of cigarettes in the seller's possession for sale, the seller shall immediately procure and properly stamp or correct the stamping of these cigarettes in accordance with this article. 
(f)  Every seller, agent and dealer shall maintain and keep for at least two (2) years records of cigarette sales within the town. These records shall be made available for inspection by the director at reasonable times and places to assure and enforce compliance with the requirements of this article. 
Section 22-903. - Remedies for nonpayment. 
(a)  After a written assessment of the tax using the best information available and after notice and opportunity for an immediate and summary hearing before the director, the director may seize cigarettes found in this town as to which the director has evidence that the tax has not been and will not be paid as required by this article. The director shall take possession of the seized cigarettes and perform a formal reassessment of tax due under this article. The director shall notify the taxpayer by certified mail of the tax due. The notice shall afford this taxpayer the right to a hearing to be held within ten (10) days of the mailing of the notice before the town manager on the propriety of the assessment, seizure and retention of the cigarettes. If the tax determined to be due is not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the notice, the director shall stamp and sell the cigarettes publicly or privately to pay the tax and expenses of collection. The director shall refund to the taxpayer any surplus funds from the sale after the deduction of the director's expenses of storage, sale and stamping of the cigarettes. The director may collect any tax deficiency resulting from the sale in the manner prescribed by general law for the collection of taxes. 
(b)  If the director has evidence of the sale of cigarettes in this town without the payment of the tax, the director may perform an assessment of the tax due with respect to the cigarettes, using the best information available. The director shall mail by certified mail a notice of summary assessment to the taxpayer. If the tax described in the notice is not paid within ten (10) days after the mailing, the director may collect the tax due by any method authorized by general law. 
(c)  If the taxpayer shall fail or refuse to pay the town the tax required to be paid under this article within the time and in the amount as provided for in this article, there shall be added to such tax a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the tax due or the sum of ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax due. The director shall also assess interest on the tax and penalty at the rate of ten (10) percent per year from the day after the tax is due until paid. 
ARTICLE X. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITIES 

Section 22-1000. - Power to consider petitions for the creation of community development authorities. 
    The town assumes the power to consider petitions for the creation of community development authorities in accordance with Virginia Code Title 15.2, Chapter 51, Article 6. 
( Ord. No. 1742, § 1, 10-14-14 ) 
Chapter 23 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; streets and sidewalks, ch. 21. 

ARTICLE I. - BLACKSBURG TRANSIT 

Section 23-100. - Transit department and director. 
(a)  There is hereby created the transit department for the town. 
(b)  There shall be a transit director appointed by the town manager. The transit director shall be the administrative head of the transit department and shall have such staff and assistants as the town council may from time to time authorize. 
(c)  The transit department shall be under the supervision and control of the town manager, and the transit director shall report directly to the town manager or the manager's designee. 
(Ord. No. 1451, § 1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 5-9-17 ) 
Section 23-101. - Fares for town transit system. 
(a)  Fixed route rates in Blacksburg. 
(1)  The following fares are hereby established to be charged for ridership on the Blacksburg Transit fixed route system. 
a.  For persons at least three (3) and not more than seventeen (17) years of age, there is hereby imposed a fare of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per ride. 
b.  For persons eighteen (18) and not more than sixty-four (64) years of age, there is hereby imposed a fare of fifty cents ($0.50) per ride. 
c.  For persons sixty-five (65) years of age and older, persons with disabilities and Medicare cardholders, there is hereby imposed a fare of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per ride. Medicare card or BTAccess ID card must be presented at the time of boarding to receive half fare. 
(2)  Ride ticket. The fares set forth in subsection (a)(1) may be satisfied by the presentation of a ride ticket. Ride tickets may be produced in increments of twenty-five cents ($0.25) each. Upon presentation to the bus driver, the driver shall collect increments in an amount equal to the appropriate fare. 
(3)  Monthly pass. The fares set forth in subsection (a)(1) may be satisfied by the presentation of a monthly pass appropriate for the age classification of its bearer and valid for the current calendar month. Monthly passes may be purchased for eight dollars ($8.00) for use by persons described in subsection (a)(1)b. and four dollars ($4.00) for use by persons described in subsections (a)(1)a. and (a)(1)c. 
(4)  Six-month passes. The fare set forth in subsection (a)(1) may be satisfied by the presentation of a current six-month pass. The six-month pass shall be based on calendar months, beginning the first day of the month purchased. The cost of the pass shall be thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) for persons in age classifications described in subsection (a)(1)b., and eighteen dollars and seventy-five cents ($18.75) for persons in age classifications described in subsections (a)(1)a. and (a)(1)c. 
(5)  Partnerships/promotional. The transit director may devise and execute a plan for the sale of passes to partners. The transit director may distribute complimentary ride tickets for promotional purposes with a total value of no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. 
(6)  LCI (Language Culture Institute). There shall be no fare charged to any full-time or part-time student of the Language Cultural Institute upon the presentation of an approved identification card issued by the university. 
(7)  Infants. There shall be no fare charged to any infant of less than three (3) years of age. 
(8)  University students, faculty and staff. There shall be no fare charged to any full-time or part-time student, faculty or staff member of Virginia Tech's Blacksburg campus or Carilion School of Medicine upon the presentation of an approved identification card issued by the university. 
(9)  Corporate Research Center employees. There shall be no fare charged to any full-time employee of companies in the Corporate Research Center upon the presentation of an approved identification card. 
(10)  Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine. There shall be no fare charged to (i) any full-time or part-time student or (ii) any faculty or staff member of the Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine upon the presentation of an approved identification card issued by the college. 
(11)  Ride transfers. There shall be no fare charged to any person presenting a valid ride transfer. The bus driver will issue ride transfers to fare paying passengers at no charge. Ride transfers are valid for one (1) hour from the time the pass is issued and may not be used for making round trips. 
(12)  Fare-free days. Notwithstanding the above, to promote awareness and utilization of the transit system, the transit director is authorized to declare no more than fifteen (15) fare-free days per fiscal year, during which days regular transit route service shall be provided at no charge. 
(13)  Special event fares. Notwithstanding the above, the transit director is authorized to establish fares for the fixed route system that shall be effective only during special events. As used in this subsection, a "special event" means an attraction or activity producing large crowds and traffic congestion that require significant amounts of additional transit routes or service. 
(14)  Promotional or marketing events. Notwithstanding the above, the transit director is authorized to establish fares for the fixed route system that shall be effective only during promotional or marketing events. As used in this subsection, a "promotional or marketing event" means an opportunity to test new routes or to promote Blacksburg Transit. These promotional or marketing fares shall be implemented by the transit director for no more than fifteen (15) events per fiscal year. 
(b)  BTAccess rates. 
(1)  BTAccess ridership fares. The following fares are hereby established to be charged for ridership on the Blacksburg Transit ADA complementary Paratransit System known as BTAccess: 
For persons, presenting a current BTAccess card, there is hereby imposed a fare of fifty cents ($0.50) per ride. One (1) approved personal care attendant is permitted to ride free. One (1) companion may accompany an eligible passenger for a fare of fifty cents ($0.50) per ride. 
(2)  Ride ticket. The fares set forth in subsection (b)(1) may be satisfied by the presentation of a ride ticket. Ride tickets may be produced in increments of twenty-five cents ($0.25) each. Upon presentation to the bus driver, the driver shall collect increments in an amount equal to the appropriate fare. 
(3)  Monthly pass. The fares set forth in subsection (b)(1) may be satisfied by the presentation of a monthly pass valid for the current calendar month. Monthly passes may be purchased for eight dollars ($8.00) for use by persons described in subsection (b)(1). 
(4)  Six-month passes. The fares set forth in subsection (b)(1) may be satisfied by the presentation of a current six-month pass. The six-month pass shall be based on calendar months, beginning the first day of the month purchased. The cost of the pass shall be thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) for persons described in (b)(1). 
(5)  Language Culture Institute. There shall be no fare charged to any full-time or part-time student of the Language Cultural Institute presenting a current BTAccess ID card and an approved identification card issued by the university. 
(6)  Infants. There shall be no fare charged to any infant of less than three (3) years of age. 
(7)  University students, faculty and staff. There shall be no fare charged to any full-time or part-time student, faculty or staff member of Virginia Tech's Blacksburg campus or Carilion School of Medicine presenting a current BTAccess ID card and an approved identification card issued by the university. 
(8)  Corporate Research Center employees. There shall be no fare charged to any full-time employee of companies in the Corporate Research Center presenting a current BTAccess ID card and an approved identification card issued by the university. 
(9)  Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine. There shall be no fare charged to any full-time or part-time student, faculty or staff member of the Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine presenting a current BTAccess ID card and an approved identification card issued by the college. 
(10)  Ride transfers. There shall be no fare charged to any person presenting a valid ride transfer. The bus driver will issue ride transfers to fare paying passengers at no charge. Ride transfers are valid for one (1) hour from the time the pass is issued and may not be used for making round trips. 
(11)  BTAccess shall be fare free on the same days as fixed route service. 
(12)  Promotional or marketing events. The transit director is authorized to establish fares for the paratransit service that shall be effective only during promotional or marketing events. During such promotion or marketing events, the fare for paratransit service will reflect the same amount as imposed on fixed routes for those passengers presenting a current BTAccess ID card and an approved identification card issued by the university. 
(c)  Transit rates in Christiansburg. 
(1)  The following fares are hereby established to be charged for ridership on the Blacksburg Transit Christiansburg "fixed" and "deviated fixed" routes: 
a.  For persons at least three (3) but not more than seventeen (17) years of age, there is hereby imposed a fare of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per ride. 
b.  For persons eighteen (18) and not more than sixty-four (64) years of age, there is hereby imposed a fare of fifty cents ($0.50) per ride. 
c.  For persons sixty-five (65) years of age and older, persons with disabilities and Medicare cardholders, there is hereby imposed a fare of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per ride. Medicare ID card must be presented at the time of boarding to receive half fare. 
(2)  Ride ticket. The fares set forth in subsection (c)(1) may be satisfied by the presentation of a ride ticket. Ride tickets may be produced in increments of twenty-five cents ($0.25) each. Upon presentation to the bus driver, the driver shall collect increments in an amount equal to the appropriate fare. 
(3)  Monthly pass. The fares set forth in subsection (c)(1) may be satisfied by the presentation of a monthly pass appropriate for the age classification of its bearer and valid for the current calendar month. Monthly passes may be purchased for eight dollars ($8.00) for use by persons described in subsection (c)(1)b. and four dollars ($4.00) for use by persons described in subsections (c)(1)a. and (c)(1)c. 
(4)  Six-month pass. The fare set forth in subsection (c)(1) may be satisfied by the presentation of a current six-month pass. The six-month pass shall be based on calendar months, beginning the first day of the month purchased. The cost of the pass shall be thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) for persons in age classifications described in subsection (c)(1)b., and eighteen dollars and seventy-five cents ($18.75) for persons in age classifications described in subsections (c)(1)a. and (c)(1)c. 
(5)  Language Culture Institute. There shall be no fare charged to any full-time or part-time student of the Language Cultural Institute presenting a current BTAccess ID card and an approved identification card issued by the university. 
(6)  Infants. There shall be no fare charged to any infant of less than three (3) years of age. 
(7)  University students, faculty and staff. There shall be no fare charged to any full-time or part-time student, faculty or staff member of Virginia Tech's Blacksburg campus or Carilion School of Medicine upon the presentation of an approved identification card issued by the university. 
(8)  Corporate Research Center employees. There shall be no fare charged to any full-time employee of companies in the Corporate Research Center upon the presentation of an approved identification card. 
(9)  Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine. There shall be no fare charged to (i) any full-time or part-time student or (ii) any faculty or staff member of the Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine upon the presentation of an approved identification card issued by the college. 
(10)  Ride transfers. There shall be no fare charged to any person presenting a valid ride transfer. The bus driver will issue ride transfers to fare paying passengers at no charge. Ride transfers are valid for one (1) hour from the time the pass is issued and may not be used for making round trips. 
(11)  Fare-free days. Notwithstanding the above, to promote awareness and utilization of the transit system, the transit director is authorized to declare no more than fifteen (15) fare-free days per fiscal year, during which regular transit service shall be provided at no charge in Christiansburg for the "fixed" and "deviated fixed" routes. 
(12)  Promotional or marketing events. Notwithstanding the above, the transit director is authorized to establish fares for the "fixed" and "deviated fixed" routes that shall be effective only during promotional or marketing events. As used in this subsection, a "promotional or marketing event" means an opportunity to test new service routes or to promote Blacksburg Transit. These promotional or marketing fares shall be implemented by the transit director for no more than fifteen (15) events per fiscal year. 
(13)  Special event fares. Notwithstanding the above, the transit director is authorized to establish fares for the "fixed" and "deviated fixed" routes that shall be effective only during special events. As used in this subsection, a "special event" means an attraction or activity producing large crowds and traffic congestion that require significant amounts of additional transit routes or service. 
(d)  Demand-response route rates in Christiansburg. 
(1)  The following fares are hereby established to be charged for ridership on the Blacksburg Transit Christiansburg Demand-Response "Go Anywhere" route: 
a.  For persons at least three (3) but not more than seventeen (17) years of age, there is hereby imposed a fare of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per ride. 
b.  For persons eighteen (18) and not more than sixty-four (64) years of age, there is hereby imposed a fare of fifty cents ($0.50) per ride. 
c.  For persons sixty-five (65) years of age and older, persons with disabilities and Medicare cardholders, there is hereby imposed a fare of twenty-five cents ($0.25) per ride. Medicare ID card must be presented at the time of boarding to receive half fare. 
(2)  Ride ticket. The fares set forth in subsection (d)(1) may be satisfied by the presentation of a ride ticket. Ride tickets may be produced in increments of twenty-five cents ($0.25) each. Upon presentation to the bus driver, the driver shall collect increments in an amount equal to the appropriate fare. 
(3)  Monthly pass. The fares set forth in subsection (d)(1) may be satisfied by the presentation of a monthly pass appropriate for the age classification of its bearer and valid for the current calendar month. Monthly passes may be purchased for eight dollars ($8.00) for use by persons described in (d)(1)b. and four dollars ($4.00) for use by persons described in subsections (d)(1)a. and (d)(1)c. 
(4)  Six-month pass. The fare set forth in subsection (d)(1) above may be satisfied by the presentation of a current six-month pass. The six-month pass shall be based on calendar months, beginning the first day of the month purchased. The cost of the pass shall be thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) for persons in age classifications described in subsection (d)(1)b., and eighteen dollars and seventy-five cents ($18.75) for persons in age classifications described in subsections (d)(1)a. and (d)(1)c. 
(5)  Language Culture Institute. There shall be no fare charged to any full-time or part-time student of the Language Cultural Institute presenting a current BTAccess ID card and an approved identification card issued by the university. 
(6)  Infants. There shall be no fare charged to any infant of less than three (3) years of age. 
(7)  University students, faculty and staff. There shall be no fare charged to any full-time or part-time student, faculty or staff member of Virginia Tech's Blacksburg campus or Carilion School of Medicine upon the presentation of an approved identification card issued by the university. 
(8)  Corporate Research Center employees. There shall be no fare charged to any full-time employee of companies in the Corporate Research Center upon the presentation of an approved identification card. 
(9)  Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine. There shall be no fare charged to (i) any full-time or part-time student or (ii) any faculty or staff member of the Edward Via College of Osteopathic Medicine upon the presentation of an approved identification card issued by the college. 
(10)  Ride transfers. There shall be no fare charged to any person presenting a valid ride transfer. The bus driver will issue ride transfers to fare paying passengers at no charge. Ride transfers are valid for one (1) hour from the time the pass is issued and may not be used for making round trips. 
(11)  Fare-free days. Notwithstanding the above, to promote awareness and utilization of the transit system, the transit director is authorized to declare no more than fifteen (15) fare-free days per fiscal year, during which regular transit service shall be provided at no charge in Christiansburg for the "Go Anywhere" route. 
(12)  Promotional or marketing events. Notwithstanding the above, the transit director is authorized to establish fares for the "Go Anywhere" route that shall be effective only during promotional or marketing events. As used in this subsection, a "promotional or marketing event" means an opportunity to test new service routes or to promote Blacksburg Transit. These promotional or marketing fares shall be implemented by the transit director for no more than fifteen (15) events per fiscal year. 
(13)  Special event fares. Notwithstanding the above, the transit director is authorized to establish fares for the "Go Anywhere" route that shall be effective only during special events. As used in this subsection, a "special event" means an attraction or activity producing large crowds and traffic congestion that require significant amounts of additional transit routes or service. 
(Ord. No. 1344, § 1, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1451, § 1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 1666, § 1, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 5-9-17 ) 
Section 23-102. - BTAccess service area. 
    The service area for BTAccess is the entire town of Blacksburg, as well as a three-quarter-mile radius around bus routes that extend beyond the town limits. BTAccess service is available on the same days and times as fixed route service. 
( Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 5-9-17 ) 
Section 23-110. - Violation by passengers; misdemeanor; trespass; ejection. 
(a)  All persons who fail, while on any Blacksburg Transit vehicle, to act in an orderly manner so as to permit the safe operation of such vehicle by the driver, or who fail to obey the directions of any such driver, operator, or other person in charge to act in such orderly manner, shall be deemed guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. Furthermore, such persons may be ejected from any such vehicle by any driver, operator or person in charge of such vehicle, or by any police officer; and in case such persons ejected have paid their fares, they shall not be entitled to the return of any part of the same. 
(b)  Any person who enters or remains upon a Blacksburg Transit vehicle after being forbidden to do so by a Blacksburg Transit driver or operator, or any other person in charge of a Blacksburg Transit vehicle, shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1457, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Section 23-111. - Smoking in buses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or to possess a lighted cigar, cigarette, e-cigarette or pipe while such person is a passenger on or is the operator of a bus engaged in the carrying of passengers for hire in the town. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 5-9-17 ) 
Section 23-112. - Advertising and sponsor opportunities. 
    The transit department is authorized to sell advertisements on or inside transit vehicles and to develop other sponsorship opportunities. The process for advertisement and sponsorship sales shall be governed by a written policy approved by town council. 
( Ord. No. 1830, § 1, 5-9-17 ) 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 

Section 23-200. - Definitions. 
    Operate: To own, advertise, or to drive a taxicab. 
    Taxicab: Any motor vehicle having a seating capacity of not more than six (6) passengers, not operating on a regular route or between fixed terminals, used in the transportation of passengers for hire or for compensation. 
Section 23-201. - Certificate required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab within the town unless a current certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued therefor pursuant to the provisions of this article. The purpose and condition of the issuance of this certificate is to assure safe, necessary, convenient, and reliable taxicab service in this town for the riding public. 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2015. 
Section 23-210. - Application. 
    The owner of a taxicab, who proposes to offer service within the town, shall file an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity with the chief of police. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, home and business address, and type of business entity, of the applicant and each principle of the applicant. 
(2)  Trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business. 
(3)  Financial ability and responsibility of the applicant, including a certificate of insurance. 
(4)  Name and address of any person lending money or furnishing capital to the applicant. 
(5)  Number, kind, seating capacity, design and color scheme of each taxicab, and serial number and identification of each taxicab proposed to be used. 
(6)  Character and location of the depot in use or proposed for use. 
(7)  Any convictions of or pleas of guilty or nolo contendere by the applicant and any principal of the applicant, for violation of any law. 
(8)  Experience of the applicant in transportation of passengers for hire. 
(9)  Reason why the applicant believes the public convenience and necessity require favorable action on the application. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Section 23-211. - Application fee. 
    The applicant shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to defray the costs of reviewing the application. 
Section 23-212. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1614, § 1, adopted June 14, 2011, repealed § 23-212, which pertained to investigation of applicant. 
Section 23-213. - Determination; grant or refusal. 
(a)  The chief of police shall consider each application for a certificate. If, after investigation, the chief of police determines that the applicant meets the criteria set forth in this division and deems that the public convenience and necessity will be served by the proposed taxicab, he or she shall issue such certificate. The investigation shall be concluded within sixty (60) days of the application. 
(b)  Any applicant who is denied a certificate by the chief of police may appeal such decision to the town manager. 
(c)  If the decision of the chief of police to deny a certificate is upheld by the town manager, an applicant may appeal the decision of the manager to the town council. 
    The following criteria shall be utilized in making this determination: 
(1)  Qualification and ability of applicant to conduct a taxicab business, as revealed by the application and associated investigation; 
(2)  Public need or demand for such service; 
(3)  Whether or not the granting of the application will contribute to the promotion of necessary, convenient, safe and reliable taxicab service for the riding public in this town; 
(4)  The owner's history of compliance with previously-issued certificates and with the standards of this article, where applicable. 
    The chief of police may grant or refuse the certificate applied for or grant a certificate for a lesser number of vehicles than that specified in the application. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1614, § 1, adopted June 14, 2011, amended § 23-213 title to read as herein set out. Former § 23-213 title pertained to council determination; grant or refusal. 
Section 23-214. - Transfer of certificate. 
    No certificate issued under this division may be transferred, except as approved by the chief of police. The person to whom the transfer is to be made shall file an application as if an original application for a certificate under this division was being made. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Section 23-215. - Expiration and renewal. 
    Each certificate issued under this division shall expire three (3) years from the date of issuance. Application for renewal of such certificate shall be made in the same form and acted upon according to the same procedure as prescribed for an original application. 
Section 23-216. - Revocation or suspension. 
    The chief of police may, for cause, cancel, revoke or suspend any certificate after due notice and opportunity for hearing afforded to the holder of the certificate. Here "cause" shall include failure to meet the conditions under which the certificate of public convenience and necessity was issued; failure to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, and statutes; or discovery of a material misstatement on the application for such certificate. Such cancellations, revocations or suspensions may be appealed in the manner provided by subsections 23-213 (b) and (c). 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Section 23-220. - Insurance. 
    Every owner of a taxicab in operation in the town shall keep in effect at all times such policies of insurance as are required under the rules and regulations of the department of motor vehicles. Each policy of insurance shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing the same to give twenty (20) days' notice in writing to the town manager before cancellation thereof. 
Section 23-221. - Identification of vehicles. 
    There shall be painted on two (2) sides of every taxicab (i) the name of the owner of such vehicle and (ii) the word or words "taxicab," "taxi," or "cab," in letters not less than three (3) inches high and plainly visible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet. Every taxicab shall also have a roof sign. Such markings and roof sign, taken together, shall clearly reflect that the motor vehicle is operating as a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Section 23-222. - Maintenance of vehicles. 
    Each taxicab shall be at all times maintained in good order and repair. No taxicab shall be operated in the town unless is shall bear a current and valid vehicle inspection sticker issued by the commonwealth. 
Section 23-223. - Fares; maximum rates; display. 
    The maximum rates to be charged for taxi services in the town shall be established by resolution of town council. Each taxicab shall bear on the inside, in plain view of passengers, a card stating the rates for service. These rate cards shall be approved by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1401, § 1, 11-8-05) 
Section 23-224. - Drivers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab while it is in service without a taxicab driver's license issued by the town in his or her possession. The driver shall present the license to a law enforcement officer upon request. 
(b)  The application for a taxicab driver's license shall be in writing, sworn to and presented to the chief of police. It shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full name, residence, places of residence (city or town, state and country) since the applicant's eighteenth birthday, age, height, race, color of eyes and hair, sex, place of birth and places of previous employment of the applicant; 
(2)  Proof of a valid Virginia driver's license; 
(3)  Department of motor vehicles driver's record for every state in which the applicant has been licensed to drive; 
(4)  Two (2) black and white passport photos. 
(c)  In the interest of public welfare and safety, it is necessary to determine if the past criminal conduct of the applicant would be compatible with the duties of the driver of a taxi cab. The chief of police is therefore directed to forward the applicant's fingerprinting and personal descriptive information through the Central Criminal Records Exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining criminal history record information regarding such applicant in accordance with Virginia Code § 15.2-1503.1. 
    If the applicant is denied a license because of the information appearing in his or her criminal history record, the chief of police shall notify the applicant that information obtained from the Central Criminal Records Exchange contributed to such denial. The information shall not be disseminated except as permitted by Virginia Code § 15.2-1503.1. 
(d)  The application fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) for initial application; ten dollars ($10.00) for each renewal. If the police department obtains the national criminal history record, then the applicant shall pay the cost of the record check to the department with the application. 
(e)  An applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall demonstrate the following: 
(1)  The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years old; 
(2)  The applicant possesses a valid Virginia driver's license; 
(3)  The applicant has fewer than eight (8) demerit points on his or her DMV record (or out of state equivalent). 
(f)  The chief of police shall not issue the taxi driver permit if the applicant: 
(1)  Is a person for whom registration with the sex offender and crimes against minors registry is required pursuant to the Virginia Code, Chapter 9 (§ 9.1-900, et seq.) of Title 9.1 or who is listed on the U. S. Department of Justice's National Sex Offender Public Website; 
(2)  Has ever been convicted of or has ever pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violent felony offense as listed in Virginia Code § 17.1-805 (C) or a substantially similar law of another state or of the United States; 
(3)  Within the preceding seven (7) years has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any of the following offenses, either under Virginia law or a substantially similar law of another state or of the United States: (i) any felony offense other than those included in subdivision 2; (ii) an offense under Virginia Code §§ 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1, 18.2-272, or 46.2-341.24; or (iii) any offense resulting in revocation of a driver's license pursuant to Virginia Code §§ 46.2-389 or 46.2-391; or 
(4)  Within the preceding three years has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any of the following offenses, either under Virginia law or a substantially similar law of another state or of the United States: (i) three (3) or more moving violations; (ii) eluding a law-enforcement officer, as described in Virginia Code § 46.2-817; (iii) reckless driving, as described in Article 7 (§ 46.2-852, et seq.) of Chapter 8 of the Virginia Code; (iv) operating a motor vehicle in violation of Virginia Code § 46.2-301; or (v) refusing to submit to a chemical test to determine the alcohol or drug content of the person's blood or breath, as described in Virginia Code § 18.2-268.3. 
(g)  If the chief of police determines that a taxicab driver's license should not be issued, based on the criteria set forth above in subsection (e) or (f), the applicant may appeal the decision to the town manager and the town council in the manner prescribed by town code subsections 23-213 (b) and (c). The applicant has the burden of demonstrating that public safety and the best interests of the community will be served by waiving the criteria. 
(h)  Each license shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of its issuance. A materially false statement on the application voids the license. 
(i)  The chief of police may, for good cause shown, cancel, revoke or suspend any license. "Good cause" includes, but is not limited to, the taxi driver's loss or suspension of his or her Virginia driving privileges; the driver's failure to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, and statutes (including being convicted of any offense set out in preceding subsection (f)); or the discovery of a material misstatement on the application for the license. Such cancellations, revocations or suspensions may be appealed in the manner provided by subsections 23-213 (b) and (c). 
(Ord. No. 1365, § 1, 7-27-04, eff. 1-1-05; Ord. No. 1614, § 1, 6-14-11; Ord. No. 1762, § 1, 4-14-15 ) 
Section 23-225. - Penalties for violations. 
    Unless otherwise provided, any person convicted of violating this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 1762, § 1, 4-14-15 ) 
Chapter 24 - WATER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Acquisition of property for water facilities under eminent domain power, and acquisition of property outside corporate limits for water pipes, lines and facilities, § 2.04; budget provisions for town utilities, § 6.04. 
Cross reference- General powers and duties of director of public works relative to water department and water distribution system, § 2-300; building regulations, ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, ch. 17; sewers, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Public water supply, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-45 et seq.; authority of town to acquire, establish, maintain and operate waterworks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 24-100. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    Authority: The Blacksburg-Christiansburg-VPI Water Authority. 
    Customer: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, governmental unit or owner of property that is furnished water service by the town. 
    Developer. A person who improves or has real property improved. 
    Director: The director of public works or his or her duly authorized deputy, agent or designated representative. 
    Distribution system: The mains, service connections, storage tanks and pumping facilities used for distribution of water from its source to the customers' premises. 
    Equivalent unit: The average daily consumption of four hundred (400) gallons of water per day. A single-family dwelling unit shall be considered one equivalent unit. One equivalent unit for a restaurant will equal sixteen (16) seats. One equivalent unit for any laundromat will equal three (3) nine (9) to twelve (12) pound machine. When computing the "equivalent" of buildings or structures other than dwelling units, restaurants and laundromats, the daily water consumption rate of four hundred (400) gallons per day shall be used as the basis for determining the equivalency. The daily water consumption rate shall be estimated in accordance with the regulations of the state health department prevailing at the time. 
    Main: A water pipe owned, operated and maintained by the town which is used for the purpose of transmission or distribution of water, but is not a water service lateral. 
    Meter: Any approved device for measuring the quantity of water consumed or used as a basis for determining charges for water service to a customer. 
    Municipal customer: Any other municipality, town or public service authority to whom water is supplied by this town at a wholesale rate through master meters and this town is not responsible for the maintenance, replacement or administration of water facilities beyond the meter, unless required by law. 
    Owner, as applied to pipeline extensions: The owner of record of real property or his designated agent. The word "owner" as it applies to application for water services and payments for water shall mean the owner of real property and dwellings or structures thereon, or the owner of dwellings or structures thereon, or the owner of dwellings or structures on leased land. 
    Premises shall include, but is not restricted to, the following: 
(1)  A building or combination of buildings owned by one customer in one common enclosure occupied by one family as a residence. 
(2)  Each unit of a multiple building separated by a solid vertical partition wall owned as a residence or owned or leased by one firm as a place of business. 
(3)  A building owned by one customer and having a number of apartments, offices or lofts using, in common, one hall and one or more means of entrance. 
(4)  A building two (2) or more stories high under one roof owned by one customer and having an individual entrance for the ground floor occupants and one for the occupants of the upper floors. 
(5)  A combination of buildings owned by one customer, in one common enclosure. 
(6)  A public building. 
(7)  A single plat used as a park or recreational area. 
    Property line: The line or limit of the street, highway or right-of-way, as may be shown or platted on maps of record, before entering on private property of the premises. 
    Service lateral: The water pipe that runs between the main and the customer's place of consumption or the customer's meter. That portion from the main to the meter is the town's service lateral; that portion from the meter to the premises. is the owner's service lateral. 
    Special customer. A customer covered under special rates prior to July 1, 1976, having a number of dwellings or units supplied through one meter to one platted lot. 
Section 24-101. - Notice of violations of chapter. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except section 24-121 and article VII, shall be served by the town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Any person who shall continue such violation beyond the time limit prescribed in such notice shall be subject to the penalty provided for such violation. 
Section 24-102. - General penalty for violations of chapter. 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), or by imprisonment for not more than twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, however, that in no case shall the penalty be greater than that provided by state law for a similar offense. 
Section 24-103. - Liability for damages caused by violations of chapter. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable, in addition to any punishment imposed, to the town for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the town by reason of such violation. 
Section 24-104. - Responsibility for construction damage to water system. 
    All damages to water mains or laterals, hydrants or other parts of the water system caused by any agency in putting in sewers, drains, pipes or in any other construction shall be chargeable to the owner of the premises for whom such work is done or, if no specific owner of the premises is apparent, then the agency causing such damage shall make the repairs to the satisfaction of the town at no cost to the town. 
Section 24-105. - Water system finances generally. 
(a)  The water system shall be operated as an enterprise accounting system with a water and sewer fund established. Water system revenue from all sources, including, but not limited to, water sales, connection fees, availability charges and assessments, and all expenditures, including, but not limited to, operating costs, extensions, capital improvements, debt services, depreciation, etc., shall be accounted for in this fund. 
(b)  The director of finance shall issue bills, make collections, make disbursements, manage debt services and maintain financial records for the water system in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and the Municipal Finance Officers Association. 
Cross reference- Similar provisions relative to sewer system finances, § 18-105. 
Section 24-106. - Procedure upon transfer of property served by system. 
(a)  When transfers of property served by the water system are to be made, the seller should promptly notify the finance department of the transfer in writing, and give the name and address of the new owner. The new owner must promptly sign a new application for service. 
(b)  The director of finance shall charge a ten dollar ($10.00) transfer fee when water records are changed from the name of one person to another person. 
Section 24-107. - Grounds for denial of service. 
    A prospective customer may be refused water service if, in the opinion of the director: 
(1)  The size or location of a main is inadequate to provide service. 
(2)  The proposed demand for water use, either in total or maximum flow, would adversely affect the service to other customers. 
(3)  Where there is an outstanding delinquency for prior service in the same name. 
(4)  Where a known cross-connection, or other threat to the public water supply exists on the property. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 3, 6-8-99; Ord. No. 1387, § 2, 6-14-05) 
Section 24-108. - Right of access to premises served by system. 
    Authorized agents of the town, with identification, shall have the right of access at all reasonable hours to any premises supplied with water from its system, for the purpose of reading meters, examining pipes and fixtures, observing the manner of using water and for any other purpose which is necessary and proper in the conduct of the town's business. 
Section 24-109. - General service standards; notice of interruption of service. 
(a)  The town shall exercise reasonable diligence to furnish a continuous and adequate supply of water to its customers and avoid any shortage or interruption thereof, except as may be precipitated by acts beyond its control. 
(b)  Whenever the town finds it necessary to schedule an interruption of its service, it shall make all reasonable effort to notify all customers to be affected by the interruption, giving the time and anticipated duration of the interruption. 
Section 24-110. - Right to interrupt service for repairs, extensions, etc. 
    The town shall have the right at all times to shut off the water temporarily, without notice, for necessary repairs, extensions or other necessary work connected with the distribution system or for causes beyond its control. 
Section 24-111. - Town not liable for accidental or temporary stoppage of supply. 
    No person shall be entitled to damages, nor to have any portion of a payment refunded, for any stoppage of water supply occasioned by accident to any portion of the waterworks, nor for stoppage for the purpose of additions or repairs. 
Section 24-112. - Town not liable for pressure boiler accidents, pipe leaks, etc.; installation of pressure relief valves. 
    All customers having boilers on their premises who depend on the pressure in the pipes to keep them supplied are hereby cautioned against the danger of collapse. The town does not recommend the installation of boilers on direct pressure and will not be responsible for accidents or leaks arising therefrom. The town and its agents shall not be held liable for damages, cost or expense for personal or property damage caused by the bursting, collapse or leakage of pressure boilers or hot water tanks, nor any leakage from pipes, fixtures or other appliances on the premises. Pressure relief valves, when needed to protect individual premises, shall be installed by and at the expense of the property owner. 
Section 24-113. - No temporary service. 
    There will be no temporary water service. 
Section 24-114. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1625, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2011, repealed § 24-114, which pertained to restricted use of water; shortages. 
Section 24-115. - Discontinuance of service generally. 
(a)  Water service may be discontinued to customers for the reasons listed below: 
(1)  In the event of a condition determined by the town to be hazardous. 
(2)  In the event of an act of God, calamity or public disaster. 
(3)  In the event a customer's use of equipment is in such manner as to adversely affect the town's equipment or the town's service to others. 
(4)  When the town has discovered clear and convincing evidence that, by fraudulent means, a customer has obtained unauthorized water service or has diverted the water service for unauthorized use or has obtained water service without same being properly registered upon the town's meters. 
(5)  In the event of tampering with the equipment furnished and owned by the town. 
(6)  For failure of the customer to permit the representatives of the town reasonable access to its equipment or for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  For failure of the customer to furnish such service equipment, permits or certificates as shall have been specified by the director as a condition of obtaining service or in the event such equipment or permissions are withdrawn or terminated. 
(8)  For failure of the customer to provide access, a protected location and the standards for installation required by the town for meter installation. 
(9)  For violation of any regulation of a federal or state agency or the Blacksburg-Christiansburg-VPI Water Authority, as adopted by the town council as a technical specification. 
(10)  For failure to comply with the provisions of the backflow prevention ordinance or program. 
(b)  Except in cases covered by paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (a) above, the customer shall be permitted at least seven (7) days following the mailing of a notice to comply with the rule before service is discontinued. 
(c)  When water service is discontinued for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, service will not be resumed until reasonable assurance is given that the consumer will comply with the provisions of this chapter and a reconnection fee is paid to the town. Each reconnection fee will be charged against the customer, unless it is for the convenience of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 3, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 1432, 12-12-06) 
Section 24-116. - Who may turn service on or off. 
    Only employees of the public works or finance department or those qualified and authorized by the directors of these departments may turn water service on or off. Application for such authorization shall be filed with the directors. 
(Ord. No. 1432, 12-12-06) 
Section 24-117. - Customer's request to turn service on or off, service not to be discontinued on certain days. 
    A customer's request for turning on or turning off water service must be made before 3:00 p.m. for same-day service; otherwise it will be done the next regular working day. No water service shall be disconnected on Friday of any week or on the day prior to a holiday, except in cases referred to in paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (a) of section 24-115. 
Section 24-118. - Customer responsible for draining and protecting household system when service discontinued. 
    Customers are responsible for draining and protecting their household water system where service is turned off by the town for any reason. 
Section 24-119. - Delivery to tanks. 
    If water from the town's water system is delivered to a tank which is also supplied with water from any other source than such water system, or containing liquids, wastes or materials used in processing, such tank shall be open to atmospheric pressure and water from the town's system shall be supplied above the maximum water level in the tank. The tank shall be equipped with an unvalved overflow pipe of ample size to fix definitely the maximum level of water. The bottom outlet of the pipe supplied with water from the town's system shall be above the tank rim or at least six (6) inches above the maximum liquid level of the tank when the overflow pipe is flowing full. 
Section 24-120. - Pump connections. 
    No pump shall directly connect to any main or service lateral for the purpose of increasing water pressure in the town's or owner's system, unless prior written approval and authorization has been obtained from the director and the pump is equipped with an approved check valve on the discharge and a low pressure cut-off on the suction, set to de-energize the pump if the pressure drops below ten (10) pounds per square inch. 
Section 24-121. - Trespass on, or damaging, tampering with, etc., system property. 
(a)  No person shall, without permission, enter or remain on any premises of the town used for the storage or distribution of water or for the storage of water system materials or equipment. 
(b)  No person shall damage, disfigure or tamper with any of the physical property of the water system. No person shall cause or permit to be inserted in any water pipe which is part of the distribution system, or which is directly or indirectly connected with such system, any object, material or substance which may cause damage or become a health hazard to the system, or discontinuation of the flow of water therein. No person shall tamper with a water meter or remove or install a water meter, without the express approval of the director or his authorized agent. No person, other than fire department personnel, shall tamper with, open or close a hydrant valve or hydrant, without the express permission of the director or his authorized agent. 
Section 24-122. - When service connection required. 
(a)  Except as specified herein, all occupied buildings located within two hundred (200) feet of a public water main shall be connected with the public water system. The owner or tenants occupying such buildings shall use the town owned system for water consumed or used in and about the premises on which such buildings are located. For any public water main constructed on or after October 1, 2000, the owner or tenant of a building within two hundred (200) feet of the public water main may elect to pay the fire protection fee set forth in section 24-602 in lieu of connection to the public water system. Once a building is connected to the public water system, it may not thereafter be disconnected. 
(b)  If the pressure available to the occupied building is not adequate to meet minimum Department of Health requirements, then the requirements of subsection (a) shall be waived. 
(c)  Whenever a new public water main is constructed, the owner of property described in subsection (a) must connect to the public water system or elect to pay the fire protection fee within twenty-four (24) months of the completion of the construction of the main. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 11, 8-14-01) 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, ETC., STANDARDS FOR DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 

Section 24-200. - Generally. 
(a)  The standards for material, installation, design and equipment of the distribution system shall be the applicable latest adopted standards of the town, as approved by the town council by resolution and amended as needed by the council. 
(b)  The detailed specifications and standards for materials and installation of distribution system components shall be followed, as prepared and on file in the office of the director of engineering and GIS, copies of which may be obtained free of charge. 
(c)  Pipes and other facilities shall be constructed according to all specifications on records as the local, state and federal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 24-201. - Approval of new materials. 
    The director of engineering and GIS may approve new materials which are not covered by the standards referred to in section 24-200 if a manufacturer's standard has been developed, and supporting evidence from an independent testing laboratory is submitted, giving evidence of performance equivalent to the required standard. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 24-202. - Size of main. 
    The minimum pipe size for mains shall be eight (8) inches, except that, with the approval of the director of engineering and GIS, a lesser pipe size in cul-de-sacs or dead-end streets may be used, where the total length does not exceed three hundred (300) feet, and hydrants are available on six (6) inch or larger mains within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any buildings in the area. In all cases, the size of the main shall be determined by the director of engineering and GIS as the conditions of the distribution system require. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 24-203. - Minimum cover for mains and service connections. 
    All mains shall have a minimum cover between the top of the pipe and the ground surface of four (4) feet, and service connections a minimum cover of thirty-six (36) inches. 
Section 24-204. - Marking of mains and services in streets, etc. 
    All water mains and services in streets, highways, rights-of-way and the like shall have a blue plastic magnetic marking tape meeting the requirements of the engineer installed approximately twelve (12) inches above the pipe, if the pipe is not metallic. 
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE LATERALS AND CONNECTIONS; METERS 

Section 24-300. - Installation and ownership of laterals from main to property line-Generally. 
(a)  The town shall furnish and install, for the purpose of connecting its distribution system to the customer's premises, the service lateral from its main to and including the curb stop at or adjacent to the customer's property line; except that developers shall make such installation in conformance with town standards and subject to inspection and approval. All such service laterals shall include a curb stop and curb box. This portion of the service lateral is the property of the town and shall be maintained by the town. 
(b)  Service laterals will be constructed pursuant to this section after all fees have been paid and a work order issued by the finance department. The public works department will do the construction as the work order can be programmed in its work plan. 
Section 24-301. - Same-Installation charges. 
(a)  Applicants will be charged for the installation of the service lateral from the main to the property line, unless a lateral has been constructed by a developer. This installation will include tapping of the main, installation of the corporation stop, pipe, curb stop and curb box and inspection of service installations. In the event developers or contractors have installed a service lateral from the main to the property line and meet all utility standards and inspections, the owner, upon application for service, will pay only the meter cost and any other fee prescribed by this chapter that may be applicable. 
(b)  The charge for the installation, by the town, of a service lateral from an existing main to the property line shall be as follows: 
(1)  Inside the corporate limits: 
a.  Seventy-five (75) feet or less to the nearest property line: 
Meter Size Water Lateral Installation 5/8 inch $625.00 1 inch 662.00 11/2 inches 840.00 2 inches 1,055.00  
b.  For meters larger than two (2) inches: Estimated cost, plus twenty (20) percent, but not less than one thousand fifty-five dollars ($1,055.00). 
(2)  Outside corporate limits: For any new water lateral installation to serve improvements located outside the corporate limits, there shall be charged an installation fee computed at the same rate as set out in subsection (b) above, plus a surcharge of seventy-five (75) percent of such rate. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 12, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 1235, § 14, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 1270, § 14, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1329, § 14, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 1360, § 22, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1380, § 15, 4-26-05; Ord. No. 1414, § 4, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 1447, § 1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 1485, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 1518, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 1678, § 1, 4-23-13 ; Ord. No. 1720, § 1, 4-22-14 ; Ord. No. 1763, § 1, 4-28-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 1789, § 1, 4-12-16 ; Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 5-9-17 ; Ord. No. 1863 , § 1, 4-25-18) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1720 provided that this ordinance shall become effective July 1, 2014, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
Section 24-302. - Installation and maintenance of laterals from curb stop to place of consumption. 
(a)  The customer shall be responsible for furnishing and laying the necessary service lateral from the curb stop to the place of consumption in accordance with the standards and requirements of the town and the statewide building code, and shall keep the service line in good repair. The owner shall relocate or reinstall any service lateral not meeting the standards of the town. 
(b)  All installations under this section shall be by licensed plumbers and subject to inspection by the town before backfilling. 
(c)  That portion of the service lateral from the meter to the building shall be the sole responsibility of the customer and the full cost of repair or replacement as a result of freezing or for any other cause shall be that of the customer. 
(d)  The town shall, in no event, be responsible for maintenance of the customer's portion of the service lateral or for damage done by water escaping from the lateral or any other pipe or fixture on the outlet side of the meter. 
Section 24-303. - Location of lateral. 
    The service lateral shall extend to that point on the customer's property line or the street line easiest of access to the town from its distribution mains and from a point at right angles to the main, where practicable, in front of the premises to be served at a point opposite the structure to be served. Laterals shall not cross intervening properties. The approval of the director of planning and engineer or his or her representative shall be secured as to the proper location for the lateral. 
Section 24-304. - Interference with or changing lateral gates, cocks, pipes or fixtures. 
    No person shall, without proper authorization from the director, interfere with water gates or curb cocks or change or operate any pipe or fixture on a water service lateral between the outlet end of the meter and the street main. 
Section 24-305. - Application for connection; acceptance as contract with town. 
(a)  All applications for water service connections and use of water shall be made at the office of the finance department, on the form prescribed, and signed by the owner of the premises to be supplied, or by his duly authorized agent, stating fully and truly the various uses to which the water is to be applied. If the application is for a new service connection, the charge for the connection must accompany the application, unless it has been previously paid. 
(b)  The acceptance by the town of an application under this section shall constitute a contract between the town and the applicant, obligating the applicant to pay the established fees and rates and to comply with all the rules and regulations prescribed in this chapter and subsequent changes, amendments and additions thereto. 
Section 24-306. - Availability fee for new connections and expansions. 
(a)  For any new water connection and for any water expansion, to serve improvements located within the town limits, there shall be charged an availability fee based on the size of the meter, as follows: 
Meter Size Availability Fee 5/8 inch $1,255.00 1 inch 3,107.00 11/2 inches 6,228.00 2 inches 9,964.00 4 inches 31,160.00 6 inches 62,308.00 8 inches 99,704.00  
(b)  For any other meter size not specifically set forth above, the availability fee to serve improvements located within the town limits shall be computed by multiplying the meter equivalent ratio for the other meter by one thousand two hundred fifty-five dollars ($1,255.00) (the availability fee for a five-eighths-inch meter). The meter equivalent ratio is the ratio of the maximum flow possible through a particular size meter relative to the maximum flow possible through a five-eighths-inch meter, as determined by the town manager using recognized engineering standards and technical literature on the other meter. 
(c)  For any new water connection and for any water expansion, to serve improvements located outside the town limits, there shall be charged an availability fee computed at the same rate as set out in subsections (a) and (b) above, plus a surcharge of seventy-five (75) percent of such rate. 
(d)  For any affordable housing funded with New River Valley HOME Consortium funds, the following shall apply: 
(1)  In lieu of the availability fee imposed pursuant to section 24-306, the fee, regardless of meter size or equivalent residential connections, for connecting a unit of affordable housing to the town water system shall be waived. The town manager shall develop an application and review process for such waivers. In the event that a request is denied by the town manager, the decision may be appealed to the town council within thirty (30) days from the date of the manager's decision. 
(2)  As used herein, "affordable housing" means a dwelling unit (a) to be purchased and occupied by an individual or family with a household income at or below eighty (80) percent of the Area Median Income ("AMI") or (b) one that is developed as rental property for tenants with a household income at or below sixty (60) percent of the AMI. The affordable housing must be substantially funded by the New River Valley HOME Consortium, as evidenced by a written agreement between the applicant and the Consortium, and the waived fees must serve as the town's matching funds required for a Consortium project pursuant to HOME program regulations administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(3)  An applicant for the waived water availability fee shall agree to pay the difference between the waived fee and the standard availability fee if the dwelling unit ceases to be affordable housing, as defined herein, at any time within ten (10) years from the date the connection to the town water system is made. This agreement shall be secured through a deed of trust. 
(e)  For affordable housing developed with federal low-income housing tax credits, the following shall apply: 
(1)  In lieu of the availability fee imposed pursuant to section 24-306, the fee, regardless of meter size or equivalent residential connections, for connecting a unit of affordable housing to the town water system may be waived. The town manager shall develop an application and review process for waiver requests. The town council must approve the waiver request by adopting a resolution finding that the project will serve the town's stated goals for affordable housing and that the waived fees will serve as the town's support for a project eligible for federal low-income housing tax credits administered by the Virginia Housing and Development Authority. 
(2)  As used in this subsection, "affordable housing" means a proposed federal low-income housing tax credit project to develop dwelling units that are developed as rental property for tenants with a household income at or below sixty (60) percent of the Area Median Income. 
(3)  An applicant for the waived water availability fee shall agree to pay the difference between the waived fee and the standard availability fee if the dwelling unit ceases to be affordable housing, as defined herein, within the affordability period set forth in the resolution approving the waiver. This agreement shall be secured through a deed of trust. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 13, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 1235, § 15, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 1270, § 15, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1329, § 15, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 1360, § 23, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1380, § 16, 4-26-05; Ord. No. 1414, § 5, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 1447, § 1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 1485, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 1518, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 1627, § 1, 10-11-11; Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 1678, § 1, 4-23-13 ; Ord. No. 1720, § 1, 4-22-14 ; Ord. No. 1763, § 1, 4-28-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 1772, § 1, 8-11-15 ; Ord. No. 1789, § 1, 4-12-16 ; Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 5-9-17 ; Ord. No. 1863 , § 1, 4-25-18) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1720 provided that this ordinance shall become effective July 1, 2014, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
Section 24-307. - Separate connection required for each dwelling. 
    One water service connection, with a separate meter, shall be required for each dwelling fronting on a street or highway, regardless of ownership. 
Section 24-308. - Determination of size of connection. 
    The size of the service connection shall be as determined by the director of engineering and GIS and shall be no less than three-fourths (3/4) inches' nominal diameter. If the premises are to be used for any purpose other than normal domestic single-family use, the owner must file with the town the type of occupancy in detail with water requirements for the director of engineering and GIS to determine the required size of service pipe and meter. The size of a separate fire service connection shall be as determined by the fire insurance rating agency concerned and shall not be less than four (4) inches' internal diameter of pipe, nor less than six (6) inches if one (1) or more private fire hydrants are installed. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 24-309. - Unauthorized connections or use of water. 
    No person shall, without proper authorization from the town manager, tap or make any connection with any main or service pipe connected with the water system or open any gate valve connected with the distribution system or in any way or by any device obtain the use of water from the system without such authorization. 
Section 24-310. - Installation generally; ownership; maintenance etc., of meters. 
(a)  All domestic, commercial and industrial water services will be rendered through meters supplied and installed by the town. Meters are the property of the town, regardless of the method prior to the adoption of the ordinance and replacement due to normal use. The finance director may sell a portable "watering" or "irrigation" meter that can be connected to an external, above-ground water fixture to any residential water customer of the town. The fee for this meter shall be one hundred twenty-five ($125.00). Any credit due will be given annually. 
(b)  Repair and disconnection of meters shall be performed only by employees of the town. 
(Ord. No. 1244, § 18, 10-2-00; Ord. No. 1432, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 1518, § 1, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1573, § 1, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 1763, § 1, 4-28-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 5-9-17 ) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1607 provided that this ordinance shall become effective July 1, 2011, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
Section 24-311. - Inspection prerequisite to installation of meter. 
    Prior to installation of a water meter and turn-on of service, the inside plumbing must receive the approval of the plumbing inspector. Premises presently served by wells shall be subject to a plumbing inspection before the meter is installed and service is supplied. 
Section 24-312. - Meter location. 
    The location of each water meter shall be in a protected place easily accessible for removal, reading and maintenance. 
Section 24-313. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1725 , § 1, adopted May 13, 2014, repealed § 24-313, which pertained to meter size. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Section 24-314. - Charge for meter installation. 
(a)  The charge for the installation of a water meter by the town inside the corporate limits shall be as follows: 
Meter Size Water Meter 
Installation 5/8 inch $1,100.00 1 inch 1,215.00 11/2 inches 1,488.00 2 inches 3,440.00  
    For meters larger than two (2) inches: Estimated cost, plus twenty (20) percent, but not less than three thousand four hundred forty dollars ($3,440.00). 
(b)  For water meter installation outside the corporate limits, the charge for the installation of a water meter shall be computed at the same rate as set out in subsection (a) above, plus a surcharge of seventy-five (75) percent. 
(c)  In addition to the meter installation fee, a deposit shall be made as follows: 
Meter Size 
(In Inches) Water Meter 
Deposit 5/8 inch $220.00 1 inch 300.00 11/2 inches 500.00 2 inches 1,600.00  
    The meter shall be inspected at the time of service connection to the ultimate consumer. If the meter is undamaged, the deposit shall be refunded within fourteen (14) days of the service connection. If the meter has been damaged due to any cause whatsoever, the deposit shall be applied to a replacement meter. 
(Ord. No. 1420, § 4, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1447, § 1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 1485, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 1518, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1573, § 1, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 1678, § 1, 4-23-13 ; Ord. No. 1720, § 1, 4-22-14 ; Ord. No. 1763, § 1, 4-28-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 1789, § 1, 4-12-16 ; Ord. No. 1863 , § 1, 4-25-18) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1643 provided for an effective date that shall become effective July 1, 2012, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. Ord. No. 1720, § 1, adopted April 22, 2014, provides for an effective date of July 1, 2014 for subsection 24-314(a) and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
ARTICLE IV. - MAIN EXTENSIONS 

Section 24-400. - For new development-To be paid for by developer; contractor to submit certain information and documents. 
    All costs for water main extensions in and to new development to be built within the town shall be paid for by the developer. "New development" includes residential subdivisions, residential developments, commercial, industrial, business, institutional, civic, religious, or governmental development. Costs for water main extensions include the cost of material, equipment, and labor for installing mains in streets from existing mains to the new development. The developer's contractor shall submit to the town a plan of installation and evidence satisfactory to the engineer of experience and qualifications for installing water mains, adequate insurance coverage and assumption of liability by the contractor or developer. 
Section 24-401. - Same-Plan. 
    The plan of an installation referred to in section 24-400 shall be submitted to the director of engineering and GIS on a utilities plan at a scale of fifty (50) feet to the inch, showing pipe size and location, valve locations, final road boundaries and grade, location of service connections and curb stop and location of hydrant connections. The plan shall be in conformance with the standards of the town; and the pipe sizes, valves and the hydrant locations shall meet the approval of the director of engineering and GIS. On completion and approval of the installation, the plan shall be corrected to an "as built" drawing on reproducible mylar paper and filed with the department of engineering and GIS. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 24-402. - Same-Installation, standards; ownership and maintenance. 
    The materials and installations involved in main extensions in residential subdivisions or developments shall meet the standards of the town and shall be subject to inspection and testing during installation and before acceptance. Detailed standards for developers are available in the office of the director of engineering and GIS free of charge. Upon acceptance, such mains shall become the property of the town and the responsibility of the public works department for maintenance, except failures due to materials or workmanship occurring within eighteen (18) months of acceptance, which shall remain the responsibility of the developer. At the time the "as built" drawing is submitted, pursuant to section 24-401, the developer will submit a written request for the town to maintain the mains. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 24-403. - For residential property owners within corporate limits. 
(a)  This section shall apply to requests by owners of single-unit or two-unit dwellings, or of other purely residential structures, which dwellings or structures existed prior to 1978, for extension of the water main to serve their real estate within this town. 
(b)  The person making the request shall apply in writing to the town manager. The town manager shall review such applications to ascertain whether satisfactory grades for the proposed main exist; permanent rights-of-way or easements can be granted to the town for the main; and whether funds exist to accomplish the project. 
(c)  The town manager shall prepare a written estimated cost of materials and shall determine whether rock removal will be required. If rock removal is required, the town manager will estimate the cost for removal and include it in the estimate. After the applicant has paid the estimated cost of material to the town and the cost of any required rock removal, the town manager shall schedule and complete the project. The town shall procure the materials, construct the project and supply all necessary labor, equipment, and materials. The applicant will pay the cost for any labor or equipment for rock removal. At the conclusion of the project, if the amount previously paid to the town exceeds by more than fifteen (15) percent of such amount, the actual cost of the materials, the town shall forthwith refund the difference to the applicant. If the amount previously paid to the town is less, by more than fifteen (15) percent of such amount, than the actual cost of materials, the requesting citizen shall forthwith pay the difference to the town. If a main size of more than eight (8) inches in diameter shall be used, the estimated and actual cost of materials shall be based on the cost of an eight-inch main. 
( Ord. No. 1822, § 1, 4-11-17 ) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to impose assessments for local improvements, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2404; how cost assessed or apportioned, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2406. 
Section 24-404. - Reserved. 
Section 24-405. - Extensions outside of corporate limits. 
(a)  All requests for water main extensions to serve property on which the improvements to be served lie wholly outside of the town's corporate limits shall be governed by this section, regardless of the nature of the person making the request, the improvements served, or of the purpose of the request. 
(b)  The person making the request shall apply in writing to the town manager. The town manager shall consider this application in light of the following standards; The feasibility and adequacy of the extension, and the economic, physical, environmental and long-term planning effects the extension would have upon the town. The town manager shall then make a recommendation to the town council and the council shall approve or deny the application. If the council shall approve the request for an extension, the town manager shall determine the administrative arrangements necessary to accomplish the extension. 
ARTICLE V. - FIRE HYDRANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, § 17-300 et seq. 

Section 24-500. - Installation and maintenance of public hydrants. 
    All public fire hydrants and their connections shall be installed under the direction of, and maintained by, the town and remain a part of the town water system under its ownership. 
Section 24-501. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1544, § 1, adopted Oct. 13, 2009, repealed § 24-501, which pertained to installation and metering of private hydrants. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Section 24-502. - Installation not to render town liable for damages. 
    The town and its agents and representatives shall not be considered in any manner an insurer of property or person, or to have undertaken to extinguish fire or to protect any person or property against loss or damage by fire, or otherwise, by reason of the installation and maintenance of any fire hydrant, and it shall be free and exempt from any and all claims for damage on account of any injury to property or persons by reason of fire, water, failure to supply water or insufficient pressure or for any other cause relating to any fire hydrant installed by it. 
Section 24-503. - Use by fire department; other use must be approved. 
    Public and private fire hydrants are installed for the sole purpose of fire protection and may be used by members of the fire department for control of fires and training. No other use of such hydrants shall be made unless specifically approved by the town manager. 
Section 24-504. - Obstruction. 
    No person shall obstruct the access to any fire hydrant by placing or permitting any snow, debris, building material or other obstruction to remain at or about the hydrant so as to interfere in any manner with its immediate use. 
Cross reference- Parking or standing vehicle near fire hydrant, § 12-400. 
ARTICLE VI. - SERVICE CHARGES 

Section 24-600. - Generally. 
    All water passing through and recorded by a meter shall be charged to and paid by the customer at the current schedule of water rates. 
Section 24-601. - Deposit to assure payment; from whom required; refunds. 
(a)  The director of finance shall require customers billed on a monthly basis to make a service deposit, based on the size of the meter, in the amount set forth in the following table, before water service will be rendered: 
Size of Meter Deposit 3/4 inch $40.00 1 inch 165.00 11/2 inches 250.00 2 inches 290.00  
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, where the customer requests service for a restaurant the deposit shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). For an apartment building, mobile home park, or a hotel, in any case where the size of the meter exceeds two (2) inches, a deposit in an amount equal to sixteen dollars ($16.00) per equivalent unit shall be required before water services are rendered. In lieu of a cash deposit of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more, the customer described in this subsection may provide alternate security in like amount of the required deposit. This alternate security may take the form of a bank or savings and loan association letter of credit or a surety bond issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in this state, which letter of credit or bond shall be conditioned on the customer's prompt and full payment of all water, sewer and solid waste collection charges and shall be approved as to form by the town attorney. The privilege of using alternate security shall not be accorded to a customer whose service is reconnected after discontinuance because of a delinquent account under section 24-141 of this Code. 
(c)  The deposits or alternate security required in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section shall be waived for the following customers: 
(1)  Previous water customers of the town who, for their last year of service, had a history of payment with no delinquency of more than twenty (20) days from the date of billing. 
(2)  Present water customers of the town who, for the most recent year of service, had a history of payment with no delinquency of more than twenty (20) days from the date of billing. 
(d)  The deposits or alternate security provided for in subsections (a), (b) and (c) shall be to assure payment of charges made by the town for water, sewer and solid waste collection services. Upon the termination of such services, the deposit or alternate security shall be applied to any unpaid balance, and the remainder, if any, without interest shall be refunded to the customer. The deposit will automatically be credited to the account, or refunded if requested by the customer, and the alternate security will automatically be surrendered, in the month following the completion of one (1) year's service, if the history of payment has demonstrated no delinquency of more than twenty (20) days from the date of billing. There shall be no refund of any deposit balance under this subsection on amounts less than five dollar ($5.00) unless requested in writing by the customer. 
(Ord. No. 1274, § 12, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 1432, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 1485, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 1789, § 1, 4-12-16 ; Ord. No. 1863 , § 1, 4-25-18) 
Section 24-602. - Rates and fees established. 
(a)  The charges for water service for a customer shall be a flat billing service charge, plus a rate based on the amount of water passing through and recorded by a meter for the billing period, whether used or wasted as a result of leaks or neglect of the customer, at the following rates: 
(1)  Billing service charge inside the corporate limits of two dollars and ninety-four cents ($2.94) and a rate of six dollars and ninety cents ($6.90) for each one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Billing service charge outside the corporate limits of five dollars and fifteen cents ($5.15) and a rate of twelve dollars and eight cents ($12.08) for each one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction thereof. 
(b)  The town manager is authorized and directed, on application, to exempt from the payment of the billing service charges imposed by this section, those elderly or disabled citizens who qualify for (but not necessarily participate in) the real estate exemption or deferral program, under Divisions 2 and 3, Article II, Chapter 24, Blacksburg Town Code, whom town council finds constitute a separate class of utility service users. These latter provisions shall apply to the exemption here created, with necessary changes, except no requirement of real estate ownership shall exist, the scheduling of the application for exemptions and notification to participants may flexible, and there shall be no proration of the exemption. 
(c)  There is imposed on the user a fee for the use of a fire hydrant meter for water purchases: Five dollars ($5.00) for the first day's use of a meter, plus one dollar ($1.00) for each day's use after that in the same week. After this or a later week, any user using a meter will incur the initial and subsequent fees as set out above. These fees shall be paid upon the use of a fire hydrant meter, unless the town manager authorizes payment with and as part of the water bill, in which case, these fees shall be due and payable with other water service charges. 
(d)  There is imposed a fire protection fee of twenty-two dollars and seventy-seven cents ($22.77) per month for any building owner or tenant who, pursuant to section 24-122, elects not to connect to the public water supply. 
(Ord. No. 1210, § 15, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 1235, § 17, 4-25-00; Ord. No. 1265, § 2, 3-13-01; Ord. No. 1270, § 17, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1274, § 13, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 1329, § 17, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 1360, § 25, 4-27-04; Ord. No. 1380, § 18, 4-26-05; Ord. No. 1414, § 6, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 1447, § 1, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 1485, § 1, 4-28-08; Ord. No. 1518, §§ 1, 2, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1573, § 1, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 1607, § 1, 4-26-11; Ord. No. 1643, § 1, 4-24-12; Ord. No. 1678, § 1, 4-23-13 ; Ord. No. 1720, § 1, 4-22-14 ; Ord. No. 1763, § 1, 4-28-15, eff. 7-1-15 ; Ord. No. 1789, § 1, 4-12-16 ; Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 5-9-17 ; Ord. No. 1863 , § 1, 4-25-18) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 1720 provided that this ordinance shall become effective July 1, 2014, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
Section 24-603. - Rates apply to each meter; metering for certain commercial, etc., complexes and trailer parks. 
(a)  The rates prescribed in this article shall apply to each separate water meter and each meter shall be considered as a separate account. Only one (1) person shall be billed for each meter or service. 
(b)  Whenever any industrial, commercial or apartment complex or trailer park is developed on one (1) parcel of property or on a contiguous parcel of property and such parcel or parcels are owned by one (1) corporation or partnership or by two (2) or more individuals jointly or as tenants by the entirety, one (1) meter shall be used for the purpose of metering water supplied to such complex where possible. Where complexes are to be served with a looped water system, approval of the town engineer is required. 
(c)  In all cases where the owners of any such complex existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived apply for a charge based on a combined reading of all meters or request that one (1) meter be used for the purpose of meter water for the entire complex, the town may require proof of legal ownership of the complex by certified copy of documents of title. 
(d)  The burden of requesting that one (1) meter be used for complexes developed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or requesting a combined reading for complexes existing prior to such date, shall be upon the owner or owners of the complex. 
Section 24-604. - Charge for special trip to gain access to meter. 
    The town manager shall cause to be established a special meter-reading charge to cover the cost of reading those meters which require a special trip by the meter reader in order to gain access to the meter to read it for billing purposes. 
Section 24-605. - When to commence. 
    The charge for water service shall commence when the service connection is completed for any premises. 
Section 24-606. - Billing generally. 
(a)  All residential accounts, apartment complex accounts with multi-users on the same meter, and commercial accounts will be billed monthly. 
(b)  Water bills shall include the charges for sewer service, solid waste collection service rendered to the customer, and other charges related to these services. 
(Ord. No. 1250, § 1, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1432, 12-12-06) 
Section 24-607. - When due and payable; discontinuing service for failure to pay. 
(a)  Bills rendered under section 24-606 shall be due and payable twenty (20) days from the date of billing. A final notice shall be mailed at the end of twenty (20) days from the date of billing. For unpaid bills, water service shall be disconnected after seven (7) days following the date of mailing of the final notice unless the provisions of subsection (f) below may apply. 
(b)  All charges for labor and materials or other services rendered by the town in connection with its water and sewer systems and not included on the customers water bill shall be due and payable thirty (30) days from the date of billing. A final notice shall be mailed at the end of thirty (30) days from the date of billing. For unpaid bills, water service shall be disconnected after ten (10) days following the date of mailing of the final notice unless the provisions of subsection (f) below may apply. 
(c)  Once the water service has been discontinued because of a delinquent account, it shall be unlawful for any person not specifically authorized by the town manager to reconnect the property to the public water supply. 
(d)  In the event that the water is turned off pursuant to this section, the customer shall make a deposit as set out in section 24-601 in an amount equal to the outstanding bill, whichever is greater, and pay a service charge of sixty dollars ($60.00) before service will be restored. The customer shall pay the deposit and service charge in addition to the total amount of the delinquent bill. 
(e)  Any person failing to pay any bill for water or related service described above within twenty (20) days after the date of billing shall, on the date after the expiration of the twenty (20) day period, incur a penalty thereon of ten dollars ($10.00) or an amount not exceeding ten (10) percent of the amount then due, which penalty shall be added to the amount due from such person. No penalty shall be imposed if such failure was not in any way the fault of the customer. Fault shall be determined by the director of finance who may consider affidavits or other evidence. Interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per year on the balance of the account shall be imposed and collected on all such delinquent accounts from the date after the expiration of twenty (20) days after the date of billing. 
(f)  The director of finance may determine not to terminate water service where the failure to pay the bill for services is not the fault or responsibility of the user of the services and widespread health and safety considerations may arise from the termination of water service. For example, this situation may exist in the case of a multiunit dwelling where an owner of the dwelling is the town's customer (but not a water user at that location), and the residents of the dwelling are the users. Nothing in this section shall prevent the town from termination of water service in cases where failure to pay the bill for services persists or is repeated. 
(Ord. No. 1250, § 2, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1414, § 7, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 1432, 12-12-06) 
Editor's note- Section 8 of Ord. No. 1414 provided that this ordinance shall become effective July 1, 2006, and shall apply to all billing periods beginning on or after that date. 
Section 24-608. - Lien on property served. 
    Pursuant to Virginia Code § 15.2-2118, delinquent charges accruing under this article shall be a lien on the property for or to which the service was rendered. Where residential real estate is involved, no lien shall attach (i) unless the user of the water service is also the owner or (ii) unless the owner of the real property negotiated or executed the agreement by which water service was provided to the property. Notice of such lien shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Code of Virginia, § 15.2-104. 
(Ord. No. 1432, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 1454, § 1, 8-14-07) 
Section 24-609. - Change of billing address. 
    Prompt notice should be given the town of any change in the billing address of the customer. Failure to receive a bill does not relieve the consumer of the obligation of its payment nor from the consequence of its nonpayment. 
Section 24-610. - Liability for payment in event property transferred. 
    Any person who has contracted with the town for water service shall remain liable for all water provided through the account, regardless of whether the ownership or occupancy of the property has changed, until the person terminates the account, or until service is terminated by the town. An owner who sells property, or a lessee whose tenancy ends, is responsible for notifying the town and for terminating his or her account. 
Section 24-611. - Estimates of water consumption when meter fails. 
    If at any time a water meter shall be found to have been tampered with or, for any reason, a meter shall fail to register or shall be found defective in registering since the last previous reading, the water consumption for such period may be estimated upon the customer's average monthly consumption for a period not exceeding twelve (12) months immediately preceding the billing period. 
Section 24-612. - Rereading and testing meters and adjustment of bills for errors. 
(a)  One request by the customer for rereading a water meter may be made between each billing date, without charge. After one (1) rereading, each additional return trip on request of the customer shall be at the rate of five dollars ($5.00) per reading, unless it is determined that an error has been made by the town, in which event the bill shall be adjusted and no charge made for rereading. 
(b)  Water meters will be tested for accuracy upon the written request of a customer. Tests will be conducted in accordance with the standard specifications for positive displacement type cold water meters of the American Water Works Association. If the meter reading is correct or if any error is within three (3) percent of the test meter, the customer shall pay a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the test and receive a report. If the meter reads in excess of three (3) percent of the test meter, the customer's bill shall be adjusted to represent a credit for the excess reading over the past six (6) months, and the customer will be furnished with a replacement meter meeting the AWWA standard for accuracy. The town reserves the right to remove and test a meter, without cost to the customer, and should such meter fail to register or over or under register in excess of three (3) percent, the customer's bill shall be adjusted, based on the average daily consumption prior to or subsequent to the failure. The time of testing shall be at the discretion of the town. 
Section 24-613. - Adjustment of bill in case of leaks. 
    After a customer has been notified by the town that there is a possibility of a water leak on the customer's premises, or when the customer becomes aware of the leak and has the leak repaired within ten (10) days and if the consumption exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of normal for the four (4) past billing periods, an adjustment to an average bill, plus costs to the town, shall be made. If the consumer neglects the leak for longer than ten (10) days after notification by the town, no adjustment on the bill shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 1456, 8-14-07) 
Section 24-614. - Adjustment of bill in case of extraordinary water usage. 
    In those cases where there is an extraordinary excess of two hundred (200) percent or more above normal water usage, the director of finance shall, after thorough investigation, be empowered to adjust the bill for water to correspond to the normal or average bill, plus costs to the town, for all in excess of this amount. A request for an adjustment under this section shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date of the bill upon which the extraordinary usage appears. 
Section 24-615. - No refund or rebate. 
    No person shall be entitled to a refund or rebate of any portion of any water charges paid, because of nonuse of water occasioned by absence, discontinuance of service or any other reason. 
ARTICLE VII. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1230, § 1, adopted Feb. 13, 2001, repealed §§ 24-700-24-712, in their entirety. Section 2 of Ord. No. 1230, enacted a new art. VII, §§ 24-700-24-713, to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter. 

Section 24-700. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to eliminate or control cross-connections, to protect the public potable water supply provided by the Town of Blacksburg, and to provide for establishment of a program of cross-connection control and backflow prevention, and the enforcement of the same. 
    The provisions hereof are directed at service line protection containment as distinguished from a domestic internal protective basis and/or "fixture outlet protective basis." 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Section 27-701. - Authority. 
    The provisions of this Division 4 of Article III of this Chapter and the program it authorizes and directs are based upon the authority and requirements of: 
(1)  The Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974. 
(2)  Applicable Statutes of Virginia. 
(3)  Waterworks Regulations, Virginia Department of Health, entitled "Cross-connection Control and Backflow Prevention in Waterworks." 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Section 24-702. - Definitions. 
    Auxiliary water system means any water system on or available to the premises other than water purchased from the Town. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's waterworks, or water from any other source such as wells, lakes or streams, or process fluids, or used water. 
    Backflow means the flow of contaminants, pollutants, process fluids, used water, untreated water, chemicals, gases, or nonpotable waters into any part of a waterworks from a customer's premises. 
    Backflow prevention device means any approved device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow or back siphonage of water or pollutants into a waterworks. 
    Certified backflow prevention inspector means an individual who has obtained a certificate of completion of a course recognized by the American Water Works Association, the Virginia Department of Health, the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation, or the Virginia Cross Connection Control Association for the surveying, prescribing, and testing of backflow prevention devices. 
    Containment means preventing backflow into the Town's waterworks from a consumer's water system by installing an appropriate backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
    Contaminant means any objectionable or hazardous physical, chemical, biological, or radiological substance or matter in water. 
    Cross-connection means any connection or structural arrangement, direct or indirect, to the Town's waterworks whereby backflow can occur. 
    Customer means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company, business, trust, joint venture or other legal entity that purchases treated water from the Town, or who owns a water supply system at a premises which is served by Town water. The term includes the owner of any building or structure under construction, which will be served by Town water upon completion. 
    Director means the Director of the Department of Engineering and GIS in the Town of Blacksburg, or his or her designee. 
    Division means the Commonwealth of Virginia, Virginia Department of Health, Office of Water Programs, Division of Water Supply Engineering or any successor thereto. 
    Imminent hazard means an existing condition or use of premises which threatens the immediate contamination or pollution of the waterworks through an incident of backflow. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (chemical, physical, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute an unnecessary risk or impair the usefulness of the water. 
    Program shall mean the Town's Cross-connection Control and Backflow Prevention Program. The program includes any regulations of the department. 
    State Waterworks Regulations means Waterworks Regulations, Virginia Department of Health, Part II, Article 3, entitled "Cross-connection Control and Backflow Prevention in Waterworks." 
    Water supply system means the water service pipe, water distributing pipes, and necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves, and all appurtenances in or adjacent to the building or premises. 
    Waterworks means the Town's system that serves piped water for drinking or domestic use to the public. The term "waterworks" shall include all structures, equipment, and appurtenances used in the storage, collection, purification, treatment and distribution of pure water beginning at the water source and ending at the service connection. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(b), 2-12-08) 
Section 24-703. - Administration. 
(a)  The director shall take reasonable steps to protect the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to backflow of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. The director shall take positive action to ensure that the waterworks is protected at all times. 
(b)  The director will implement a backflow prevention program adopted as hereinafter stated, to include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills the requirements of the State Waterworks Regulations and is in accordance with those regulations, and in accordance with the Uniform Statewide Building Code. The primary object of the program shall be containment as herein defined, i.e., preventing backflow into the Town's waterworks from a consumer's water system by correctly installing an appropriate backflow prevention device at or downstream of the service connection. 
(c)  The director shall prepare a backflow prevention program and obtain the approval of the program by the Virginia Department of Health. 
(d)  Without limiting the general responsibilities set forth above, the director shall have the joint responsibility, with the customer, to identify high and moderate hazard customers of the waterworks. The director shall have the responsibility to survey identified premises on a periodic basis, to determine the degree of hazard to the waterworks posed by the use of the premises, and to determine the type of device required to reduce or eliminate the hazard. The director shall inspect or observe the inspection of backflow prevention devices installed at premises that pose a moderate or high hazard upon their installation, replacement, or overhaul. The director shall periodically audit such devices, through testing, to ensure that they continue to operate as designed. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Section 24-704. - Responsibilities of customers. 
(a)  Each customer is responsible for identifying itself to the director as posing a high or moderate potential backflow hazard, based upon the standards developed by the Virginia Department of Health, as publicized through the Town's program or other public information, or information within the customer's possession. 
(b)  Each customer identified as a potential high or moderate hazard shall permit the inspection of its premises, at reasonable times and dates, for the identification of the high or moderate hazard use or condition of the premises. 
(c)  Each customer inspected by the director shall appropriately install a backflow prevention device as identified by the director, and shall annually test such device. Each such customer shall cause each containment device to be tested on an annual basis by a certified backflow prevention inspector, and shall submit a report of such test to the director upon the completion of the test. Each such customer shall maintain every containment device in good working order. 
(d)  Each customer who has installed a backflow prevention device shall permit the director to enter upon its premises at reasonable dates and times for periodic testing of the device. 
(e)  The customer is responsible to identify and isolate potential cross-connections within the customer's own premises, beginning at the service connection. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Section 24-705. - Hazard assessment. 
(a)  The director shall cause inspections to be made of properties served by the Town's water distribution system where there may exist a high or moderate hazard of cross-connection, as identified by the program. For the construction of a new premises to be served by the Town's water distribution system, the director shall determine, on the basis of the information available, whether the new premises may pose a high or moderate hazard of cross-connection. 
(b)  The director or his or her designee shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time premises served by a connection to the waterworks for the purpose of inspecting, observing, sampling, and testing the water supply system or systems for a cross-connection. Upon request, the owner of the property shall furnish pertinent information regarding the water supply system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access shall be grounds for the discontinuation of water service to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Section 24-706. - Installation of backflow prevention device. 
(a)  If, in the judgment of the director, an approved backflow device is required at the Town's water service connection to any customer's new or existing premises, the director shall direct the owner to install an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the customer's premises. The customer shall, within sixty (60) days from the date such notice was mailed or delivered install and test such approved device or devices, at its expense. 
(b)  The director may set a shorter time period for the installation of the device if an imminent hazard to the waterworks exists. 
(c)  Failure to appropriately install the prescribed device within the time limit set by the director, including an extension, if any, shall be grounds for the discontinuation or refusal of water service to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Section 24-707. - Type of protection required. 
    The types of protection required within the Town, and those which shall apply in implementation of this article and the Town's cross-connection control program required by this article shall be as set forth in the State Waterworks Regulations, Section 12 VAC 5-590-620, the provisions of which are hereby adopted as a guide to determine the degree of hazard for given situations. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Section 24-708. - Backflow prevention devices. 
    Backflow prevention devices installed or used within the Town shall comply with the requirements and criteria set forth in the State Waterworks Regulations, which shall apply to the Town's cross- connection control and backflow prevention program required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Section 24-709. - Annual inspection and testing of installed devices. 
(a)  The customer shall have thorough inspections and operational tests made at least annually of backflow prevention devices which are required and installed in accordance with this article. A certified backflow prevention device inspector shall perform this inspection and test, and the customer shall submit the results of the inspection and test to the director. 
(b)  Failure to obtain this annual inspection and test, and to submit the results thereof to the director, shall constitute grounds for the discontinuation of water service to the premises. 
(c)  In the event the device fails the inspection and operational test, then the customer shall replace or overhaul the device, obtain a test of the device, and submit the results of the test to the director. Failure to do so shall constitute grounds for the discontinuation of water service to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Section 24-710. - Periodic testing by the department. 
    The director shall institute a program for the periodic testing of required backflow prevention devices by certified backflow prevention device inspectors. No device shall be inspected more frequently than once every five (5) years under this program, unless the device fails any test. The purpose of this program shall be to perform an in-field audit of the effectiveness of the required backflow prevention devices. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Section 24-711. - Reserved. 
Section 24-712. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The following actions shall constitute grounds for the discontinuation of water service: 
(1)  A customer fails or refuses to permit the inspection of its premises as required by section 24-705, of this article. 
(2)  A customer fails or refuses to timely and properly install the prescribed backflow prevention device, as required by section 24-706, of this article. 
(3)  A customer fails or refuses to obtain an annual test of a required device, or to submit a report of the test to the Department, as required in section 24-709, of this article. 
(4)  A customer fails or refuses to replace or overhaul a device which fails its test, as required by section 24-709, of this article. 
(5)  A customer fails or refuses to permit the Department to test a required device, as required by section 24-710, of this article. 
(b)  Where any one (1) of the above listed conditions exists, the director shall notify the customer of the violation of the ordinance, in writing, and include a warning that water service to the premises will be discontinued if the condition is not corrected within a time period of thirty (30) days. The director may specify a shorter time period of an imminent threat to the water works exists. 
(c)  In the event that any one (1) of the above conditions is not corrected within the time period specified in the written notice, then water service to the premises shall be discontinued, in order to protect the public health, and the safety of the water works and the water supply. 
(d)  The building official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for any premises where, due to new construction or renovation, a backflow prevention device must be installed, until full compliance with the director's instructions has been achieved. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01) 
Section 24-713. - Penalties. 
    Any owner of property served by a connection to the Town's waterworks found guilty of violating any provision or provisions of this article, or any lawful, written order of the director issued pursuant to the terms of the same, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and for each violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) as provided in section 1-111 of the Blacksburg Town Code (1998), as amended. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this article shall occur shall be deemed to be a separate and additional violation. The penalties provided in this section shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies for which provision is made in this article, or those which are available at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 1230, § 2, 2-13-01) 
ARTICLE VIII. - DROUGHT AND EMERGENCY WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 

Section 24-800. - Authority to declare a potential water shortage and impose water conservation measures. 
    The town manager, after notifying town council, is authorized to declare drought or emergency water supply conditions and impose voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures for Blacksburg's water system. The town manager will authorize and initiate prudent drought management actions as outlined in this article. The town manager shall also communicate the importance and methods of conserving water at all times, not just in times of impending drought. 
(Ord. No. 1625, § 1, 10-11-11) 
Section 24-801. - Conditions for drought declaration and potential water shortage. 
(a)  In the event of a potential drought or emergency water supply shortage as described in this article, the town manager shall consider the following indicators and parameters for each of the three (3) drought stages, as well as other relevant information, and take the following actions: 
Stage I-Drought Watch: 
The drought watch stage is intended to increase public awareness of climatic conditions that are likely to precede the occurrence of a significant drought event. 
The indicators that may trigger a drought watch are as follows: 
(1)  Precipitation deficits (<75.0-85.0 percent, depending on time of year) determined using comparisons based on data compiled by the office of the state climatologist. 
(2)  Representative daily stream flows fall between the 10th and 25th percentile for return flow frequencies. Stream flows are monitored by utilizing the USGS gauging station (03171000) located at Radford, Virginia. 
(3)  NOAA Drought Index D1, moderate drought. 
During this stage, town staff shall also (i) monitor and compare water intake and treatment with water usage and (ii) utilize additional drought indicators such as the Standardized Precipitation Index, Palmer Drought Index, and NOAA monthly and seasonal precipitation outlooks. 
When a drought watch declaration is warranted, the following types of actions may be initiated: 
(1)  Informing customers of potential drought conditions and water conservation activities. 
(2)  Monitoring USGS data for in-stream flows daily. 
(3)  Limiting nonessential government use. 
(4)  Notifying major water users and Virginia Tech of the drought condition. 
(5)  Increasing resources to identify and correct water leaks. 
(6)  Encouraging use of water recyclers (rain barrels, gray water, etc.) for nonpotable uses. 
Stage II-Drought Warning (Voluntary): 
The drought warning stage shall be declared when the onset of a significant drought event is imminent. The town manager will request voluntary water conservation activities with a goal of reducing water use five (5) to ten (10) percent. 
The indicators/parameters that may trigger a drought warning are as follows: 
(1)  Precipitation deficits (<65.0-75.0 percent, depending on time of year), as determined using comparisons based on data compiled by the office of the state climatologist. 
(2)  Representative daily stream flows fall between the 5th and 10th percentile for return flow frequencies. Stream flows shall be monitored by utilizing the USGS gauging station (03171000) located at Radford, Virginia. 
(3)  NOAA Drought Index D2, severe drought. 
During this stage, town staff shall continue to monitor drought indicators listed above and continue to monitor and compare water intake and treatment with water usage. 
When a drought warning declaration is warranted, the following types of actions may be initiated: 
(1)  Continuing measures from stage I. 
(2)  Implementing voluntary water use restrictions for all nonessential outdoor water use, such as irrigation or washing cars. 
(3)  Limiting water use for recreational activities, such as swimming pools or golf courses. 
(4)  Requesting Virginia Tech to initiate voluntary water reduction measures. 
Stage III-Drought Emergency (Mandatory): 
The drought emergency stage shall be declared during the height of a significant drought event or during a water supply emergency. Mandatory water conservation activities will be established, with a goal of reducing water use ten (10) to fifteen (15) percent. 
The indicators/parameters that may trigger a drought emergency are as follows: 
(1)  Precipitation deficits (<55.0-65.0 percent, depending on time of year) determined using comparisons based on data compiled by the office of the state climatologist. 
(2)  Representative daily stream flows below the 5th percentile for return flow frequencies. Stream flows are monitored by utilizing the USGS gauging station (03171000) located at Radford, Virginia. 
(3)  NOAA Drought Index D3, extreme drought, or greater. 
(4)  Water intake and treatment are less than historical water demand. 
(5)  Source water level is near or below water intake. 
When a drought emergency declaration is warranted, the following types of actions may be taken: 
(1)  Continuing measures from stages I and II. 
(2)  Prohibiting all nonessential outdoor water use including: 
a.  Washing vehicles; 
b.  Irrigation for lawns, gardens, and plantings; 
c.  Recreational uses, including refilling swimming pools; and 
d.  Washing decks, sidewalks, and driveways. 
(3)  Requiring mandatory water use restrictions by major water users for nonessential functions. 
(b)  In the event of an emergency that significantly affects (or may affect) the town's water supply (which includes, but is not limited to, the water treatment plant, source water or distribution systems), the town manager may declare a water supply emergency and take all actions described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1625, § 1, 10-11-11) 
Section 24-802. - Additional measures. 
    If the measures outlined in this article are insufficient to reduce demand and preserve sufficient supplies of water for citizens, the town manager may implement additional measures during critical periods. These measures shall be communicated as provided for in section 24-805. These measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: (a) limiting new water mains and water taps; and (b) implementing a water conservation rate. 
(Ord. No. 1625, § 1, 10-11-11) 
Section 24-803. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who fails to comply with mandatory conservation measures during a declared drought emergency stage may be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  For the first offense, a violator shall receive a written warning delivered in person or posted by a town employee. 
(2)  For the second offense, a violator shall be assessed a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00), to be imposed on the violator's next water bill, or, in the case of violators not on the public water system, to be assessed by a written notice. 
(3)  For the third offense, a violator shall be assessed a civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each offense, to be imposed on the violator's next water bill, or, in the case of any person not on the public water system, to be assessed by a written notice. 
(4)  Each violation by a person shall be counted as a separate violation by that person, regardless of the location at which the violation occurs. 
(Ord. No. 1625, § 1, 10-11-11) 
Section 24-804. - Appeals. 
    Upon declaration of a drought emergency or water supply emergency, the town council shall establish an appeals review board to review applications for exemptions from required conservation measures and to consider appeals of penalties assessed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1625, § 1, 10-11-11) 
Section 24-805. - Public notice and duration of restrictions. 
    The existence of Stages I, II and III conditions, or of any water supply emergency, as well as any required conservation measures, shall become effective upon the declaration being printed in any newspaper of general circulation within the locality or being broadcast upon any radio or television station serving the locality. Any prohibitions or restrictions shall remain in effect until the town manager determines that a water emergency in the locality no longer exists. 
(Ord. No. 1625, § 1, 10-11-11) 
APPENDIX A - Ordinance No. 1137 BLACKSBURG ZONING ORDINANCE 
Adopted: April 22, 1997 
Last Revised: March 8, 2011 
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1100 - Authority and citation. 
    The provisions of this ordinance are adopted pursuant to §§ 15.2-2280 and 15.2-2281, of the Code of Virginia, as amended. This ordinance, and all provisions contained herein, together with the official zoning map, a copy of which is on file in the department of planning and building, shall be known as the Town of Blacksburg Zoning Ordinance and may be cited as such, or as the "Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(c), 2-12-08) 
Sec. 1101 - Jurisdiction. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all property within the corporate limits of the Town of Blacksburg. 
Sec. 1102 - Purpose. 
    The zoning regulations and districts set forth in this ordinance are for the general purpose of implementing the comprehensive plan of the Town of Blacksburg. They are designed to achieve the general purposes of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, and of further accomplishing the objectives of Section 15.2-2200 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. To these ends, this ordinance is designed to give reasonable consideration to each of the following purposes: 
(1)  Provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood and other dangers; 
(2)  Reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets; 
(3)  Facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community; 
(4)  Facilitate the provision of adequate police, fire protection, disaster evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewer, flood protection, schools, parks, forests, playgrounds, recreational facilities, airports and other public requirements; 
(5)  Protect against destruction of, or encroachment upon historic buildings or areas; 
(6)  Protect against one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, undue density of population in relation to the community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light or air, hazards and congestion in travel and transportation, or loss of life, health, or property from fire, flood, panic, or other hazards; 
(7)  Encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base; 
(8)  Provide for the preservation of agricultural and forestal lands and other lands of significance for the natural environment; 
(9)  Protect approach slopes and other safety areas of licensed airports; 
(10)  Protect surface and groundwater resources; and 
(11)  Create and preserve affordable housing suitable for meeting the current and future needs of the Town as well as a reasonable proportion of the current and future needs of the planning district within which the Town is situated. 
Sec. 1103 - Establishment of districts. 
    The following are established as Town of Blacksburg zoning districts: 
Residential Districts RR-1 Rural Residential 1 RR-2 Rural Residential 2 R-4 Low Density Residential R-5 Transitional Residential OTR Old Town Residential RM-27 Low Density Multi-unit Residential RM-48 Medium Density Multi-unit Residential PR Planned Residential PMH Planned Manufactured Home Commercial Districts DC Downtown Commercial GC General Commercial PC Planned Commercial Mixed Use Districts MXD Mixed Use Development Office Districts O Office R&D Research and Development Industrial Districts IN Industrial PI Planned Industrial University Districts UNIV University Overlay Districts CVO Creek Valley Overlay FHO Flood Hazard Overlay SHO Special Housing Overlay HPO Historic Preservation Overlay OSO Open Space Design Overlay AOD Live/Work/Sell Arts Overlay  
    The location and boundaries of these zoning districts are shown on the official zoning map. 
( Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 1104 - Interpretation of district boundaries and standards. 
(a)  Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, right-of-ways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines; 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as following center lines of bodies of water shall be construed as following such center lines. In the event such center lines move as a result of natural forces, the boundary shall also move. 
(b)  District Standards-If the standards specified in this ordinance are in conflict with the requirements with any lawfully adopted rule, regulations or laws, the more restrictive or higher standards shall govern. 
(c)  Uses and activities not provided for or addressed by the terms of this ordinance, shall be considered prohibited uses and activities, unless the Administrator shall find that the use or activity is compatible and consistent with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 1105 - Severability. 
(a)  Should any section or any provision of this ordinance be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this ordinance, and such remainder shall continue in full force and effect. 
(b)  Should the application of any section or any provision of this ordinance to a particular property, building, structure or use be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the application of said section or provision to any other property, building, structure or use. 
Sec. 1106 - Continuation of provisions of prior Zoning Ordinance. 
    The provisions of this chapter [Appendix], so far as they are the same as those of the 1976 Zoning Ordinance of the Town, Ordinance Number 415, and all amendments thereto and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1107 - Provisions of Ordinance [Number] 415 in conflict with this chapter [Appendix] are repealed. 
    All provisions of Ordinance [Number] 415, as amended, in conflict with this chapter [Appendix] are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 1108 - References to Virginia Code. 
    All references to specific sections of the Virginia Code shall be construed as references to successor sections mutatis mutandis. 
Sec. 1109 - Application of chapter to new territory. 
    The provisions of this chapter [Appendix] shall apply to new territory which comes within the Town limits by annexation, boundary adjustment, or otherwise. 
    The new territory shall be classified in the zoning district most like its previous zoning in terms of permitted uses, until a study can be done to determine if a different zoning classification is more appropriate. 
    The Town Council shall undertake the amendment of the Comprehensive Plan and the zoning map as necessary whenever new territory comes within the Town limits. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
Sec. 1110 - Disclosure of real parties in interest. 
    Any applicant for a special exception, conditional use permit, amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, or variance, shall make complete disclosure of the equitable ownership of the real estate to be affected including, in the case of corporate ownership, the name of stockholders, officers and directors, and in any case the names and addresses of all of the real parties of interest. The requirement of listing names of stockholders shall not apply to a corporation whose stock is traded on a national or local stock exchange and which corporation has more than five hundred (500) shareholders. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 1, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 1111 - Overview and interpretation of ordinance. 
    This ordinance is divided into five (5) articles, which must be read together for a complete understanding of the development regulations that apply to any particular proposal. 
    Article III sets forth the basic development regulations for each zoning district. Article IV sets forth development regulations that apply to a specific use. Where an Article IV standard is different from the applicable Article III standard - either more or less restrictive - then the Article IV standard applies. 
    Article V sets forth standards for certain common development features, such as landscaping and parking, that apply within all zoning districts. 
    Article II establishes definitions for terms used in this ordinance. 
    Article I states how the ordinance is to be administered. 
    Any person using this ordinance should review each article for a comprehensive understanding of the applicable zoning provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 1, 9-12-00) 
Sec. 1112 - Special exceptions. 
(a)  Town Council reserves unto itself the authority to consider and act upon special exceptions, as authorized by Virginia Code § 15.2-2286. Any request for a waiver, modification, variation or substitution permitted by this Appendix shall be considered and acted upon by the Town Council. 
(b)  Consideration and action. In acting upon a special exception, Town Council shall consider the Comprehensive Plan, the purposes of the zoning district, the intent of the standard in question, and the criteria in this Section; however, the Town Council shall not be required to make specific findings in support of its decision. 
(c)  Criteria. The Town Council may grant a complete exception from the standard, or it may modify the standard based on the particularities of the site. Any modification of the standard shall be considered a special exception. In determining to grant a special exception, the Town Council shall be guided by the following general considerations: 
(1)  The unusual shape or topography of a lot or an adjoining lot; 
(2)  The location of existing structures; and 
(3)  Whether mature trees can be preserved through the exception. 
(d)  For exceptions to requirements for parking in front of a building line, the primary considerations should be the shape or topography of a lot, the location of existing structures and preserving mature trees. However, the considerations may also include the degree of exception requested, the impact on the relationship of the building to the street, internal/external connectivity, safety concerns and consistency with existing development patterns. When an exception is granted, it should be conditioned on buffering the parking with landscaping, including natural plant materials, shrubs and trees. 
(e)  For buffer yard exception requests, considerations shall include the following: 
(1)  Natural land characteristics, such as topography or existing vegetation on the proposed building site that would achieve the same result as installing a buffer yard; 
(2)  Innovative landscaping or architectural design employed on the building site to achieve an equivalent screening or buffering effect; 
(3)  Whether the required screening and landscaping would be ineffective at maturity due to the proposed topography of the site and/or the location of the improvements on the site; and 
(4)  Whether the topography of adjacent and surrounding sites is such as to render the required screening ineffective at maturity. 
(f)  In approving a special exception, Town Council may impose reasonable conditions to address any possible impacts of the special exception. 
(g)  A request for a special exception shall be acted on by Town Council within ninety (90) days after the date of the request, or concurrently with a zoning map amendment or conditional use permit, whichever is longer. 
(h)  Unless the applicant obtains site plan approval incorporating the exception within one (1) year of the grant, the exception will expire. 
(Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 1800, § 1, 10-11-16 ) 
Sec. 1113 - Notice by Administrator or BZA in certain matters. 
    When any applicant requesting a written order, requirement, decision, or determination from the Administrator or the BZA that is subject to the appeals provisions contained in Virginia Code § 15.2-2311 or 15.2-2314 is not the owner or the agent of the owner of the real property subject to the written order, requirement decision or determination, written notice shall be given by the Administrator or, at the direction of the Administrator, the applicant shall be required to give the owner such notice and to provide satisfactory evidence to the Administrator that the notice has been given. Written notice mailed to the owner at the last known address of the owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books or current real estate tax assessment records shall satisfy the notice requirements of this Section. This Section shall not apply to inquiries from the Town Council, Planning Commission, or employees of the Town made in the normal course of business. 
(Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 1114-1119 - [Reserved]. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 1120 - Planning commission; powers, duties, and composition. 
    There is hereby created a Town Planning Commission, which commission shall be known as the "Blacksburg Town Planning Commission," which may be referred to in this ordinance as the "Planning Commission" or "the Commission." 
Sec. 1121 - Composition; qualifications and appointment of members. 
    The Planning Commission shall consist of not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) members, one (1) of whom shall be a member of the Town Council, and the remaining members, to be known as appointed members, shall be residents of the Town. All members shall be appointed by the Town Council. 
Sec. 1122 - By-laws. 
    The Planning Commission shall develop, adopt, and maintain by-laws to govern its operation. 
Sec. 1123 - Compensation of members. 
    All members of the Planning Commission shall serve with such compensation as the Town Council may choose to provide, as well as reimbursement for actual expenses incurred by members. 
(Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 1124 - Removal of members. 
(a)  Any appointed member of the Planning Commission may be removed by the Town Council for malfeasance in office. Such removal may be made only after a public hearing at which such member is given an opportunity to appear and be heard on the charges. 
(b)  Any member may be removed by the Town Council without limitation in the event that the Commission member is absent from any three (3) consecutive commission meetings, or any four (4) commission meetings within any twelve (12) month period. In either such event, Town Council shall appoint a successor to fill the unexpired term of the removed member. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 1125 - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties which are now or may hereafter be granted to or imposed upon such commissions by state law, and in addition thereto, such powers and duties as are provided by this Code or other ordinances. 
(b)  The Commission shall develop, adopt and maintain by-laws that govern its operation. 
Sec. 1126 - Officers and staff support. 
(a)  The officers of the Planning Commission shall be the chair, vice-chair, and secretary, whose terms shall be for one (1) year as determined by the Planning Commission. 
(b)  The Town manager, Town Attorney, and Town Clerk shall provide staff support to the Planning Commission as may be reasonably required. 
Sec. 1127 - Review of special exceptions. 
    The Planning Commission shall review requests for special exceptions based on the criteria established in section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1184, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1680, § 1, adopted May 14, 2013, amended § 1127 title to read as herein set out. Former § 1127 title pertained to authority to grant exceptions. 
DIVISION 4. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 

Sec. 1140 - Comprehensive plan. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the Town in accordance with the requirements of Virginia Code § 15.2-2223. The plan may also include any other policy areas deemed by the Planning Commission and Town Council to be important to the long term development of the Town. The Town Council shall adopt the plan in accord with the requirements of Virginia Code Title 15.2, Chapter 22, Article 3. Once adopted, the Planning Commission shall have the responsibility to continuously review and recommend updates to the plan to ensure that the plan remains a current statement of Town development goals, objectives, and policies. 
(b)  The Comprehensive Plan shall be used by the Planning Commission and Town Council as one (1) basis upon which to evaluate amendments to, and approvals required by, this ordinance in accordance with provisions contained herein. 
(c)  Proposed changes to the Comprehensive Plan and the adopted Comprehensive Plan shall be posted on the Town's website in accord with the requirements of Virginia Code Title 15.2, Chapter 22, Article 3. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 2, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 1141 - Amendments to the comprehensive plan. 
    An amendment to the Comprehensive Plan may be initiated by the Town Council, the Planning Commission, or any person. If the Town Council desires an amendment, it may prepare the amendment and refer it to the Planning Commission for a public hearing, or it may direct the Planning Commission to prepare an amendment and submit it to a public hearing within sixty (60) days or such longer time frame as may be specified. All amendments to the Comprehensive Plan shall be recommended, and approved and adopted, respectively, as required by Virginia Code § 15.2-2229. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 3, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13) 
DIVISION 5. - ZONING AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 1150 - Amendments to ordinance. 
(a)  Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice require, the Town may, by ordinance, amend, supplement, or change these regulations, district boundaries, or classifications of property. Any such amendments may be initiated by: 
(1)  Resolution of the Town Council, or; 
(2)  Motion of the Planning Commission, or; 
(3)  Petition of the owner, contract purchaser with the owner's written consent, or the owner's agent, of the property which is the subject of the proposed zoning map amendment. 
(4)  Any person may submit suggestions for Zoning Ordinance text amendments to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall forward these requests to the appropriate committee of the Planning Commission for consideration during the annual Zoning Ordinance review process. 
Any petition submitted shall be in writing and shall be addressed to Town Council. 
(b)  The Administrator shall establish and maintain the amendment application materials. These application materials shall, at a minimum, include any information the Administrator deems necessary for the Planning Commission and Town Council to adequately evaluate the amendment request. A concept plan shall accompany all map amendment requests. 
(c)  The Administrator shall not accept any amendment application for a lot or parcel that does not comply with the minimum lot area, width, or frontage requirements of the requested zoning district. In such situations, the applicant shall first seek a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals. If a variance is granted, the Administrator shall thereafter accept the amendment application for the consideration of the Commission and Board. 
(d)  If the Council denies any amendment application submitted for its review, or the application is withdrawn after Council consideration, the Town shall not consider substantially the same application for the same property within one (1) year of the Council action. The Administrator shall have the authority to determine whether new applications submitted within this one-year period are substantially the same. In making any such determination the Administrator shall have the authority to consider any items pertaining to the proposed use or development of the site such as, but not limited to, the uses proposed, densities, access, building locations, and overall site design. 
(e)  Prior to the initiation of an application for a special exception, conditional use permit, variance, rezoning, or other land use permit, or prior to the issuance of final approval, the applicant shall produce satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed, which have been properly assessed against the subject property, have been paid. 
(f)  Within three (3) months prior to the filing of a conditional use permit or rezoning application, each applicant shall schedule and attend a pre-application meeting with the Zoning Administrator. The meeting shall consist of a discussion of the proposed application and the applicable procedures and substantive requirements of this ordinance. A request for a pre-application conference shall be made in writing on a form prepared by the Department of Planning and Building. Such request shall be accompanied by a sketch map(s) of the site sufficient to illustrate the location of proposed uses, the scale and intensity of uses and environmental conditions on the property to the extent they are known, a description of the proposed project or use, and a list of any specific issues to be discussed at the conference. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1308, § 1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1433, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 1151 - Commission study and action. 
(a)  All proposed amendments to the Zoning Ordinance shall be referred by the Town Council to the Planning Commission for study and recommendation. The Commission shall study proposals to determine: 
(1)  Whether the proposed amendment conforms to the general guidelines and policies contained in the Town comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The relationship of the proposed amendment to the purposes of the general planning program of the Town, with appropriate consideration as to whether the change will further the purposes of this ordinance and the general welfare of the entire community. 
(3)  The need and justification for the change. 
(4)  When pertaining to a change in the district classification of property, the effect of the change, if any, on the property, surrounding property, and on public services and facilities. In addition, the Commission shall consider the appropriateness of the property for the proposed change as related to the purposes set forth at the beginning of each district classification. 
(b)  Prior to making any recommendation to the Town Council on a proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, the Commission shall advertise and hold a public hearing in accord with the provisions of Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204, as amended. The cost of all public advertisements shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(c)  The Commission shall review the proposed amendment and report its findings and recommendations to the Town Council along with any appropriate explanatory materials within one hundred (100) days after the first Planning Commission meeting after the proposed Zoning Ordinance amendment is referred to the Commission. Failure of the Commission to report to the Town Council shall be deemed a recommendation of approval. If the Commission does not report within the prescribed time, the Town may act on the amendment without the recommendation of the Commission. 
(d)  Any recommendation of the Commission shall be deemed advisory, and shall not be binding on the Town. 
Sec. 1152 - Council study and action. 
(a)  Before enacting any proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing as required by [Code of Virginia] § 15.2-2204, with public notice as required by Code of Virginia §§ 15.2-2204 and 15.2-2285, as amended. The Town Council may hold a joint public hearing with the Planning Commission. The cost of all public advertisements shall be the responsibility of the applicant. After holding this hearing, the Town Council may make appropriate changes to the proposed amendment; provided however that no land may be zoned to a more intensive use classification than was contained in the public notice without an additional public notice as required by [Code of Virginia] § 15.2-2204. 
(b)  The Town Clerk shall transmit to the Administrator official notice of any Town Council action modifying the Zoning Ordinance. The Administrator shall thereafter have the responsibility to make any necessary and appropriate changes to the Zoning Ordinance map. The Town Clerk shall have the responsibility to make any necessary and appropriate changes to the Zoning Ordinance text. 
(c)  Failure by the Town Council to take action on the Planning Commission's recommendation within six (6) months after the Planning Commission's action or failure to act shall be considered a denial of a request. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 1, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 1153 - Posting of property; requirements; exemptions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any advertising requirements imposed by Virginia Code §§ 15.2-2204 and 15.2-2285, the public notice process for every proposed map amendment, conditional use permit, variance or any other type of review as elsewhere specified in this Appendix shall require posted public notice on the property proposed for review. 
(b)  At least fifteen (15) days prior to the Commission's public hearing on the pending application, the Administrator shall erect on the subject property signs indicating the change proposed, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing. Failure to do so shall result in the cancellation or continuation of the scheduled public hearing. The applicant shall be responsible for all advertising costs associated with the public hearing, including a one hundred dollar ($100.00) posting fee. Alternatively, the applicant may post the property, using signs provided by the Zoning Administrator, and not be subject to the posting fee. 
(c)  The Administrator shall determine the number of signs required; however, there shall be at least one (1) sign posted along each public right-of-way abutting the property. At least one (1) sign shall be posted every three hundred (300) feet along any single right-of-way. All signs must be clearly visible from the adjacent right-of-way. For properties that lack any public right-of-way, all required signs shall be posted along at least two (2) property lines, as determined by the Administrator. 
(d)  The applicant shall have the responsibility to determine and provide the structural elements necessary to erect the sign on the property. 
(e)  All public hearing signs posted shall be removed from the property by the applicant within two (2) days after the Commission's public hearing. 
(f)  The following exemptions shall apply to the provisions of this Section: 
(1)  The posting of property shall not be required for any action initiated by a resolution of the Council if the action encompasses more than twenty-six (26) parcels of land. 
(2)  The temporary absence of any posted sign, due to vandalism or climatic conditions, shall not violate the intent of this Section or invalidate any action by the Commission or the Council. 
(Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 1154-1159 - [Reserved]. 
DIVISION 6. - CONDITIONAL ZONING 

Sec. 1160 - Generally. 
(a)  In accordance with the authority granted to the Town by Virginia Code § 15.2-2298, the owner of property for which an amendment is requested may voluntarily proffer in writing reasonable conditions, in addition to the applicable regulations for the requested zoning district. All proffered conditions must be in writing and signed by the owner of the property. 
(b)  The Town's acceptance of proffers pursuant to this authority shall be in accord with the procedures and standards contained in Code of Virginia § 15.2-2298. 
(c)  All conditions proffered by the owner shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  The rezoning itself must give rise for the need for the conditions. 
(2)  The conditions shall have a reasonable relation to the rezoning. 
(3)  The conditions shall be in conformity with the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  The conditions must be clearly understood and enforceable. 
(5)  The conditions must not require or allow a design or standard that is less restrictive than the general provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  Any such conditions should be submitted prior to the start of the Commission's public hearing on the amendment. All conditions shall be submitted in writing, signed by the owner, prior to the start of the Town Council's public hearing, and shall also be submitted in accord with any adopted Town Council policy pertaining to the submittal of proffers. However, Town Council may accept amended proffers once the public hearing has begun if the amended proffers do not materially affect the overall proposal. 
(e)  The Commission and the Council shall not be obligated to accept any or all of the conditions made by the property owner. 
(f)  In the event proffered conditions include the dedication of real property or payment of cash, such property shall not transfer and such payment of cash shall not be made until the facilities for which such property is dedicated or cash is tendered are included in the capital improvement program, provided that nothing herein shall prevent the Town from accepting proffered conditions which are not normally included in such capital improvement program. If proffered conditions include the dedication of real property or the payment of cash, the proffered conditions should provide for the disposition of such property or cash payment in the event the property or cash payment is not used for the purpose for which proffered. However, the Town may utilize cash payments for alternative improvements as provided by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2302.2. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 1161 - Changes to proffers. 
    If proffered conditions which substantially modify the nature or impact of the proposed use, are made by the owner after the Commission's recommendation on the amendment: 
(a)  Town Council may act at once upon modifications which are an outgrowth of staff, Planning Commission, or public comment; or 
(b)  Town Council may refer the application back to the Planning Commission for further review and action. 
    The Commission shall have the authority to schedule a new public hearing for any request so referred. The applicant shall be responsible for all advertising costs associated with the new public hearing. 
Sec. 1162 - Planned zoning districts. 
(a)  Any application to rezone land to a planned zoning district, including RR2, shall constitute an application for conditional zoning. The written and graphic information submitted by the applicant as part of the application process shall constitute proffers. Once the Town Council has approved the final master plan, all accepted proffers shall constitute conditions, enforceable by the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  To initiate an amendment, the applicant shall complete a rezoning application. The application shall be accompanied by graphic and written information, which shall constitute a preliminary master plan. All information submitted shall be of sufficient clarity and scale to clearly and accurately identify the location, nature, and character of the proposed district. At a minimum this information shall include: 
(1)  A legal description and plat of the total site proposed for development; showing the site boundaries, and existing street lines, lot lines, total acreage, and easements. 
(2)  Existing zoning, land use, tax parcel number and ownership of each parcel proposed for the district. 
(3)  A general statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the planned zoning district, including a description of the character of the proposed development, the existing and proposed ownership of the site, and the market for which the development is oriented. 
(4)  A description, map, and analysis of existing site conditions, including information on topography, archeological and historic resources, natural water courses, floodplains, unique natural features, tree cover areas, etc. 
(5)  A comprehensive sign plan. 
(6)  A land use plan designating categories of uses and their location on the site, and establishing site development standards, including setback, height, lot coverage, floor area ratios, density, building envelopes, and the proposed lot layout of the planned zoning district. 
(7)  A circulation plan, including location of existing and proposed vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, and other circulation facilities and location and general design of parking and loading facilities. General information on the trip generation, ownership and maintenance and proposed construction standards for these facilities should be included. A Traffic Impact Analysis may be required by the Administrator. 
(8)  A public services and utilities plan providing engineering requirements for and provision of public water, public sewer, and storm water facilities to serve the site. 
(9)  Statements pertaining to any architectural and community design guidelines shall be submitted in sufficient detail to provide information on building designs, orientations, styles, lighting plans, etc. 
(10)  A phasing plan delineating the proposed phases of the development, the approximate commencement date for construction and a proposed build-out period. 
(11)  The names and addresses of adjacent property owners, including their property's tax parcel number, zoning, and land use. 
(12)  A statement that a property owner's or other association will be created to meet any proffered obligations, as applicable. 
(c)  The completed rezoning application and supporting preliminary master plan materials shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and the Town Council through the procedures for review of applications for an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  The plan approved by the Town Council shall constitute the final master plan for the planned development. Once approved by the Town Council, the applicant shall submit a mylar copy of the approved plan. The Administrator shall authorize the revisions to the official zoning map to indicate the establishment of the planned zoning district. The approval of the final master plan for a planned zoning district is equivalent to, and has the effect of, the approval of a preliminary subdivision plat, pursuant to Town Code, Appendix B, Blacksburg Subdivision Ordinance, Article IV. 
(e)  No building permits may be issued on land within the planned development until final plans for the development have been approved by the Administrator under the procedures outlined below. 
(f)  The Administrator shall approve or disapprove a final site development plan within sixty (60) days from receipt of such plan. The plan shall be in substantial conformance with the approved final master plan. Such final site development plan may include one (1) or more sections of the overall planned zoning district, and shall meet all applicable federal, state and Town regulations and shall contain specific details of information required generally in the preliminary plan, including, if applicable, documents of a condominium, merchant's, property owner's or homeowners' association incorporated under laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, declaration of covenants and restrictions, and other similar documents. 
( Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 1163 - Additional submissions required for PC and PIN districts. 
    There shall be submitted with any application for PC or PIN zoning a plan including graphic depictions indicating architectural building design, including characteristics such as scale, massing, roof shape, window size, shape and spacing, and exterior materials. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 2, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 1164 - Revisions to final master plan for planned zoning districts. 
(a)  Major revisions to the approved final master plan must be submitted and approved in the same manner as the original plan. 
(b)  Major revisions include, but are not limited to changes such as: 
(1)  Any increase in the density of the development; 
(2)  Substantial change in circulation or access; 
(3)  Substantial change in the mixture of dwelling unit types included in the project; 
(4)  Substantial changes in grading or utility provisions; 
(5)  Substantial changes in the mixture of land uses or an increase in the amount of land devoted to commercial, office, or institutional purposes; 
(6)  Reduction in the approved open space, landscaping or buffering; 
(7)  Substantial change in architectural or site design features of the development; 
(8)  Any other change that the Administrator finds is a major divergence from the approved final master plan. 
(c)  All other changes in the final master plan shall be considered minor revisions. The Administrator, upon receipt of a written request of the owner, may approve such minor revisions. 
(1)  If the Administrator fails to act on a request for a minor revision to the Master Plan within thirty (30) calendar days, it shall be considered approved. 
(2)  The Administrator's disapproval of a request for a minor revision may be appealed by the applicant through the process for major revisions. 
Sec. 1165 - Enforcement of conditions. 
(a)  The Administrator shall be vested with all necessary authority on behalf of the Town Council to administer and enforce conditions attached to a rezoning or amendment to a zoning map, including: 
(1)  The ordering in writing of the remedy of any noncompliance with such conditions. 
(2)  The bringing of legal action to insure compliance with such conditions. 
(3)  Requiring a guarantee, satisfactory to the Administrator in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of any physical improvements required by the conditions, or a contract for the construction of such improvements, and the contractor's guarantee, in like amount and so conditioned, which guarantee shall be reduced or released by the Administrator upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that construction of such improvements has been completed in whole or in part. 
(b)  Failure of a property owner to meet all conditions accepted by the Council shall constitute cause to deny approval of a site development plan, or deny issuance of a zoning permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy, as may be appropriate. 
Sec. 1166 - Records of conditions. 
    The zoning map shall show by an appropriate symbol on the map the existence of conditions attached to the zoning on the map. The Administrator shall keep and make available for public inspection a conditional zoning index. The index shall provide ready access to the ordinance creating the conditions in addition to the regulations provided for in a particular zoning district or zone. 
Sec. 1167 - Review of Administrator's decisions. 
    Any zoning applicant, or any other person aggrieved by a decision of the Administrator made pursuant to the provisions of Section 1165, may petition the Town Council for the review of the decision of the Administrator. All such petitions for review shall be filed with the Administrator within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision for which review is sought. All such petitions shall specify the grounds upon which the petitioner is aggrieved. 
Sec. 1168 - Amendments and variations of conditions. 
    Any request by an applicant to amend or vary conditions that were voluntarily proffered and accepted by the Town Council shall be reviewed and processed pursuant to Code of Virginia § 15.2-2302. 
(Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13) 
DIVISION 8. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1513, § 1, adopted Apr. 14, 2009, amended Art. I, Div. 8 title, as herein set out. Former Art. I, Div. 8 title pertained to conditional use permits. 

Sec. 1180 - Applicability and purpose. 
(a)  The procedures and standards contained in this section shall apply to all uses specifically permitted as conditional uses in the district regulations found in Article 3 of this ordinance [Appendix]. 
(b)  This category of uses known as conditional uses is established in recognition that in addition to uses permitted by right, certain uses may, depending upon their scale, design, location, and conditions imposed by the Town Council, be compatible with permitted and future uses in a district. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 1181 - General standards. 
(a)  The Administrator shall not accept a conditional use permit application that does not comply with the minimum requirements for that use. In such situations, the applicant shall first seek a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals. If a variance is granted, the Administrator shall thereafter accept the conditional use permit application for the consideration of the Commission and Town Council. 
(b)  No conditional use permit shall be issued except upon a finding of the Town Council that in addition to conformity with any standards set forth in this chapter [Appendix], the proposed conditional use conforms with the following general standards. These standards shall be met either by the proposal made in the original conditional use permit application, or by the proposal as modified or amended as part of the review of the application by the Commission and the Town Council: 
(1)  The proposal as submitted or modified shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the Town, or to specific elements of the plan, and to official Town policies adopted in relation thereto, including the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  The proposal as submitted or modified shall have a minimum adverse impact on the surrounding neighborhood or community. Adverse impact shall be evaluated with consideration to items such as, but not limited to, traffic congestion, noise, lights, dust, drainage, water quality, air quality, odor, fumes and vibrations. In considering impacts, due regard shall be given to the timing of the operation, site design, access, screening, or other matters which might be regulated to mitigate adverse impact. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 1182 - Application requirements. 
(a)  An application for a conditional use permit may be initiated by: 
(1)  Resolution of the Town Council, or; 
(2)  Motion of the Commission, or; 
(3)  Petition of the owner, contract purchaser with the owner's written consent, or the owner's agent, of the property for which a conditional use permit is requested. 
(b)  The applicant for a conditional use permit shall provide at the time of application, information and or data to demonstrate that the proposed use will be in harmony with the purposes of the specific zoning district in which it will be located. This information shall include a concept plan and other supporting data sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the purposes and standards of this ordinance. Further, the applicant shall have the responsibility to demonstrate that the proposed use will have minimum adverse impact on adjoining property and the surrounding neighborhood in terms of public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(c)  All applications submitted for conditional use permits shall show the nature and extent of the proposed use and development. If the proposed development is to be constructed in phases, all phases shall be shown at the time of the original application. The applicant shall have the responsibility to show that the proposal meets all of the applicable specific and general standards for the use. 
(d)  Within three (3) months prior to the initiation of an application for a conditional use permit, the potential applicant shall: 
(1)  Schedule and attend a pre-application meeting, as described in Section 1150. 
(2)  Produce satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed, which have been properly assessed against the subject property, have been paid. 
(e)  In addition to the information required by Section 1182, development applications for broadcasting and communication facilities shall include the following supplemental information: 
(1)  A scaled elevation perspective of the proposed wireless telecommunication tower and associated structures. 
(2)  A report from a licensed professional engineer which: 
a.  describes the tower height and design including a cross section and elevation; 
b.  documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between antennas; 
c.  describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas that it can accommodate; 
d.  documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with established public safety telecommunications; 
e.  includes an engineer's stamp and registration number; and 
f.  includes other information necessary to evaluate the request. 
(3)  Information which documents the need for the proposed facility, considering existing and proposed antennae, operated by the applicant, that provide coverage for the Town of Blacksburg and vicinity. 
(4)  Engineering information detailing the minimum and optimal height and coverage required for the facility. 
(5)  A visual impact analysis prepared by a qualified professional that includes photo-simulations of the proposed wireless communication tower that at a minimum simulate the views of the facility from habitable structures on abutting properties and adjacent public roads. 
(Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1433, 2-13-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 1183 - Review and action. 
(a)  The Administrator shall review all conditional use permit applications submitted. This review shall evaluate the proposal against the comprehensive plan and the specific and general standards for the requested use. The Administrator shall make a report to the Commission. This report shall contain all information pertinent to the evaluation of the request. 
(b)  The process for review of a conditional use permit application shall be the same as the process for review of a rezoning application, Sections 1150 et. seq., of this ordinance [Appendix]. 
(c)  The Commission shall review and make recommendations to the Town Council concerning the approval or disapproval of any conditional use permit. Posting of the property shall be in accord with Section 1153 of this ordinance [Appendix]. The Commission shall base its recommendation upon the review of the submitted application materials, the specific and general criteria for the conditional use, public comment received at the hearing, and the information and evaluation of the Administrator. In making a recommendation to the Town Council, the Commission may recommend any conditions necessary to insure that the proposal meets the specific and general standards for the proposed use. Any such conditions shall be related to the design, scale, use, or operation of the proposed conditional use. Where warranted, for the purpose of compliance with the general standards for conditional uses, such conditions may exceed the specific standards for the use found elsewhere in this ordinance. 
(d)  The Town Council may grant or deny any applicant a conditional use permit after notice is given and a public hearing is held in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, as amended. In granting a conditional use permit, the Town Council may attach any conditions necessary to insure that the proposal meets the specific and general standards for the proposed use. Any such conditions shall be related to the design, scale, use, or operation of the proposed conditional use. Where warranted, for the purpose of compliance with the general standards for conditional uses, such conditions may exceed the specific standards for the use found elsewhere in this ordinance [Appendix]. 
(e)  A decision to deny a conditional use permit for a wireless communication tower shall be in writing supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
(Ord. No. 1170, 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 1184 - Time limitations. 
(a)  Within one hundred (100) days after the first meeting of the Commission after the proposed conditional use permit application is referred to the Commission, unless a shorter period shall have been established by mutual agreement between the Town Council and the Commission in a particular case, the Commission shall review the proposed application and report its findings and recommendation to the Town Council along with any appropriate explanatory materials. Failure of the Commission to so report shall be deemed a recommendation of approval. If the Commission does not report within the prescribed time, the Town Council may act on the application without the recommendation of the Commission. 
(b)  Any conditional use permit granted shall be null and void eighteen (18) months after approval by the Town Council if the use or development authorized by the permit is not commenced to a degree that, in the opinion of the Administrator, clearly establishes the intent to utilize the granted conditional use permit in a period of time deemed reasonable for the type and scope of improvements involved. 
(c)  Conditional uses which are approved by the Town Council shall run with the land, so long as such property is used for the purpose requiring the conditional use permit and shall not be transferable to any other property. 
(1)  Activities or uses approved by a conditional use permit which are discontinued for a period of more than two (2) consecutive years shall not be reestablished on the same property unless a new conditional use permit is issued in accord with this ordinance. 
(2)  A conditional use permit shall be void, if at the time of the commencement of the authorized use, activity, or structure, the site for which the permit has been granted contains other uses or activities not in place at the time of the issuance of the conditional use permit. 
(d)  If the Town Council denies any application submitted for its review, or the application is withdrawn after Council consideration, the Town shall not consider any application for the same conditional use, on the same property, within one (1) year of the Council action. 
(Ord. No. 1184, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 1185 - Amendments to conditional use permit site plan and conditional use permit. 
    Procedures for the amendment of the conditional use permit shall be the same as for the original permit application, with the exception that minor changes thereto shall not require the resubmission of a site plan. "Minor changes" to a conditional use permit site plan shall include, but not be limited to, alterations or additions which do not increase the gross floor area of a building or the size of a structure by more than ten (10) percent and which do not otherwise modify the physical characteristics of the site. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1513, § 1, adopted Apr. 14, 2009, amended § 1185 to read as herein set out. Former § 1185 pertained to amendments to conditional use permit site plan and conditional use permit. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 1186 - Modifications to use permitted by conditional use permit in absence of same. 
    Where there exist uses classified as permitted uses by conditional use permit and such uses have not been allowed by a conditional use permit and thus are nonconforming due only to their existence prior to the adoption of this chapter [Appendix], minor modifications may be permitted by the Administrator to such use without the necessity of applying for and being granted a conditional use permit. Here, "minor modifications" shall include, but not be limited to, alterations or additions which do not increase the gross floor area of the building or the size of the structure by more than ten (10) percent, and which do not otherwise modify the physical characteristics of the site. Such substantial changes as defined in Section 1185 shall require a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1513, § 1, adopted Apr. 14, 2009, amended § 1186 to read as herein set out. Former § 1186 pertained to modifications to use permitted by conditional use permit in absence of same. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
DIVISION 9. - ADVANCE DENSITY 

Sec. 1190 - Transfer of density potential from land dedicated to Town for public use. 
    In residential zoning districts computations of the maximum number of dwelling units per acre, or in commercial zoning districts maximum lot coverage, with respect to a lot from which land has been severed for a public park, school site, other public facility site, regional detention facility, mass transit facility or street improvement, shall be based upon the lot area including that area severed for such purposes when: 
(1)  An effective irrevocable dedication to public use or conveyance to the Town has occurred and evidence of such dedication or conveyance is of record among the land records of Montgomery County; 
(2)  Such dedication or conveyance was not made in exchange for monetary compensation from the Town, nor was the need for such public facility created by the subdivision or development of the property; 
(3)  The area dedicated or conveyed is necessary for the installation or improvement of the public use which is in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan. Where such proposed public use requires approval under Code of Virginia § 15.2-2232, such approval shall be obtained prior to the granting of credit under this section; and 
(4)  The Town Council has specifically approved density credit for the lot, lots or parcel or parcels in question, prior to completion of dedication or conveyance. 
DIVISION 10. - ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 1200 - Powers and duties. 
(a)  This Appendix shall be administered and enforced by a Zoning Administrator, who shall be appointed by the Director of Planning and Building. Assistants to the Zoning Administrator may be assigned or designated by the Director of Planning and Building, and such duly appointed assistants are authorized to act on behalf of the Administrator in the administration and enforcement of this Appendix. 
(b)  The Administrator shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Zoning permit. To issue or deny a zoning permit for the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, adding to, or alteration of any structure, or the establishment of any land use. The Administrator shall also have the authority to revoke any zoning permit if violations of the provisions of this Appendix occur. 
(2)  Certificate of zoning compliance. To issue or deny a certificate of zoning compliance, which indicates that the use and physical development of the site is in conformity with the Zoning Ordinance. 
(3)  Certificate of occupancy. To issue or deny a certificate of occupancy. 
(4)  Collect fees. To collect any fees required or set forth in this ordinance. 
(5)  Making and keeping records. To make and keep all records required by state law or necessary and appropriate for the administration of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(6)  Inspection of buildings or land. To inspect any building or land to determine if violations of this Appendix have been committed or exist. 
(7)  Enforcement. To enforce the Zoning Ordinance and take all necessary steps to remedy any condition found in violation of the provisions of it. 
(8)  Request assistance. To request the assistance of other local and state officials or agencies in the administration and enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(9)  Interpretation. To interpret the official zoning map and provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, and offer written opinions on their meaning and applicability, and to make findings of fact, and, with the concurrence of the Town Attorney, conclusions of law regarding determinations of rights accruing under Code of Virginia § 15.2-2307 or § 15.2-2311(c). 
(10)  No written decision of the Administrator shall be subject to change, modification, or reversal after sixty (60) days have elapsed, where the person aggrieved has materially changed his position in good faith reliance on the decision. 
(Ord. No. 1278, § 1, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 1768, § 1, 9-8-15 ) 
Sec. 1201 - Zoning permits. 
(a)  A zoning permit shall be required prior to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, adding to, or alteration of any structure, or the establishment of any land use, except as listed below: 
(1)  Patios. 
(2)  Accessory structures less than six (6) feet in height and twenty (20) square feet in area. 
(b)  A zoning permit shall be required for: 
(1)  Construction or reconstruction of any parking lot; 
(2)  Any change in use of an existing structure or parking lot; 
(3)  Installation of a dumpster or permanent trash or recycling container; 
(4)  Addition of lights to a parking lot in connection with a use approved under a conditional use permit. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide any information necessary for the Administrator to determine that the proposed use, building, or structure complies with all provisions of this ordinance. 
(d)  All zoning permits issued shall be valid for a period of six (6) months, unless the structure, use or activity for which the permit was issued has commenced. The Administrator may reissue any expired permit provided the structure, use and or activity complies with all applicable provisions of the ordinance at the time of reissuance. 
(e)  The zoning permit is an element of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 1202 - Building permits; relation to zoning. 
    No building permit for the extension, erection, or alteration of any building or structure shall be issued before an application has been made, and a zoning permit issued. No building or structure shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
Sec. 1203 - Certificates of zoning compliance. 
(a)  A certificate of zoning compliance shall be required for any of the following: 
(1)  Occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, enlarged or structurally altered. 
(2)  Change in the use of an existing building. 
(3)  Change in the use of vacant land except for the raising of crops, and other agricultural uses not involving structures. 
(4)  Any change in use of a nonconforming use, or any alteration of a nonconforming building or structure. 
(b)  No such occupancy, use, or change in use shall take place until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator. Such certificate shall certify that the building or the proposed use, or the use of the land, complies with the provisions of this ordinance. Upon application of the owner or an authorized agent, the Zoning Administrator shall issue the certificate of zoning compliance for any building, structure or lot; provided, that the Administrator finds such building, structure or lot is in conformity with all applicable provisions of this ordinance, and all other applicable Town laws. 
(c)  The Town shall issue or deny any application for a certificate of zoning compliance within seven (7) days of an application being filed. If denied, the Town shall advise the owner or owner's agent the reasons for the denial, and the specific actions required on the part of the owner before the certificate of zoning compliance can be issued. 
Sec. 1204 - Temporary or partial certificates of compliance. 
(a)  In case of undue hardship, the Administrator may issue a temporary or partial certificate of zoning compliance for the property upon application by the owner or authorized agent. Temporary or partial certificates of zoning compliance shall be valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months, during which time all improvements required by Town law must be made. 
(b)  The Administrator shall not issue any temporary or partial certificate of zoning compliance unless: 
(1)  The site and building is in a safe and usable condition, free from conditions that might endanger the health, safety or welfare of persons using the site; and 
(2)  All site development requirements are substantially completed, but due to unavoidable delays such as adverse weather conditions, they cannot be entirely completed as required in a reasonable time; and 
(3)  The owner or authorized agent provides to the Town a performance guarantee, requiring corrective action. This guarantee shall be payable to the Town, in an amount determined by the Town to be sufficient to insure satisfactory completion of all improvements required and related to the development within six (6) months from the date of issuance of the temporary or partial certificate of zoning compliance. The performance guarantee may be in the form of a cash escrow, cashier's check, or irrevocable letter of credit. The Town Attorney shall approve the form and language of any instrument submitted. 
(4)  The Administrator shall have the authority to waive the performance guarantee if the unfinished improvements have an estimated value of less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(5)  The Administrator shall have the authority to grant an extension to the temporary certificate of zoning compliance, provided all performance guarantees remain in effect. 
Sec. 1205 - Fees. 
    Administrative review fees for permits and procedures specified by this ordinance shall be established by the Town Council. A schedule of these fees is available in the department of planning and building. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(c), 2-12-08) 
Sec. 1206 - Inspection warrants. 
    As authorized by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2286(15), for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to apply for the issuance of inspection warrants by a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction. The Zoning Administrator may present sworn testimony to a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction and if such sworn testimony establishes probable cause that a Zoning Ordinance violation has occurred, request that the magistrate or court grant the Zoning Administrator an inspection warrant to enable the Zoning Administrator to enter the subject dwelling for the purpose of determining whether violations of the Zoning Ordinance do exist. The Zoning Administrator shall make a reasonable effort to obtain consent from the owner or tenant of the subject dwelling prior to seeking the issuance of an inspection warrant under this section. Prior to seeking the issuance of an inspection warrant from a magistrate or court of competent jurisdiction, the Zoning Administrator shall seek advice from the Town Attorney on the appropriateness of seeking an inspection warrant. It shall be a violation of the Zoning Ordinance for any owner, managing agent, tenant, occupant or other person to deny the Zoning Administrator access to any dwelling after the Zoning Administrator has obtained an inspection warrant from a magistrate or a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1651, § 1, 8-14-12) 
Sec. 1207 - Subpoena duces tecum. 
    As authorized by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2286(4), whenever the Zoning Administrator has reasonable cause to believe that any person has engaged in or is engaging in any violation of a Zoning Ordinance that limits occupancy in a residential dwelling unit, which is subject to a civil penalty that may be imposed in accordance with the provisions of Zoning Ordinance Section 1213, and the Zoning Administrator, after a good faith effort to obtain the data or information necessary to determine whether a violation has occurred, has been unable to obtain such information, the Zoning Administrator may request that the Town Attorney petition the judge of the general district court for a subpoena duces tecum against any such person refusing to produce such data or information. The judge of the court, upon good cause shown, may cause the subpoena to be issued. Any person failing to comply with such subpoena shall be subject to punishment for contempt by the court issuing the subpoena. Any person so subpoenaed may apply to the judge who issued the subpoena to quash it. 
(Ord. No. 1651, § 1, 8-14-12) 
DIVISION 11. - ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES 

Sec. 1210 - Notice of violation. 
(a)  The Administrator shall have the responsibility for enforcing the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. The Administrator may, as necessary, solicit the assistance of other local and state officials and agencies to assist with this enforcement. 
(b)  Property owners, permit applicants, and/or establishment owners/managers, as applicable, shall be notified in writing of violations of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. The Administrator shall, in the notice of violation, state the nature of the violation, the date that it was observed, and the remedy or remedies necessary to correct the violation. The Administrator may establish a reasonable time period for the correction of the violation; however, in no case shall such time period exceed fifteen (15) days from the date of written notification, except that the Administrator may allow a longer time period to correct the violation if the correction would require the structural alteration of a building or structure. 
(c)  If the violation is not corrected within the time period specified in the first notification, a second written notice shall be sent. The second notification shall request compliance with these provisions within a period not to exceed seven (7) days. 
(d)  Every written notice of violation or written order of the Administrator shall include a statement informing the recipient that he or she may have a right to appeal the notice of zoning violation or written order within thirty (30) days in accordance with this Section, and that the decision shall be final and unappealable if not appealed within thirty (30) days. If a second notice of violation is given as provided for in subsection (c) above, the thirty (30) day appeal period is not extended. The thirty (30) day appeal period begins when the first notice of violation is provided under subsection (b) above. The notice of violation or written order shall also include the amount of the appeal fee and a reference to where additional information may be obtained regarding the filing of an appeal. 
(e)  An appeal from the Administrator's written notice of violation or written order shall be in writing and shall state the grounds thereof. 
(f)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the Administrator certifies to the Board of Zoning Appeals that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the board or by a court of record, on application and notice to the Administrator and for good cause shown. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the above, the appeal period shall be ten (10) days for a notice of violation involving (i) the maximum occupancy limitations of a residential dwelling unit or (ii) parking prohibited by Zoning Ordinance subsection 5201 (a) or (b). No second written notice shall be required before civil penalties may be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 1651, § 1, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 1211 - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  The owner or general agent of the building or premises where a violation of any provisions of this chapter [Appendix] has been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the owner, general agent, lessee or tenant of any part of the building or premises in which such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(b)  If the violation is uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, within a time period established by the court. Failure to remove or abate a Zoning Ordinance within the specified time period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and any such failure during any succeeding thirty (30) day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each thirty (30) day period punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(c)  However, any conviction resulting from a violation of provisions regulating the number of unrelated persons in single-family residential dwellings shall be punishable by a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Failure to abate the violation within the specified time period shall be punishable by a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and any such failure during any succeeding ten (10) day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense for each ten (10) day period punishable by a fine of up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). A conviction resulting from a violation of provisions regulating the number of unrelated persons in single-family residential dwellings shall not be punishable by a jail term. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 2, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 1212 - Civil enforcement procedures. 
    The Zoning Administrator is authorized to bring legal action, including injunction, abatement, or other appropriate action or proceeding. This remedy is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedy available to the Administrator. 
Sec. 1213 - Civil penalties. 
    Any owner or general agent of the building or premises where a violation of any provisions of the Zoning Ordinance has been committed or shall exist, or the lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist, or the general agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who commits, takes part or assists in any such violation or who maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist, shall be punishable by a civil penalty. 
A.  Any violation of the following provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first violation, a civil penalty of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for the second violation and a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation thereafter arising from the same set of operative facts: 
1.  Occupancy of a dwelling unit in violation of sections 3023(f), 3032(e), 3042(e), 3052(f), 3062(f), 3083, 3094, 3113(f), 3123(f), 3144, 3155, 3166, 3184, 3193, 3213, or 4225(b)(2). 
2.  Any erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, adding to, or alteration of any structure, or the establishment of any land use without a Zoning Permit, pursuant to Section 1201. 
3.  Any violation of a proffer, or a planned development application plan, conditional use permit, variance, site plan, certificate of zoning compliance, or any condition related thereto. 
4.  Any violation of Section 5100, which regulates developments and uses requiring a site development plan. 
5.  Any violation of Article 5, Division 2, which regulates off-street parking, stacking, and loading spaces. 
6.  Any violation of Article 5, Division 3, which regulates buffer yards and screening. 
7.  Any violation of Article 5, Division 4, which regulates landscaping. 
8.  Any violation of Article 5, Division 5, which regulates signage. 
9.  Each use of a lot, including the use of any structure thereon, not authorized either as a matter of right or by conditional use permit by the zoning regulations applicable to the district in which the lot is located. 
B.  Designation of a particular violation of the Zoning Ordinance pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be in lieu of criminal sanctions, and except when such violation results in injury to any person or persons. 
C.  Each day during which a violation is found to exist shall be a separate offense. However, the same scheduled violation arising from the same operative set of facts may be charged not more than once in a ten (10) day period, and the total civil penalties from a series of such violations arising from the same set of operative facts shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
D.  The Zoning Administrator, or the Zoning Administrator's designee, may issue a civil summons for a scheduled violation. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a scheduled violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the department of finance prior to the date fixed for trial in court. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty established for the offence charged. Such persons shall be informed of their right to stand trial and that a signature to an admission of liability will have the same force and effect as a judgment of court. 
E.  If a person charged with a scheduled violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. A finding of liability shall not be deemed a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
F.  No provision herein shall be construed to allow the imposition of civil penalties (i) for activities related to land development or (ii) for violation of any provision of a local Zoning Ordinance relating to the posting of signs on public property or public rights-of-way. 
G.  No civil penalty shall accrue or be assessed during the pendency of the applicable appeal period. 
(Ord. No. 1278, § 2, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1339, § 1, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1651, § 1, 8-14-12) 
State Law reference- Civil penalties for violation of Zoning Ordinance, § 15.2-2209 
Sec. 1214 - Enforcement; penalties. 
    Any requirement of this chapter [Appendix] shall be maintained for the life of the use or the structure. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1278, § 2, 11-13-01) 
Note- Formerly § 1213. 
DIVISION 13. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 1230 - Purpose. 
(a)  Within the districts established by this chapter [Appendix] or amendments thereto, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and characteristics of use which were lawful before this chapter [Appendix] was passed or amended, which will be nonconforming. 
(b)  Such nonconformities are hereby declared to be incompatible with the character of the districts in which they occur. Nonconformities shall be permitted to remain until the right to maintain them is lost as provided in this division, but it is the intent of this division that such continuance should not be indefinite and that the nonconformities shall gradually be removed. 
(c)  Except as provided in this division, no nonconformity shall be increased, enlarged upon, expanded, extended, repaired after damage to over fifty (50) percent of the value of the structure or resumed after discontinuance as specified herein. In determining the question of whether a structure has been damaged to over fifty (50) percent of the value of the structure, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  The Zoning Administrator shall inspect the structure, if so permitted. The Zoning Administrator, using recognized procedures and standards in that profession, shall determine, if possible, whether or not the structure has been damaged to over fifty (50) percent of the value of the structure. 
(2)  If the Zoning Administrator may not be able to make such determination without further information from the owner of the structure, the Administrator will request from the owner a scope of work and estimated cost of repair, prepared by a general contractor, and a copy of any contract for the repairs between the owner and general contractor. The Zoning Administrator shall compare the cost of repair with the assessed value of the structure, to determine if the structure has been destroyed by more than fifty (50) percent of the value of the structure. 
(3)  If the Zoning Administrator is unable to make the determination as to whether a structure has been damaged to over fifty (50) percent of its value, the Zoning Administrator shall use the best available information to make this determination. 
(4)  After a structure has been damaged to over fifty (50) percent of its value, the owner shall have twelve (12) months after the date of the damage to obtain a building permit for reconstruction, in a manner consistent with this chapter [Appendix], or removal of the structure. The Zoning Administrator may grant one (1) extension for up to four (4) additional months, to address circumstances caused by acts of God, insurance delays, strikes, civil commotion, war, or other factors beyond the control of the owner. The request for extension must be in writing and be received by the Zoning Administrator prior to the expiration of the original permit. 
(5)  This section shall apply to legal nonconforming structures, as well as to conforming or legal nonconforming structures containing nonconforming uses. 
(d)  No nonconformity shall undergo a change in character of the use in existence upon adoption of the Zoning Ordinance, as Ordinance No. 1137. Any nonconformity that underwent or undergoes a change in character after that point lost or loses its status as a legal nonconformity under Ordinance No. 1137, adopted April 22, 1997; and at that point constituted and constitutes a violation of this division, not entitled to protection as a legal nonconformity. Whether a nonconformity has been increased in size and scope is merely one (1) circumstance relevant to the determination of whether the character of the use has been changed. Where the character of a nonconformity changes, it ceases to enjoy the exemption from the Zoning Ordinance which is protected by the "then existing" use. 
(e)  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this division shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building, for which no site plan is required, on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of this chapter [Appendix] or amendments thereto and upon which actual building construction has been carried out diligently. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been subsequently begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction; provided, that work shall be carried on diligently. Nothing in this subsection shall affect the operation of Section 5133, "Approved Final Site Plan-Term of Validity," of this ordinance. 
(f)  Where a site development plan is valid and a building permit has been obtained for construction but the site development plan expires before construction begins, then subsection (e) above applies. 
(g)  For purposes of this division, the value of the structure shall be derived from the then current records of the Montgomery County Commissioner of Revenue. 
(h)  Where changes to a structure or lot render the structure or lot inconsistent with this chapter [Appendix], and where those changes result from acquisition of property for public purpose under threat of, or by condemnation, the structure or lot shall not because of that factor be deemed a legal nonconforming structure or lot and shall not because of that factor be inconsistent with this chapter [Appendix]. 
Sec. 1231 - Nonconforming lots of record. 
(a)  In any district in which single-unit dwellings are permitted, a single-unit dwelling and customary accessory building may be erected on any single undeveloped lot of record at the effective date of this division or amendments thereto; but only if such lot cannot be combined with another adjoining undeveloped lot or lots under the same ownership in order to establish a lot or lots conforming to the requirements of this division. 
This section shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the applicable zoning district requirements for area or frontage, or both; provided that all requirements, except area or frontage of the lot, or both, shall be complied with as for other residences in the same district. 
(b)  If two (2) or more undeveloped lots or combinations of developed and undeveloped lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage under single ownership are of record at the effective date of this chapter [Appendix] or amendments thereto, and if all or parts of the lots do not meet the minimum requirements for lot frontage and area herein established, the lots involved shall be considered an undivided parcel for the purposes of this division, and no portion of such lots or parcels shall be used or sold in a manner to diminish compliance with the requirements of this division as to lot frontage and area. 
(c)  If two (2) or more lots or portions of lots with continuous frontage under single ownership are of record at the effective date of this chapter [Appendix] or amendments thereto, and if all or parts of the lots are required for the existing structure or structures to meet the minimum site development regulations herein established, the lots involved shall be considered an undivided parcel for the purposes of this division, and no portion of such lots or parcels shall be used or sold in a manner to diminish compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1215, § 3, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 1232 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 1233 - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where a structure lawfully exists at the effective date of this chapter [Appendix] or amendments thereto which could not be built or placed under the terms of this chapter [Appendix] by reason of restrictions on area, bulk, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may continue so long as it remains otherwise lawful, and so long as it is maintained in the condition that existed on the effective date of this chapter [Appendix], subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No nonconforming structure may be altered in a way which increases the nonconformity. However, a principal structure which is nonconforming due to encroachment into a required yard may be enlarged within or coextensive with the plane of the structure, so long as no new nonconformity is thereby created. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in Section 1235 of this Appendix, if a nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged, and the cost of restoring the structure to its condition does not exceed fifty (50) percent of current assessed value of the entire structure, then the structure may be restored to its original nonconforming condition, provided that a building permit is secured, reconstruction is started within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the damage, and such reconstruction is diligently pursued to completion. The building official shall determine the cost of restoration. 
(3)  If such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved or shall be removed from the Town of Blacksburg. The word "structure" shall specifically include manufactured homes. 
(4)  This subsection shall not apply to a bed and breakfast service. The existence of any nonconformity with respect to the structure or use of the dwelling unit housing the bed and breakfast service shall not constitute a basis for denial of the conditional use permit. The proper use of any such structure for a bed and breakfast service shall not constitute an extension, enlargement, reconstruction, or alteration of the nonconforming structure. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 4, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 1234 - Nonconforming uses of buildings, structures, and land. 
(a)  Where, at the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto, lawful use exists of buildings, structures, or land, individually or in combination, which use is made no longer permissible under the terms of this division as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long as the then existing or a more restricted use continues and it is not discontinued for more than two years, and so long as the nonconforming use does not undergo a change in character of the use in existence upon adoption of the Zoning Ordinance on April 22, 1997, as Ordinance No. 1137. Any nonconforming use that underwent or undergoes a change in character, after that point lost or loses its status as a legal nonconformity use under Ordinance No. 1137, adopted April 22, 1997; and, at that point constituted and constitutes a violation of this division, not entitled to protection as a legal nonconforming use. If buildings or structures in such nonconforming use be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered, use thereafter shall conform to the regulations of the district in which they are located. 
(b)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter [Appendix] in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. No additional buildings or structures shall be constructed to carry out or support the non-conforming use on the site. 
(c)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the effective date of this division or amendment thereto, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building, and no such extension shall cause a change in character of the use in existence upon the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance on April 22, 1997, as Ordinance No. 1137. 
(d)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(e)  No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel unoccupied by such use at the time of the adoption or subsequent amendment of this chapter [Appendix]. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to a bed and breakfast service. The existence of any nonconformity with respect to the structure or use of the dwelling unit housing the bed and breakfast service shall not constitute a basis for denial of the conditional use permit. The proper use of any such structure for a bed and breakfast service shall not constitute an extension, enlargement, reconstruction, or alteration of the nonconforming structure. 
(g)  Where there is both a nonconforming structure and a nonconforming use with respect to the same structure, in case of conflict, the rules on nonconforming uses set out in this section shall apply. 
(h)  The landowner or the homeowner may remove a nonconforming manufactured home unit, and replace it with another comparable manufactured home unit. In a mobile or manufactured home park, a single-section home may replace a single-section home, and a multi-section home may replace a multisection home. The owner of a valid nonconforming mobile or manufactured home not located in a mobile or manufactured home park may replace that home with a newer manufactured home, either single or multi-section, that meets current HUD standards. The nonconforming status shall be retained. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1308, § 3, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 2, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 1235. - Residential or commercial buildings damaged by natural disaster. 
    If a nonconforming residential or commercial building is damaged or destroyed by fire, natural disaster or other act of God, such building shall be repaired, rebuilt or replaced to eliminate or reduce the nonconforming features to the extent possible, without the need to obtain a variance as provided in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2310. If such building cannot be repaired, rebuilt or replaced except to restore it to its original nonconforming condition, the owner shall have the right to do so. The owner shall apply for a building permit and any work done to repair, rebuild or replace such building shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. Any work done to repair, rebuild or replace such building shall be in compliance with the provisions of the local floodplain regulations adopted as a condition of participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. Unless such building is repaired or rebuilt within two (2) years of the date of the natural disaster or replaced within two (2) years of the date of the natural disaster or other act of God, such building shall only be repaired, rebuilt or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. However, if the nonconforming building is in an area under a federal disaster declaration and the building has been damaged or destroyed as a direct result of conditions that gave rise to the declaration, then the owner shall have an additional two (2) years for the building to be repaired, rebuilt or replaced as otherwise provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 1236 - Nonconforming parking lots. 
(a)  Nonconforming parking lots may continue to be used after a change in use of the structures they serve. 
(b)  Additions to nonconforming parking lots shall conform to all requirements of Article V. 
(c)  Owners of nonconforming parking lots may make certain modifications to the parking lot, without bringing the parking lot into conformity with the requirements of Article V, as follows: 
(1)  Landscaping, provided that the required minimum number of parking spaces is preserved. 
(2)  Resurfacing. 
(3)  Any other modification to the parking lot, not exceeding 75% of the paved area of the parking lot. 
(d)  The owner of an existing nonconforming gravel parking lot may use this parking lot in conjunction with the structure for which the parking lot was designed, where there is a change in use of the structure with no requirement for additional parking spaces. Where additional parking spaces are required, the new parking area shall conform to all requirements of this ordinance. 
(e)  If the owner of the gravel parking lot paves it, the owner shall bring the parking lot into conformity with all requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 5, 9-12-00) 
Sec. 1237 - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Except where otherwise provided, in cases where signs existing as of the date of the adoption of this ordinance exceed the total allowable sign area for the subject parcel, no additional signs shall be permitted thereon. 
(b)  Maintenance. All nonconforming signs may be maintained and repainted but shall not be maintained in such a manner as to increase the degree of nonconformity. A nonconforming sign may be repaired provided it has not been damaged in excess of fifty percent of its replacement value. Any freestanding nonconforming sign may be modified so long as the proposed modification brings the nonconforming sign into structural conformity with the provisions of this division. 
(c)  A permit shall be required for the repair or modification, including a change in sign faces, of any nonconforming sign. Sign faces or messages may be replaced on any nonconforming sign, provided no structural changes are required to make the replacement. The Town Council finds that a legal nonconforming sign structure or use representing a business, entity, or message that is no longer in existence constitutes a change in character of this structure or use. A sign shall be considered abandoned if the business for which the sign was erected has not been in operation for a period of at least two (2) years. After a reasonable attempt to notify the property owner, the Town may order the removal of the nonconforming, abandoned sign. The Town through its own agents or employees may enter the property upon which the sign is located and remove any such sign whenever the owner has refused to do so. The cost of such removal shall be chargeable to the owner of the property. Nothing herein shall prevent the Town from applying to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order requiring the removal of such abandoned nonconforming sign by the owner by means of injunction or other appropriate remedy. 
(d)  Any nonconformity of an underlying use, structure, or lot shall not be ascribed to a sign pertaining to that use, structure, or lot. The conformity or not of the sign shall be determined independently of the determination of the conformity of the use, structure, or lot, to which the sign pertains. Any such sign shall be subject to the sign regulations of the zoning district in which the use is located. 
(Ord. No. 1339, § 3, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1369, § 1, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 12-11-07) 
Sec. 1238 - Overhead utility poles. 
    Certain minor modifications of overhead utility poles shall be permitted. These minor modifications include, but are not limited to, the addition of brackets up to 24 inches in length, in-line relocations, addition of guy wires and poles, a single additional crossarm, replacement with taller poles, and limited pole relocations to accommodate minor line adjustments. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 3, 7-11-06) 
Note- Formerly § 1239 
DIVISION 14. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 

Sec. 1240 - Generally. 
(a)  The Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) shall consist of at least five (5) members and may consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the Circuit Court. The Circuit Court may appoint not more than three (3) alternate members, whose qualifications, terms and compensation shall be the same as those of regular members. Terms of office shall be for five (5) years. The secretary of the board shall notify the court at least thirty (30) days in advance of the expiration of any term of office and promptly if any vacancy occurs. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of the member whose term became vacant. One (1) member of the board may be a member of the Planning Commission. A member whose term expires shall continue to serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. Members of the board shall hold no elected public office, except that one (1) member may be on the Planning Commission. 
(b)  The BZA shall develop, adopt and maintain by-laws that govern its operation. 
(c)  The BZA shall elect from its membership a chair and a vice-chair to serve in the absence of the chair, and other such officers as may be necessary. These officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. The Administrator shall serve as secretary to the board without vote and the Town Clerk shall record the minutes. 
(d)  For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the board and the board shall offer an equal amount of time in a hearing on the case to the applicant, appellant or other person aggrieved under Code of Virginia § 15.2-2314 and the town staff. Code of Virginia § 15.2-2308.1 shall govern the provision of materials related to a particular case and ex parte communication. The board shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may consider necessary. 
(e)  The board shall keep a full public record of its proceeding, including minutes of its proceedings and other official actions, which shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk and shall submit a report of its activities to the Town Council at least once a year. The meetings of the board shall be held at the call of its chair and at such times as the board may determine. The chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(f)  Members of the board may receive such compensation as may be authorized by the Town Council, and members shall be removable for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office, or for other just cause, by the circuit court, after hearing held after at least fifteen (15) days' notice. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1768, § 1, 9-8-15 ) 
Sec. 1241 - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The BZA shall have the power and duty to hear and decide appeals from any written order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this ordinance. The determination of the administrative officer shall be presumed to be correct. At a hearing on an appeal, the administrative officer shall explain the basis for his or her determination after which the appellant has the burden of proof to rebut such presumption of correctness by a preponderance of the evidence. No such appeal shall be heard except after notice and hearing as provided by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204. For purposes of this section, "determination" means any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer. Any appeal of a determination to the board shall be in compliance with this section, notwithstanding any other provision of law, general or special. 
(b)  The BZA shall consider any applicable ordinances, laws and regulations in making its decision. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, general or special, a variance shall be granted if (i) the evidence shows that the strict application of the terms of the ordinance would unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property or (ii) that the granting of the variance would alleviate a hardship due to a physical condition relating to the property or improvements thereon at the time of the effective date of the ordinance, and the following are shown: 
(i)  The property interest for which the variance is being requested was acquired in good faith and any hardship was not created by the applicant for the variance; 
(ii)  The granting of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and nearby properties in the proximity of that geographical area; 
(iii)  The condition or situation of the property concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the ordinance; 
(iv)  The granting of the variance does not result in a use that is not otherwise permitted on such property or a change in the zoning classification of the property; and 
(v)  The relief or remedy sought by the variance application is not available through a special exception process that is authorized in the Zoning Ordinance pursuant to Code of Virginia § 15.2-2309(6) or the process for modification of a zoning ordinance pursuant to Code of Virginia § 15.2-2286(A)(4) at the time of the filing of the variance application. 
    No variance request shall be considered by the BZA until after notice and hearing as provided by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204. When giving any required notice to the owners, their agents or the occupants of abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected, the BZA may give such notice by first-class mail rather than by registered or certified mail. In addition, posting of the property shall be required as provided for in Zoning Ordinance § 1153. 
    In granting a variance, the BZA may impose such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed structure or use as it may deem necessary in the public interest, and may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, general or special, the property upon which a property owner has been granted a variance shall be treated as conforming for all purposes under state law and local ordinance; however, the structure permitted by the variance may not be expanded unless the expansion is within an area of the site or part of the structure for which no variance is required under the ordinance. Where the expansion is proposed within an area of the site or part of the structure for which a variance is required, the approval of an additional variance shall be required. 
    With respect to signs, the power to grant variances shall not extend to an economic hardship related to the cost, size, or location of a new sign or to the convenience of the applicant; and it shall not extend to the convenience of regional or national businesses which propose to use a standard sign when it does not conform to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  The BZA shall have the power and duty to hear and decide appeals from any written decision of the Administrator. No such appeal shall be heard except after notice and hearing as provided by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204. 
(e)  The BZA shall have the power and duty to hear and decide applications for interpretation of the official zoning map where there is uncertainty as to the location of a district boundary. No such determination shall be made except after notice and hearing as provided by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204. Any property owner affected by a determination of the location of the boundary must be notified by first class mail prior to any such determination. After notice and hearing, the BZA may interpret the map in such a way to carry out the intent and purpose of this ordinance. However the BZA shall not have the power to change substantially the locations of the district boundaries as established by the Zoning Ordinance. This authority of the BZA to determine the location of district boundaries shall not be construed as the power to rezone property. 
(f)  The board, by resolution, may fix a schedule of regular meetings, and may also fix the day or days to which any meeting shall be continued if the chair, or vice-chair if the chair is unable to act, finds and declares that weather or other conditions are such that it is hazardous for members to attend the meeting. Such finding shall be communicated to the members and the press as promptly as possible. All hearings and other matters previously advertised for such meeting in accordance with Code of Virginia § 15.2-2312 shall be conducted at the continued meeting and no further advertisement is required. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 7, 9-12-00; readopted 10-10-00; Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 1768, § 1, 9-8-15 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1247, § 7, adopted Sept. 12, 2000, was reconsidered and readopted on Oct. 10, 2000. 
Sec. 1242 - Applications for variances. 
(a)  Applications for variances may be made by any property owner, tenant, government official, department, board or bureau of the Town. All applications shall be submitted to the Administrator in accordance with rules adopted by the BZA. All applications and accompanying maps, plans or other information shall be transmitted promptly to the secretary of the BZA who shall place the application on the agenda to be acted upon by the BZA, within ninety (90) days of the filing of the application. No such application shall be heard except after notice and hearing as provided by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2204, as amended. The Administrator shall transmit a copy of the application to the Commission, which may send a recommendation to the BZA, or appear as a party at the hearing. 
(b)  Prior to the initiation of an application for a variance, the applicant shall produce satisfactory evidence that any delinquent real estate taxes owed, which have been properly assessed against the subject property, have been paid. 
Sec. 1243 - Applications for appeals. 
    Appeals to the BZA may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, or board of the Town affected by any decision of the Administrator, or from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by any other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this ordinance. Appeals must be made within thirty (30) days after the entry of the decision appealed by filing with the Administrator and with the BZA a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the BZA all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. A decision by the BZA on an appeal taken pursuant to this Section shall be binding upon the owner of the property that is the subject of such appeal only if the owner of such property has been provided notice of the zoning violation or written order of the zoning administrator in accordance with this Section. The owner's actual notice of such notice of zoning violation or written order or active participation in the appeal hearing shall waive the owner's right to challenge the validity of the BZA's decision due to failure of the owner to receive the notice of zoning violation or written order. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the Administrator certifies to the BZA that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed unless a restraining order is granted by the BZA, or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the Administrator and for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 1244 - Procedures for variances and appeal. 
(a)  The BZA shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to all parties of interest, and decide the same within ninety (90) days of the filing of the appeal. In exercising its power, the BZA may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify an order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from. Failure of the BZA to take action within the ninety (90) day time limit results in a denial of the application. (Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
(b)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the BZA shall be necessary to reverse any order, decision, requirement, or determination of an administrative officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the BZA is required to pass under the terms of this ordinance, or to effect any variance from this ordinance. 
(c)  The BZA shall keep minutes of its proceedings and other official actions which shall be filed in the Office of the BZA. All records shall be public records. The chair of the BZA, or in his or her absence, the acting chair, may administer oaths, and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
Sec. 1245 - Certiorari to review decision of BZA. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the BZA, or any aggrieved taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the Town may file with the Circuit Court a petition requesting a writ of certiorari in the manner provided by Code of Virginia § 15.2-2314. 
(Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13) 
DIVISIONS 15-16. - [RESERVED] 

Secs. 1246-1269. - [Reserved]. 
DIVISION 17. - ACCESSORY APARTMENT PERMIT PROGRAM 

Sec. 1270 - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Accessory apartments are not "by right" uses and have not been permitted for many years. However, the Blacksburg Town Council has determined that, under certain circumstances, it may be appropriate to allow an accessory apartment in conjunction with a detached single family home through an annual permit program. Done successfully, an accessory apartment permit program can promote home ownership, owner residency, affordable housing, aging in place, mixed age and income neighborhoods, and university related student or faculty housing. 
(b)  The majority of Virginia Tech students live off campus in different types of housing. Based on its experience with absentee landlords and single family homes rented by students, the Blacksburg Town Council has found that owner occupied properties in the town are better maintained and cause fewer problems in residential neighborhoods. The owner occupancy requirement in this accessory apartment permit program exists as a counterbalance to prevent neighborhood problems such as noise and trash that may be created by the additional housing that will be permitted. Owner occupancy is also consistent with a primary goal of this program, which is to provide aging-in-place options. It is for these reasons that the Town Council finds that the owner occupancy requirement will prevent the deterioration of neighborhoods and is substantially related to land use impact, making it a land use regulation instead of a regulation of the land owner. Because of the importance of owner occupancy in the Town's creation of this accessory apartment permit program, this requirement shall not be considered to be severable. 
(c)  Because of these concerns about residential over-occupancy and impacts on neighborhood character, accessory apartments shall be permitted only under the conditions set forth in this division and Zoning Ordinance § 4201. 
( Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 4-11-17 ) 
Sec. 1271 - General provisions. 
(a)  Accessory apartments are permitted only in the RR-1, RR-2 and R-4 zoning districts. 
(b)  Lots that are non-conforming with regard to minimum lot size are eligible for an accessory apartment provided that no additions or changes to the footprint of the existing structure occur. 
(c)  The primary dwelling unit or accessory apartment must be owner occupied. 
(d)  The owner must reside on the premises for at least nine (9) calendar months cumulatively in a calendar year. If an owner will be in residence less than nine (9) months in any calendar year, then the Planning and Building Department must be informed and the owner will not be permitted to rent the accessory apartment during that year. 
(e)  No accessory apartment may be created or rented without first obtaining a permit from the Town of Blacksburg. Applicants may register at any time during the calendar year. Registration must be renewed annually. The permit does not run with the land, so any new owner must complete an application for rental of an accessory apartment. 
(f)  The apartment permit registration program does not supersede any applicable private deed restrictions or covenants governing a property. 
(g)  Owners participating in the accessory apartment permit program are not eligible to rent the property as a homestay (regulated in Chapter 6 of the Town Code). 
(h)  The owner shall sign an affidavit before a notary public stating that he or she occupies either the primary dwelling unit or the accessory apartment. The affidavit will also state that, should the owner choose not to participate in the program in the future, the unit will not be rented as an accessory apartment. Upon the sale of the property, a new owner shall be required to register and sign a new affidavit. 
(i)  As part of the accessory apartment permit program, property owners will consent to comply with the applicable standards of the program and consent to inspection at reasonable times by Town staff for compliance. 
(j)  Failure to comply with the standards of the program, including all occupancy and use and design standards, may result in revocation of approval for the accessory apartment and the use must cease and no further application will be approved for a period of one (1) year from the revocation. A written revocation notice will be sent to the property owner. Appeal of a revocation will be heard before the Board of Zoning Appeals in the manner outlined in Zoning Ordinance § 1243, et. seq. 
(k)  "Owner" means the following: 
(1)  An individual who possesses, as shown by a recorded deed, fifty (50) percent or more ownership in the property, and occupies the dwelling unit with a bona fide intent to make it his or her primary residence; or 
(2)  An individual who is a trustor of a family trust that possesses fee title ownership to the property and was created for estate planning purposes by one (1) or more trustors of the trust. Such individual must occupy the dwelling unit owned by the family trust with a bona fide intent to make it his or her primary residence. Each living trustor of the trust shall so occupy the dwelling unit except for a trustor who temporarily resides elsewhere due to a disability or infirmity. In such event, the dwelling unit shall nevertheless be the domicile of the trustor during the trustor's temporary absence. 
(3)  A person who meets the requirements of the preceding sub-sections (1) and (2) shall not be deemed an owner occupant if the property on which the dwelling unit is located has more than one (1) owner and all owners of the property do not occupy the dwelling unit with a bona fide intent to make the dwelling unit their primary residence. 
(4)  A claim that a person is not an owner occupant may be rebutted by documentation, submitted to the Planning and Building department, showing that the person who occupies the primary dwelling unit has a bona fide intent to make that unit his or her primary residence as indicated by the following documents that show such person: 
i.  Is listed as a primary borrower on documents for any loan presently applicable to the property where the dwelling unit is located; 
ii.  Has claimed all income, deductions, and depreciation from the property on his or her tax returns for the previous year; 
iii.  Is the owner listed on all rental documents and agreements with tenants who occupy the dwelling unit, including any accessory apartment; 
iv.  Is the owner listed on all insurance, utility, appraisal, or other contractual documents related to the property; and 
v.  Is a full-time resident of Virginia for state income tax purposes. 
(5)  Any person, or group of persons, who fails, upon request of the Planning and Building department, to provide any of the documents set forth in the preceding sub-sections or who provides a document showing that ownership of a dwelling unit is shared among persons who do not all occupy the dwelling unit shall mean for the purpose of this section that such person or persons shall not be deemed an "owner" for the purposes of this section. 
(l)  Before a permit is issued, the owner shall sign a notarized owner occupancy covenant that will be recorded in the Montgomery County Circuit Court land records. This covenant is intended to make the requirements of this program clear to prospective purchasers. 
( Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 4-11-17 ) 
DIVISION 18. - TEMPORARY USE PERMITS 

Sec. 1280 - Purpose. 
(a)  There are certain temporary uses that by their nature require additional regulation, beyond the general requirements applicable to a particular zoning district, to protect the welfare, safety and convenience of the public. The impacts of temporary uses are generally quantifiable and subject to mitigation by imposition of specific standards. Such uses may be allowed within designated zoning districts under the controls, limitations and regulations of the Temporary Use Permit established by this division. 
(b)  The Zoning Administrator may approve a Temporary Use Permit under the provisions of this division after concluding that the proposed temporary use complies with the applicable Use and Design Standards for the use. 
( Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 1281 - Application. 
(a)  An application for a Temporary Use Permit may be made by (i) any person who is a property owner or (ii) by any lessee with written permission from the owner. 
(b)  The application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the Planning and Building Department. All information required for evaluation of the application shall be supplied and the applicant shall remit the fee established by Town Council for such permit. No application shall be deemed filed until all submission requirements have been met. 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator shall approve or deny an application for a Temporary Use Permit within forty-five (45) calendar days of filing. In the event the Zoning Administrator denies any application, the Zoning Administrator shall clearly identify the deficiencies that are the basis for the denial by reference to specific zoning ordinance sections and requirements. 
(d)  Whenever a Temporary Use Permit is denied by the Zoning Administrator, the applicant may take either of the following actions in lieu of accepting the decision as final: 
(1)  Revise the application to satisfy the stated reason for denial, in which case the revised application shall be handled as a new application; or 
(2)  Appeal the denial to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Zoning Ordinance § 1243. 
( Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 1282 - Revocation or expiration of temporary use permit. 
(a)  A Temporary Use Permit may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator at any time due to the failure of the permit holder to observe all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. Notice of the revocation shall be made in writing. Any person aggrieved by such notice may appeal the revocation to the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Zoning Ordinance § 1243. 
(b)  A Temporary Use Permit shall be issued on an annual basis. Temporary Use Permits shall automatically expire twelve (12) months after the date of issuance and must be renewed by filing a new application and receiving approval from the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 1283 - Temporary use permit general requirements. 
(a)  All temporary uses shall satisfy the applicable Use and Design Standards. 
(b)  Issuance of a permit shall be conditioned upon the applicant's consent to reasonable inspections initiated by the Zoning Administrator to verify compliance with the requirements of this division, and a right of access for the Zoning Administrator to make such inspections. 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator shall have no authority to vary, modify, or waive any of the regulations or standards prescribed for any use for which a Temporary Use Permit is required, except that the Zoning Administrator may waive some or all application submission requirements that do not apply in a given situation. 
(d)  The Zoning Administrator may require a bond or other suitable guarantee sufficient to ensure (i) that signs, trash, temporary structures and debris will be removed from the site and from the immediate vicinity of the site; (ii) that the activity will not remain for longer than a temporary period; and (iii) compliance with applicable town ordinances. Such bond or guarantee shall be not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), depending on the nature and extent of the proposed use. The bond or guarantee shall be forfeited to the Town if (i) the site is not adequately cleared of all trash, debris, signs and temporary structures, (ii) if the activity remains on the site after expiration of the permit, or (iii) if substantive violations of any applicable town ordinances occur. 
(e)  All activities to be conducted pursuant to a Temporary Use Permit shall be in compliance with all applicable town, county, state, and federal regulations. 
(f)  Use of all buildings and structures as part of a Temporary Use Permit shall be in compliance with all applicable building code regulations. 
( Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 1284 - Temporary use permit-Types and zoning districts. 
    The following Temporary Use Permit Types are allowed in the listed zoning districts: 
(a)  Itinerant Vendor -General Commercial (GC), Research and Development (R&D), and Office (O). 
(b)  Mobile Food Vendor -General Commercial (GC), Research and Development (R&D), Office (O), Industrial (I), Planned Commercial (PC), Planned Industrial (PI), and Planned Residential (PR) on commercially designated parcels only. 
( Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 1-12-16 ) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS AND USE TYPES 

Sec. 2100 - Rules of construction. 
    The following rules for general construction of language shall apply to this ordinance: 
    The specific shall control the general. 
    The word "person" includes a "firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company," as well as an "individual." 
    Any words pertaining to gender shall be interchangeable. The word "he" shall mean "she," and "she" shall mean "he." 
    The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied." 
    The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." 
    The present tense includes the future tense; the singular number includes the plural; the plural number includes the singular. 
    The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" or "should" is permissive. 
    All public officials, bodies, and agencies referred to in this ordinance are those of the Town of Blacksburg, Virginia, unless otherwise specifically indicated. 
Sec. 2101 - Terms not defined. 
    Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted meaning, or such as the context may imply. 
Sec. 2102 - Use types; generally. 
(a)  The purpose of the USE TYPES is to establish a classification system for land uses and a consistent set of terms defining uses permitted within various zoning districts. The Use Types section also facilitates the process of determining the applicable use type of any activity not clearly within any defined use type. 
(b)  In the event of any question as to the appropriate use type of any existing or proposed use or activity, the Administrator shall have the authority to determine the appropriate use type. In making such determination, the Administrator shall consider the operational and physical characteristics of the use in question and shall consider the classification contained in the most recent edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. In addition, the Administrator shall consider the specific requirements of the use in common with those included as examples of Use Types. Those examples, when included in use type descriptions, are intended to be illustrative, as opposed to exclusive lists. The Administrator may also determine that a proposed use or activity is sufficiently different from any use type listed below and will require an amendment to the text of this ordinance. 
(c)  The Administrator shall make such determinations of appropriate Use Types in writing, which shall include an explanation of the reasons for the determination. 
(d)  A determination of the Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to the procedures for administrative appeals outlined in Article I, Division 14. 
Sec. 2103 - Definitions of terms and use types. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, the words and phrases listed below in this section shall have the meanings described below: 
    ACCESSORY APARTMENT-(See Residential Dwelling). 
    ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE-A building or structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. Where an accessory building or structure is attached to the principal building in a substantial manner, as by a wall or roof, such accessory building shall be considered a part of the principal building. 
    ACCESSORY USE-A use of land or a building or structure or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building or structure and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
    ACTIVE RECREATION USES-includes, but is not limited to, pedestrian trails, bicycle trails, tennis courts, multi-use paved areas, swimming and boating areas, playgrounds and play fields and bridle paths. 
    ADDITION-Any increase to the gross floor area of a structure. 
    ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES-Governmental offices providing administrative, clerical or public contact services that deal directly with the citizen. Typical uses include federal, state, county, city and Town offices. 
    ADMINISTRATOR-The Zoning Administrator of the Town of Blacksburg, Virginia, or an authorized agent thereof, also referred to in this ordinance as the Zoning Administrator. 
    ADULT CABARET-A building or portion of a building regularly featuring dancing or other live entertainment if the dancing or entertainment that constitutes the primary live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibition of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT-Any adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, or video-viewing booth or arcade booth. 
    ADULT MEDIA-Magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, cd-roms or other devices used to record computer images, or other media that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER-An establishment that shows sexually oriented movies, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exhibition of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as a significant part of its business. 
    ADULT STORE-An establishment that: Offers for sale or rent items from any of the following categories: (a) adult media, (b) sexually oriented goods, or (c) goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for specified sexual activities; and the combination of such items constitutes more than 15 percent of its stock in trade or occupies more than 15 percent of its gross public floor area; and where there is no on-site consumption of the goods, media or performances for sale or rent. 
    ADVERTISING SIGN-A sign, including a billboard, which directs attention to a business, commodity, activity, service or product not conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where it is located. 
    A-FRAME OR EASEL SIGN-Any upright sign with a rigid supporting frame either in the form of an inverted "V" or in the form of an easel. These signs are typically used to display a temporary message and are not permanently affixed to the ground. 
    AFFORDABLE HOUSING-Housing that is affordable to families with incomes at or below 80% of the area median income, provided that the occupant pays no more than 30% of his or her gross income for gross housing costs, including utilities. As a guideline, the 1990 United States Census establishes median family income for Blacksburg at $35,617. Housing affordable to families with incomes at or below 80% of the median is priced at approximately $70,000.00. 
    AGENT-One who represents another, called the principal, in dealings with third persons. The agent undertakes some business by authority of the principal. The principal is the property owner. 
    AGGRIEVED PERSON-A person or group of people with an immediate, pecuniary and substantial interest in an action taken by the Administrator or Board of Zoning Appeals under this ordinance, as opposed to a remote or indirect interest. 
    A person is also aggrieved if the person suffers a denial of some personal or property right or imposition of a burden or obligation different from that suffered by the public in general. 
    AGRICULTURAL SERVICES-An establishment primarily engaged in providing services specifically for the agricultural community which is not directly associated with a farm operation. Included in this use type would be servicing of agricultural equipment, independent equipment operators, and other related agricultural services. 
    AGRICULTURE-The use of land for the production of food and fibre, including farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry. A garden accessory to a residence shall not be considered agriculture. The keeping of a horse, cow, pig, sheep, goat, or chicken shall constitute agriculture regardless of the size of the animal and regardless of the purpose for which it is kept. (Ord. No. 1188, § 1, 11-10-98) 
    ALTERATION-Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or interior partitions, or any enlargement or reduction of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or a structure from one (1) location to another. The addition of bedrooms, kitchens, and bathrooms to an existing residential structure. 
    AMATEUR RADIO TOWER-A structure on which an antenna is installed for the purpose of transmitting and receiving amateur radio signals erected and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC. 
    ANTIQUE SHOPS-A place offering primarily antiques for sale. An antique for the purposes of this ordinance shall be a work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object, or the like, of or belonging to the past, at least 30 years old. 
    ATTACHED SIGN-Any sign attached with the sign face substantially parallel to the wall, structure, roof, canopy, marquee or porch of the structure. 
    ATTIC-The part of a structure which is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing. Where the combined floor areas with ceiling height equal to or greater than seven (7) feet exceed fifty (50) percent of the gross floor areas of that living level, then that floor level is not considered an attic under this ordinance and must be included in the calculation of gross floor area for floor area ratio. 
    AUTOMOBILE DEALERSHIP-The use of any building, land area or other premise for the display of new and used automobiles, trucks, vans, or motorcycles for sale or rent, including any warranty repair work and other major and minor repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
    AUTOMOBILE PARTS/SUPPLY, RETAIL-Retail sales of automobile parts and accessories. Typical uses include automobile parts and supply stores which offer new and factory rebuilt parts and accessories. 
    AUTOMOBILE RENTAL/LEASING-Rental of automobiles and light trucks and vans, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles for rent or lease. Typical uses include auto rental agencies and taxicab dispatch areas. 
    AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SERVICES-Repair of automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and parts. Typical uses include tire sales and installation, wheel and brake shops, oil and lubrication services and similar repair and service activities where minor repairs and routine maintenance are conducted. 
    AVIATION FACILITY-Landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities, and related facilities for operation, service, fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales, and rental of aircraft, and including activities directly associated with the operation and maintenance of airport facilities and the provision of safety and security. 
    AWNING-A shelter constructed of rigid or nonrigid materials on a supporting framework, either freestanding, or projecting from and supported by an exterior wall of a building. 
    AWNING SIGN-Any sign applied directly to the surface or incorporated into the design of an awning or canopy attached to a building facade. 
    BANNER-A sign applied to cloth, paper, flexible plastic, or fabric of any kind and generally intended to be displayed on a temporary basis. 
    BASE FLOOD/100-YEAR FLOOD-The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    BASE FLOOD ELEVATION-The Federal Emergency Management Agency designated 100-year water surface elevation. 
    BASEMENT-Any floor at least half of which is subgrade (below ground level). 
    BED AND BREAKFAST-(See Residential Dwelling). 
    BEDROOM-A room in a dwelling which may be occupied for sleeping purposes. Every room which is at least seventy (70) square feet in area, having at least one (1) window facing directly to the outdoors or to a court, which is not the kitchen, living room, dining room, bathroom, closet, hall, storage or utility space or similar area, shall be considered a bedroom. 
    BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS-The term Board of Zoning Appeals shall refer to the Town of Blacksburg Board of Zoning Appeals, also referred to in this ordinance [article] as BZA. 
    BOARDING HOUSE-(See Residential Dwelling). 
    BREWPUB-A restaurant/brewery that sells the majority of its beer on site. The beer is brewed primarily for sale in the restaurant and bar. The beer is often dispensed directly from the brewery's storage tanks. Where allowed by law, brewpubs often sell beer "to go" and/or distribute to off site accounts. Off site sales is limited and not the primary use. 
    BROADCASTING OR COMMUNICATION TOWER-Any unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of radio, television, radar, cellular telephone, personal paging device, specialized mobile radio (SMR), and similar services. A Broadcasting or Communication Facility usually consists of an equipment shelter or cabinet, a support tower or other structure used to achieve the necessary elevation, and the transmission or reception devices or antenna. Excluded are amateur radio towers, which are described separately. Also excluded are wireless communication antennas which fit the definition of Utility Services, Minor, above. 
    BUFFER YARD-A yard improved with screening and landscaping materials required between abutting zoning districts of differing intensities or between adjoining land uses for the purpose of decreasing the adverse impact of differing uses and districts. 
    BUILDING-Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, activity, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind. 
    BUILDING COVERAGE-That portion of a lot, which when viewed from directly above, would be covered by any building or structure. For the purposes of this definition, lot shall include contiguous lots of the same ownership within a single zoning district which are to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. 
    BUILDING, FRONT-The side of a building which faces the front of the lot upon which the building is located (see "Lot, Front"). 
    BUILDING LINE-A straight line extending from the front, side, or rear of a building, coincident with the plane of the facade closest to the lot line. 
    BUILDING SEPARATION-The minimum horizontal distance between two (2) buildings on adjacent lots or across a street or alley. 
    BULLETIN BOARD-A wall-mounted sign for public or permitted civic uses, oriented to viewers already on site, on which notices of public interest are temporarily posted. 
    BUSINESS OR TRADE SCHOOLS-A use providing education or training in business, commerce, language, or other similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as an educational facility, either primary and secondary, or college and university, or as a home occupation. 
    BUSINESS SIGN-A sign which directs attention to a profession or business conducted, or to a commodity, service, activity or entertainment sold or offered, upon the premises where the sign is located, or in the building to which the sign is affixed. 
    BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES-Establishments or places of business engaged in the sale, rental or repair of office equipment, supplies and materials, or the provision of services used by office, professional and service establishments. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops, convenience printing and copying establishments, as well as temporary labor services. 
    CABINET SIGN-A separate sign structure having definitive geometric limits and depth which encloses a particular message. Signs such as, but not limited to, plexiglass face signs shall be considered cabinet signs. Freestanding letters, numerals or symbols affixed to or painted on a wall or similar surface shall not be considered cabinet signs. 
    CALIPER-The diameter of the trunk of a tree at the height of twelve (12) inches above grade. 
    CAMPGROUNDS-Facilities providing camping or parking areas and incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles and/or tents. 
    CAMPS-A use which primarily provides recreational opportunities of an outdoor nature on a daily or overnight basis. Included in this use type would be scout camps, religious camps, children's camps, wilderness camps, and similar uses which are not otherwise specifically described in this ordinance. 
    CAMPSITE-A designated plot of ground within a campground intended or used for the exclusive occupancy by a tent, recreational vehicle, or a vacation cottage. 
    CANOPY-Awning, marquee. 
    CAR WASH-Washing and cleaning of vehicles. Typical uses include automatic conveyor machines and self-service car washes. 
    CEMETERY-Land used or dedicated to the burial of the dead, including crematoriums, mausoleums, necessary sales and maintenance facilities. Mortuaries shall be included when operated within the boundary of such cemetery. 
    CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE-For the purposes of this ordinance, official certification that premises conform to all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and may be lawfully used or occupied. 
    CLINIC-A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an out-patient basis including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration and services to outpatients, employees, or visitors. The term, "clinic" includes immediate care facilities, where emergency treatment is the dominant form of care provided at the facility. 
    CLUB-A use providing educational, meeting, or social facilities for civic or social clubs, fraternal/sororal organization, and similar organizations and associations, primarily for use by members and guests. Recreational facilities, unless otherwise specifically cited in this section, may be provided for members and guests as an accessory use. A Club does not include a building in which members reside. A student center is a club. 
    COMMERCIAL INDOOR AMUSEMENT-Establishments which provide multiple coin operated amusement or entertainment devices or machines as other than an incidental use of the premises. Such devices would include pinball machines, video games, and other games of skill or scoring, and would include pool and/or billiard tables, whether or not they are coin operated. Typical uses include game rooms, billiard and pool halls, and video arcades. 
    COMMERCIAL INDOOR ENTERTAINMENT-Predominantly spectator uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include motion picture theaters, and concert or music halls. 
    COMMERCIAL INDOOR SPORTS AND RECREATION-Predominantly participant uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, ice and roller skating rinks, indoor racquetball, swimming, and/or tennis facilities. 
    COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT-Predominantly spectator uses conducted in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include sports arenas, motor vehicle or animal racing facilities, and outdoor amusement parks. 
    COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR SPORTS AND RECREATION-Predominantly participant uses conducted in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, miniature golf, swimming pools, tennis courts, outdoor racquetball courts, motorized cart and motorcycle tracks, and motorized model airplane flying facilities. 
    COMMERCIAL VEHICLE REPAIR SERVICES, MAJOR-Repair of construction equipment, commercial trucks, agricultural implements and similar heavy equipment, including automobiles, where major engine and transmission repairs are conducted. Typical uses include automobile and truck repair garages, transmission shops, radiator shops, body and fender shops, equipment service centers, machine shops and other similar uses where major repair activities are conducted. 
    COMMISSION-The term Commission shall mean the Planning Commission of the Town of Blacksburg, Virginia. 
    COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES-Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms. Excluded from this use type are facilities classified as Major Utility Services or Broadcasting or Communication Towers. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service centers, telegraph service offices or film and sound recording facilities. 
    COMMUNITY RECREATION-A private recreational facility for use solely by the residents and guests of a particular residential development, planned unit development, or residential neighborhood, including indoor and outdoor facilities. These facilities are usually proposed or planned in association with development and are usually located within or adjacent to such development. 
    CONDITIONAL USE-A use with operating and/or physical characteristics different from those uses permitted by right in a given zoning district which may, nonetheless, be compatible with those by right uses under appropriate conditions and with adequate public review. Conditional uses are allowed only at the discretion and approval of the Town Council, following review and recommendation by the Planning Commission in accordance with Article I, Division 8 [of this Appendix]. 
    CONSTRUCTION SALES AND SERVICES-Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in retail or wholesale sale, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures, but specifically excluding automobile or equipment supplies otherwise classified herein. Typical uses include building material stores and home supply establishments. 
    CONSTRUCTION SIGN-A temporary sign identifying an architect, developer, builder, general contractor, subcontractor, material supplier, and or financing entity participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located. 
    CONSTRUCTION YARDS-Establishments housing facilities of businesses primarily engaged in construction activities, including outside storage of materials and equipment. Typical uses are building contractor's yards. 
    CONSUMER REPAIR SERVICES-Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals and households, rather than businesses, but excluding automotive and equipment repair Use Types. Typical uses include appliance repair shops, shoe repair, watch or jewelry repair shops, or repair of musical instruments. 
    CONVENIENCE STORE-See "Neighborhood Convenience Store." 
    CORRECTION FACILITIES-A public or privately operated use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined, designed to isolate those individuals from a surrounding community. 
    COUNTY-Shall mean Montgomery County, Virginia. 
    CULTURAL SERVICES-A library, museum, or similar public or quasi-public use displaying, preserving and exhibiting objects of community and cultural interest in one (1) or more of the arts or sciences. 
    CUSTOM MANUFACTURING-Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing, within enclosed structures, involving the use of hand tools, or the use of mechanical equipment commonly associated with residential or commercial uses, or a single kiln. 
    DANCE HALL-Establishments in which more than ten (10) percent of the total floor area is designed or used as a dance floor, or where an admission fee is directly collected, or some other form of compensation is obtained for dancing. 
    DAY CARE CENTER-Any facility operated for the purpose of providing care, protection and guidance to ten (10) or more individuals during only part of a twenty-four (24) hour day. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day care centers for individuals, and other similar uses but excludes public and private educational facilities or any facility offering care to individuals for a full twenty-four (24) hour period. 
    DECK-A structure, without a roof, directly adjacent to a principal building, which has an average elevation of thirty (30) inches or greater from finished grade. A deck may be constructed of any materials. 
    DEDICATION-The transfer of private property to public ownership upon written acceptance. 
    DEVELOPMENT -Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or storage of equipment or materials. The term "development" includes construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, and demolition of a structure. It also includes the erection of a new sign. 
    DIRECTIONAL SIGN-A sign which provides onsite directional information for the convenience of the public. 
    DRIVEWAY-A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking area, parking space, garage, dwelling, or other structure. 
    DWELLING UNIT-A room or group of rooms connected together containing cooking, bathroom and sleeping facilities constituting a separate, independent housekeeping unit, physically separated from any other dwelling unit in the same structure. 
    EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES, COLLEGE/UNIVERSITY-An educational institution authorized by the Commonwealth of Virginia to award associate, baccalaureate or higher degrees, and facilities associated with it. This term includes academic buildings, administrative facilities, dormitories, special housing, parking areas, dining halls and other physical plants associated with the college or university use. 
    EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES, PRIMARY/SECONDARY-A public, private or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary, junior and/or senior high school levels in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    EQUIPMENT SALES AND RENTAL-Establishments primarily engaged in the sale or rental of tools, trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar industrial equipment, and the rental of mobile homes. Included in this use type is the incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing of such equipment. 
    ESTABLISHMENT-Any entity or individual conducting a business, profession, or trade; and any entity or individual conducting a civic, community service, or nonprofit activity. 
    EVENT CENTER-A multi-purpose venue facility hosting special events such as graduations, weddings, anniversaries, holiday gatherings, trade shows, corporate functions, parties, concert settings, and general get-togethers. An event center could typically have a catering kitchen, indoor and/or outdoor seating, and a stage or event area. 
    FACADE-An entire outside wall of a structure, including wall faces, parapets, fascia, windows, and doors, of one complete elevation. 
    FAIR MARKET VALUE-The price at which property would change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither being under any compulsion to buy or to sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. 
    FAMILY-One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or under approved foster care. 
    FAMILY DAY CARE HOME-(See Residential Dwelling). 
    FARM EMPLOYEE HOUSING-(See Residential Dwelling). 
    FARMLAND-Land in active agricultural or horticultural use. 
    FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS-Provision of financial and banking services to consumers or clients. Walk-in and drive-in services to consumers are generally provided on site. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan associations, savings banks, credit unions, lending establishments and automatic teller machines (ATMs). 
    FLOOD-A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas. 
    FLOOD, ONE HUNDRED YEAR-A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year). 
    FLOODPLAIN-(1) A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; or, (2) an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of run-off or surface waters from any source. 
    FLOODWAY-The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    FLOOR AREA, GROSS-The sum of the horizontal areas of the several stories of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls, or in the case of a common wall separating two buildings, from the centerline of such common wall. Gross floor area shall exclude basements and attics. The surface area of tennis courts, swimming pools, driveways, surface parking spaces, decks, patios, and porches, is not included in the total gross floor area. 
    FLOOR AREA RATIO-The ratio of gross floor area of all structures on a lot to total lot area. 
    FORESTRY OPERATIONS-The use of land for the raising and harvesting of timber, pulp woods and other forestry products for commercial purposes, including the temporary operation of a sawmill and/or chipper to process the timber cut from that parcel or contiguous parcels. Excluded from this definition shall be the cutting of timber associated with land development approved by the Town, which shall be considered accessory to the development of the property. 
    FRATERNITY OR SORORITY SIGN-A sign displaying the name of, or identifying in words, letters, or symbols, a fraternity or sorority. 
    FREESTANDING SIGN-A sign standing on the ground. Such signs are usually, but not necessarily always supported from the ground by one or more poles or posts or similar uprights with or without braces. This term includes benches and A-frame or sandwich board signs. 
    FRONTAGE WIDTH-(See Lot, Frontage). 
    FULL CUTOFF LUMINAIRE-An outdoor light fixture shielded in such a manner that all light emitted by the fixture is projected below the horizontal plane. 
    FUNERAL HOME-Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the dead for burial, and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes or mortuaries. 
    GARDEN CENTER-Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in retail or wholesale (bulk) sale, from the premises, of trees, shrubs, seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, plants and plant materials primarily for agricultural, residential and commercial consumers. Such establishments typically sell products purchased from others, but may sell some material which they grow themselves. Typical uses include nurseries, plant stores and lawn and garden centers. 
    GASOLINE STATION-Any place of business with fuel pumps and underground storage tanks which provides fuels and oil for motor vehicles. 
    GENERAL OFFICE-Use of a site for business, professional, or administrative offices, excluding medical offices. Typical uses include real estate, insurance, management, travel, computer software or information systems research and development, or other business offices; organization and association offices; or law, architectural, engineering, accounting or other professional offices. Retail sales do not comprise more than an accessory aspect of the primary activity of a General Office. VPI & SU offices shall not house any regularly-scheduled classes. 
    GLARE-The effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
    GOLF COURSE-A tract of land for playing golf, improved with tees, greens, fairways, hazards, and which may include clubhouses and shelters. Included would be executive or par 3 golf courses. Specifically excluded would be independent driving ranges and any miniature golf course. 
    GROCERY STORE-A retail business primarily engaged in the sale of unprepared food for personal or household preparation and consumption. Such a facility may also engage in incidental sales of prepared foods for personal consumption on-or off-site. 
    GROSS PUBLIC FLOOR AREA-The total area of the building accessible or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion picture theaters, motion picture arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas, storage areas visible from such other areas, restrooms (whether or not labeled "public"), plus aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas. 
    GROUP HOME-(See Residential Dwelling). 
    GUIDANCE SERVICES-A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative, or similar services for persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction, or similar conditions for only part of a twenty-four hour day. 
    HALFWAY HOUSE-An establishment providing accommodations, rehabilitation, counseling, and supervision to persons suffering from alcohol or drug addiction, to persons re-entering society after being released from a correctional facility or other institution, or to persons suffering from similar disorders. 
    HEIGHT, BUILDING-The vertical distance measured from the adjoining grade at the front entrance of the building or structure to the highest point of the structure. For corner lots, the building height shall be the average of the front height defined above and the building side height adjacent to the street. The building side height shall be defined as the vertical distance measured from the lowest adjoining grade on the side adjacent to the street to the highest point of the structure. 
    HEIGHT, STRUCTURE-The distance between the highest point of any structure, and the lowest grade adjacent to the structure. 
    HEIGHT, TREE-The measurement taken from the top of the root ball to the top of the trunk. (Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
    HISTORIC ARCHITECTURE REVIEW BOARD-A board appointed by Town Council to effectuate the provisions of this article for the protection and preservation of historic or archaeological sites or structures in the Town. 
    HISTORIC AREA-An area containing buildings or places in which historic events occurred or having special public value because of notable architectural or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the Town, of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation. A historic area is not currently in, or does not currently constitute, an historic district. 
    HISTORIC DISTRICT-A site, structure, landmark, one or more of them, or a group of them, which have unique architectural, historic, cultural, or archaeological importance to the Town, the Commonwealth, or the nation, and which are designated on the Town's official zoning map as constituting an historic district and subject to the provisions of this article. 
    HISTORIC DISTRICT SIGN-A sign within an Historic District announcing the location of an historic district, landmark, historic area, monument or property. These signs may have information relating to the historic, architectural, cultural, or archaeological significance of the historic area. 
    HISTORIC SITE-A site or structure which may not be included in an historic district, but which has an important historic, architectural or cultural significance to the Town, commonwealth, or nation. An historic site is registered with the Virginia Landmarks Registry or the National Register of Historic Places. 
    HISTORIC SITE SIGN-An on-premises sign that identifies the location of, and provides information about, a historic place, structure, or event. 
    HISTORIC STRUCTURE-Any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    HOME FOR ADULTS-(See Residential Dwelling). 
    HOME OCCUPATION-An accessory use of a dwelling unit for gainful employment involving the production, provision, or sale of goods and/or services. 
    HOSPITAL-A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons primarily on an in-patient basis and including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment diagnostic services, training, research, administration, and services to patients, employees, or visitors. 
    HOTEL/MOTEL/MOTOR LODGE-A building or group of attached or detached buildings containing lodging units intended primarily for rental or lease to transients by the day, week or month. Such uses generally provide additional services such as daily maid service, restaurants, meeting rooms and/or recreation facilities. 
    HOUSEHOLD PET-Animals that are kept for personal use or enjoyment within the home. Household pet shall include but is not limited to dogs, cats, birds, and rodents. Household pet does not include farm animals, such as horses, ponies, cows, pigs, chickens, goats, sheep. 
    IDENTIFICATION SIGN-A permanent on-premises sign announcing the name of a subdivision, multi-unit residential development, church, institution, school, park, shopping center, industrial park, public or quasi-public area or similar type use. An identification sign is not a business sign. 
    ILLUMINATED SIGN-Any sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign. 
    INDUSTRY, HEAVY-Manufacturing or other enterprises with significant external effects, or which pose significant risks due to the involvement of explosives, radioactive materials, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, or other hazardous materials in the manufacturing or other process. 
    INDUSTRY, LIGHT-Enterprises engaged in the processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and products, from processed or previously manufactured materials. Light industry is capable of operation in such a manner as to control the external effects of the manufacturing process, such as smoke, noise, soot, dirt, vibration, odor, etc. A machine shop is included in this category. Also included is the manufacturing of apparel, electrical appliances, electronic equipment, camera and photographic equipment, ceramic products, cosmetics and toiletries, business machines, fish tanks and supplies, food, paper products (but not the manufacture of paper from pulpwood), musical instruments, medical appliances, tools or hardware, plastic products (but not the processing of raw materials), pharmaceuticals or optical goods, bicycles, any other product of a similar nature. 
    INDUSTRY, MEDIUM-Enterprises in which goods are generally mass produced from raw materials on a large scale through use of an assembly line or similar process, usually for sale to wholesalers or other industrial or manufacturing uses. Medium industry produces moderate external effects such as smoke, noise, soot, dirt, vibration, odor, etc. 
    INTERIOR PARKING LOT ISLAND-An island or planter that is surrounded on at least 3 sides by a parking lot or access road. 
    ITINERANT VENDOR-Any person who engages in, does, or transacts a temporary or transient business in the Town and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, occupies any location for a maximum of seven (7) consecutive days at one time for no more than four (4) times per calendar year. For the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance, "Mobile Food Vendor" has a separate definition. 
    KENNEL, COMMERCIAL-The boarding, breeding, raising, grooming or training of two or more dogs, cats, or other household pets of any age not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises, and/or for commercial gain. 
    KENNEL, PRIVATE-The keeping, breeding, raising, showing or training of 4 or more dogs over six months of age for personal enjoyment of the owner or occupants of the property, and for which commercial gain is not the primary objective. 
    LABORATORY-A facility for scientific laboratory research in technology-intensive fields or a facility for scientific laboratory analysis of natural resources, medical resources, and manufactured materials. 
    LAMP-The component of a luminaire that produces light, also referred to as a bulb. 
    LANDFILL, RUBBLE-The use of land for the legal disposal of only inert waste. Inert waste is physically, chemically and biologically stable from further degradation and considered to be nonreactive, and includes rubble, concrete, broken bricks, and block. 
    LANDMARK-An individual site or feature (which may or may not be a structure), or a site with a structure or structures on it, of particular importance because of its unique architectural, historical, cultural, or archaeological features, designated an historic district and eligible for designation on the National Register of Historic Places. 
    LANDSCAPING-The improvement of the appearance of an area by the planting of trees, grass, shrubs, or other plant materials, or by the alteration of the contours of the ground. 
    LAUNDRY-Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, cleaning or dyeing services other than those classified as Personal Services. Typical uses include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, diaper services, or linen supply services. 
    LIFE CARE FACILITY-A residential facility primarily for the continuing care of the elderly, providing for transitional housing progressing from independent living in various dwelling units, with or without kitchen facilities, and culminating in nursing home type care where all related uses are located on the same lot. Such facility may include other services integral to the personal and therapeutic care of the residents. An Assisted Living facility would be included in this definition. 
    LIGHT TRESPASS-Light sources casting excessive light upon adjacent property or upon a public right-of-way, also called light spillover. 
    LIGHTING, PUBLIC PARK AND RECREATION AREA FIELD-Any and all lighting devices and the operation of such devices for the purpose of illuminating a public park and recreation area field in a manner that is less restrictive or more intensive than the standards set forth in Section 5601 for "Exterior Lighting." 
    LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET-Space for bulk pick-ups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. 
    LOCATION SIGN-An off-premises sign which directs attention to the approximate location of a church, school or other nonprofit institution. 
    LOT-A parcel of land intended to be separately owned, developed, or otherwise used as a unit, established by plat, subdivisions or as otherwise permitted by law. 
    LOT, CORNER-A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. 
    LOT COVERAGE-That portion of a lot, which when viewed from directly above, would be covered by any building or structure, parking and loading areas and other surface which is impermeable or substantially impervious to storm water. Gravel parking areas shall be considered impervious. For the purposes of this definition, lot shall include contiguous lots of the same ownership within a single zoning district which are to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. 
    LOT, DEPTH OF-The average horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines. The average shall consist of the horizontal distances of the side lot lines and the distance of a line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines. 
    LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE-A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street other than an alley. Double frontage lots may be referred to as through lots. 
    LOT, FRONT-The side of a lot which abuts a public street is the front of the lot. For corner lots, the shortest side fronting upon a street should be considered the front of the lot. Where buildings exist on the lot, the frontage may be established by the orientation of the buildings, or of the principal entrance, if building orientation does not clearly indicate lot frontage. Where no other method determines conclusively the front of a lot, due to the shape of the lot, the Administrator will select one (1) frontage on the basis of the following considerations: the adjacent street with the greatest traffic flow, context of the surrounding development, topography of the area, and retention of mature trees. 
    LOT FRONTAGE-The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the point where the side lot lines intersect the street right-of-way of an improved and publicly maintained street. All sides of a lot which abut a street shall be considered frontage. On curvilinear streets the arc between the side lot lines shall be considered the lot frontage. (Ord. No. 1166, adopted 9-9-97) 
    LOT, INTERIOR-A lot, other than a corner lot, which has only one frontage on a street other than an alley. 
    LOT, IRREGULAR-A lot of such a shape or configuration that technically meets the area, frontage and width to depth requirements of this ordinance but meets these requirements by incorporating unusual elongations, angles, curvilinear lines unrelated to topography or other natural land features. 
    LOT OF RECORD-A lot whose existence, location, and dimensions have been legally recorded or registered in a deed or on a plat in the Clerk's office of the Circuit Court of Montgomery County. 
    LOT, PIPESTEM-A "panhandle" or "flag" shaped lot with its widest point set back from the road at the rear of another lot (called the pipe), and having a thin strip of land connecting to the road to provide legal access and frontage (called the stem). Pipestem lots are also referred to as panhandle lots or flag lots. 
    LOT, SIDE-The side lines of a lot which are adjacent to and intersect the lot front line. For corner lots, the side not determined to be the lot front shall be the lot side. 
    LOT, WIDTH OF-The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at the required front setback. 
    LOWEST FLOOR (FLOODPLAIN)-The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements. 
    LUMEN-The standard unit of measurement of luminous flux. 
    LUMINAIRE-The complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps with the components designed to distribute light, position and protect the lamp, and to connect the lamp to the power supply, also referred to as a fixture. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME-(See Residential Dwelling). 
    MANUFACTURED HOME LOT, YARDS-A site for the placement of a manufactured home within a manufactured home park. Unlike other lots, a manufactured home lot may not be formally subdivided into a discrete taxable parcel of land. The front yard of a manufactured home lot generally lies between the manufactured home hitch and the street, across the entire width of the lot. The side yards of the lot lie between the front and back of the manufactured home and the lot line. The rear yard is opposite the front yard, between the side of the manufactured home and the rear lot line, extending the entire width of the lot. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME SALES-Establishments primarily engaged in the display, retail sale, rental, and minor repair of new and used manufactured homes, modular homes, parts, and equipment. 
    MEDICAL OFFICE-Use of a site for facilities which provide diagnoses, minor surgical care and outpatient care on a routine basis, but which does not provide overnight care or serve as a base for an ambulance service. Medical offices are operated by doctors, dentists, or similar practitioners licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. Emergency treatment is not the dominant type of care provided at this facility. 
    MEMORIAL SIGN-A monument or plaque designed to commemorate or honor the memory of a person or event, oriented to viewers already on site. Such sign shall be wall mounted or integral to the principal structure. Common examples are a cornerstone or a dedicated plaque. 
    MENU OR DAILY SPECIAL SIGN-An on-premises attached sign used for the display of a menu or daily special related to a restaurant or other personal service. 
    MINI-WAREHOUSE-A building designed to provide rental storage space in cubicles where each cubicle has a maximum floor area of 400 square feet. Each cubicle shall be enclosed by walls and ceiling and have a separate entrance for the loading and unloading of stored goods. 
    MOBILE FOOD VENDOR-A readily movable wheeled cart, trailer, or vehicle designed and equipped for the preparing, serving, and/or selling of food and operated at temporary locations. This definition shall include food trucks and food carts. 
    MODULAR HOME-A dwelling unit constructed on-site in accordance with the Virginia One and Two-family Dwelling Code and composed of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation. 
    MONUMENT SIGN-A freestanding sign attached to a continuous structural base, which base is not less than half the width of the message portion of the sign and is permanently affixed to the ground. Monument signs do not include freestanding signs supported by poles. 
    MULTI-ESTABLISHMENT BUILDING-A structure containing more than one establishment. 
    MULTIFAMILY DWELLING-(See Residential Dwelling). 
    MXD DEVELOPMENT-The aggregated contiguous tract(s) of land included in a single application for zoning to a Mixed Use Development district. MXD Development zonings that may coincidentally abut each other but which were zoned as Mixed Use Development at different times for different purposes shall be treated as separate MXD Developments. 
    MXD DEVELOPMENT BOUNDARY-The boundary defining each MXD Development. 
    NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES-The official list, maintained by the National Park Service of the United States Department of the Interior, of historic resources considered by that agency to be worthy of preservation. 
    NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE STORE-Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed goods for household consumption, such as prepackaged food and beverages, and limited household supplies and hardware. Convenience stores shall not include fuel pumps or the selling of fuel for motor vehicles. Typical uses include neighborhood markets and country stores. 
    NEIGHBORHOOD IDENTIFICATION SIGN-A monument style sign located in or near a public right-of-way, at or near a neighborhood boundary, displaying the name of a neighborhood. 
    NONCONFORMING BUILDING-Any building the size, dimensions or location of which was lawful when erected or altered, but which fails to conform to the current standards and regulations due to the adoption, revision or amendment of this ordinance. 
    NONCONFORMING LOT-A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which were lawful at the time the lot was created, but which fail to conform to the current standards and regulations due to the adoption, revision or amendment of this ordinance. 
    NONCONFORMING SIGN-Any sign, the area, dimensions or location of which were lawful at the time the sign was erected, but which fail to conform to the current standards and regulations due to the adoption, revision or amendment of this ordinance. 
    NONCONFORMING USE-A use or activity which was lawful when originally established, but which fails to conform to the current standards and regulations due to the adoption, revision or amendment of this ordinance. 
    NONCONTRIBUTING SITE-A site within an historic district that is not relevant to the period for which the district is significant. 
    NURSING HOME-A use providing bed care and in-patient services for persons requiring regular medical attention but excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency medical services and excluding a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease. 
    OCCUPANCY-The period during which one owns, rents, uses, or occupies a certain premises or land. 
    OCCUPANT-A person who, on a regular basis, spends nights at a residence. A person is considered an occupant regardless of whether they spend the majority of their nights at a residence, if the times they do stay overnight are regular and recurrent. In addition, a person shall be considered an occupant if their clothes or other daily living supplies are maintained at the residence. 
    OFFICE SIGN-An attached sign indicating the location of an office. 
    OFF-PREMISES SIGN-Any sign which directs attention to a message, or business, commodity, activity, service or product not conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where the sign is located. These signs may also be known as location signs, billboards, outdoor advertising signs, or general advertising signs. 
    OFF-STREET PARKING AREA-Space provided for vehicular parking outside the dedicated street right-of-way. 
    ON-PREMISES SIGN-Any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, activity, service or product conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where the sign is located. 
    OPEN SPACE-A cohesive body of land designated for agriculture, horticulture, forestry, or open space use, as those terms are defined by Virginia Code 58.1-3230. This definition also includes land in which the Town has an interest of not less than five years' duration which the Town has designated to be retained and used for the preservation and provision of open-space land. 
    OPEN SPACE, COMMON-Land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and may include such complementary structures as are necessary and appropriate. Common open space may include, recreation centers, swimming pools, tennis and basketball courts, and similar facilities. 
    OUTDOOR GATHERING-Any temporary organized gathering expected to attract 500 or more people at one time in open spaces outside an enclosed structure. Included in this use type would be music festivals, church revivals, carnivals and fairs, and similar transient amusement and recreational activities not otherwise listed in this section. Such activities held in public parks or on public school property shall not be included within this use type. 
    OUTDOOR STORAGE-The keeping, in other than a building, of any goods, materials, or merchandise on the same parcel for more than twenty-four consecutive hours. 
    OUTPATIENT SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT CENTER-An establishment which provides patient services primarily related to the treatment of alcohol or other drug or substance abuse disorders, which services include the dispensing and administering of controlled substances and pharmaceutical products by professional medical practitioners as licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia; such an establishment may also provide ancillary mental health treatments. 
    OVERLAY DISTRICT-A district established by this Ordinance to prescribe special regulations to be applied to a site in combination with the underlying or base district. 
    PARKING AREA-A site for surface parking or a parking structure use that provides one (1) or more parking spaces together with drive aisles, turning and maneuvering areas, incorporated landscaped areas, and similar features that meet the requirements established by this ordinance. This use type excludes temporary parking facilities permitted by town code. 
    PARKING AREA CALCULATION-The square foot area of the parking spaces and aisles and interior parking lot islands, excluding access drives that do not have parking spaces within them. 
    PARKING FACILITY-A site for surface parking or a parking structure use that provides parking as the permitted principal use. This use type specifically excludes any on-site or off-site parking accessory to a permitted principal use. 
    PARKING SPACE-An area adequate in size for the purpose of parking one (1) automobile with room for opening doors on both sides. 
    PATIO-A level surfaced area directly adjacent to a principal building which has an average elevation of not more than 30 inches from finished grade, and without walls or a roof. A patio may be constructed of any materials. 
    PAWN SHOP-A use engaged in the loaning of money on the security of property pledged in the keeping of the pawnbroker and the incidental sale of such property. 
    PERSON-An individual, firm, corporation, or association. 
    PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT SERVICES-Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvements and similar services. Typical uses include driving schools, health or physical fitness studios, reducing salons, dance studios, handicraft and hobby instruction. 
    PERSONAL SERVICES-Establishments or places of business engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include beauty and barber shops; grooming of pets; seamstresses, tailors, or shoe repairs; florists; and laundromats and dry cleaning stations serving individuals and households. 
    POLITICAL SIGN-A sign of any political party, group, or idea; or a sign announcing the candidacy of any individual for any public office. 
    PORCH-A roofed open area, which may be glazed or screened, usually attached to or part of and with direct access to or from, a building. 
    PORTABLE SIGN-A freestanding temporary sign that is designed to be moved easily, and is not permanently affixed to the ground. 
    PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER-A portable, weather-resistant receptacle designed and used for the temporary storage or shipment of items, including, but not limited to, household goods, furniture, wares, building materials, equipment or merchandise. The term includes both wheeled trailers and container units that can be detached from a trailer. The term shall not include dumpsters or refuse containers. 
    POST OFFICE-Postal services directly available to the consumer operated by the United States Postal Service. 
    PREMISES-See Lot. 
    PRESERVATION-The act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity, and material of a site, structure, or landmark and their existing form and vegetative cover. Preservation may include initial stabilization work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of these elements. 
    PRIMARY CONSERVATION AREA-The 100-year floodplain, wetlands (including woodlands with wetland soils), steep slopes, and significant wildlife habitats. 
    PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE-A building or structure in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted. 
    PRINCIPAL USE-The main use of land or structures as distinguished from a secondary or accessory use. 
    PRIVATE FARMERS MARKET-The open air sale of agricultural products such as vegetables, fruits, herbs, grains, mushrooms, flowers, potted or bedding plants, honey, meat, dairy or eggs directly to the public by a group of farmers or producers that occurs on a regular basis (once per week or more for a minimum of twenty-six (26) weeks in a calendar year) on privately owned land. Handcrafted products (such as wooden furniture, textiles) or value added products (such as jam, beeswax candles) or other handmade food products (such as baked goods) may be sold, but sellers of these goods may not comprise the majority of the vendors. A Community Supported Agriculture pickup location, but not resale, shall be considered an accessory use to a Private Farmers Market. Flea markets, yard sales and auctions are not "Private Farmers Markets." A wayside stand or an individual selling such items from a truck is not "Private Farmers Market." This use is subject to compliance with the use and design standards contained in zoning ordinance section 4547. 
    PROJECTING SIGN-A sign which is attached perpendicular to a building wall, roof, facade, canopy, marquee or porch. 
    PUBLIC-Unless otherwise specifically indicated, public shall mean anything owned, operated, provided and/or maintained by a local, state, or federal government. 
    PUBLIC ASSEMBLY-Facilities that accommodate public assembly for sports, amusements, or entertainment purposes. Typical uses include auditoriums, sports stadiums, convention facilities, and incidental sales and exhibition facilities. 
    PUBLIC FARMERS MARKET-The open air sale of agricultural products such as vegetables, fruits, herbs, grains, mushrooms, flowers, potted or bedding plants, honey, meat, dairy, or eggs directly to the public by a group of farmers or producers that occurs on a regular basis (once per week or more for a minimum of twenty-six (26) weeks in a calendar year) on land owned by the Town of Blacksburg. Handcrafted products (such as wooden furniture, textiles) or value added products (such as jam, beeswax candles) or other handmade food products (such as baked goods) may be sold, but sellers of these goods may not comprise the majority of the vendors. A Community Supported Agriculture pickup location, but not resale, shall be considered an accessory use to a Public Farmers Market. Flea markets, yard sales and auctions are not "Public Farmers Markets." A wayside stand or an individual selling such items from a truck is not considered "Public Farmers Market." This use is subject to compliance with the Use and Design Standards contained in section 4548. 
    PUBLIC MAINTENANCE AND SERVICE FACILITIES-A public facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing, material storage, and similar activities including street or sewer yards, equipment services centers, and similar uses having characteristics of commercial services or contracting or industrial activities. 
    PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS-Publicly owned and operated parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, indoor/outdoor athletic or recreation facilities, indoor/outdoor shelters, amphitheaters, game preserves, open spaces, and other similar uses. This shall not include Public Recreation Assembly. 
    PUBLIC RECREATION ASSEMBLY-Publicly-owned and operated community, civic, or recreation centers, year-round swimming facilities, or indoor performing arts/auditoriums. 
    PUBLIC SERVICE SIGN-A sign advertising only the name, time and place of any bona fide fair, carnival, festival, bazaar, horse show fund raising activity, or similar event when conducted by or for the benefit of any civic, religious, educational or charitable cause. 
    PUBLIC WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS-A water or sewer system owned and operated by: (1) a municipality or county; OR, (2) a private individual or a corporation approved and properly licensed by the State Corporation Commission prior to the adoption date of this ordinance; AND meeting the requirements of the State Health Department and/or Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
    RAILROAD FACILITIES-Railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities, and terminal facilities. 
    REAL ESTATE SIGN-An on-premises sign for the purpose of advertising the sale or lease, or the completion of the sale or lease, of real estate. 
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE-A vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE-Retail sales of recreational vehicles and boats, including service and storage of vehicles and parts and related accessories. 
    RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY-A use located in a permanent building and providing regular organized religious worship and related incidental activities, except primary or secondary schools and day care facilities. 
    REPLACEMENT COST-The cost of restoring a damaged building or structure to its original condition. Replacement cost shall include reasonable estimates of the cost of materials and labor and shall be compared with the assessed value as determined by the County Assessor to determine the percentage of the cost of improvements. 
    RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT-A business which engages in research, or research and development, of innovative ideas in technology-intensive fields. Examples include research and development of communication systems, transportation, geographic information systems, multi-media and video technology. Development and construction of prototypes may be associated with this use. 
    RESIDENTIAL DENSITY-A measure of bedrooms per acre for each lot. The number of bedrooms for portions of an acre shall be calculated proportionately and rounded down to the next whole bedroom (e.g. at twenty (20) bedrooms per acre, a .96 acre lot = 19.2, that is nineteen (19) bedrooms permitted). 
    RESIDENTIAL DWELLING-A building or part of a building, containing living, sleeping, housekeeping accommodations, and sanitary facilities for occupancy by one (1) or more individuals or families. The following are included as residential dwelling types: 
ACCESSORY APARTMENT-A secondary dwelling unit or units established in conjunction with and clearly subordinate to a primary dwelling unit, whether a part of the same structure as the primary dwelling unit or a detached structure or structures on the same lot. 
ACCESSORY APARTMENT PERMIT PROGRAM-The program established by the Town of Blacksburg for the purpose of regulating accessory apartments created after April 15, 2017. This program does not include lawful non-conforming accessory apartments created prior to 1975 that are documented on the list maintained by the Planning and Building Department. 
BED AND BREAKFAST-A dwelling in which not more than twelve (12) bedrooms are provided for overnight guests for compensation, on daily or weekly basis, with or without breakfast. The serving of meals other than breakfast, or the serving of breakfast to other than overnight guests, shall be considered a restaurant. 
BOARDING HOUSE-A dwelling unit, or part thereof, in which lodging is provided by the owner or operator who resides on the premises to three (3) or more but less than fourteen (14) boarders. Included in this use type are rooming houses and tourist homes. 
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME-A single-family dwelling in which more than five (5) but less than thirteen (13) individuals, are received for care, protection and guidance during only part of a twenty-four (24) hour day. Individuals related by blood, legal adoption or marriage to the person who maintains the home shall not be counted towards this total. The care of five (5) or fewer individuals for portions of a day shall be considered as a home occupation. 
FARM EMPLOYEE HOUSING-A dwelling located on a farm for the purpose of housing an employee of that farm operation and his/her family. Also included in this use type would be multifamily dwelling(s) for seasonal employees in connection with an orchard or other agricultural use which relies on seasonal employees who must be housed. 
GROUP HOME-A licensed residential facility in which no more than eight (8) mentally ill, intellectually or developmentally disabled persons reside, with one (1) or more resident counselors or other staff persons, shall be considered a residential occupancy by a single-family. Mental illness and developmental disability shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance. Such facility shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Behavioral Health and Developmental Services. 
HOME ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY-A residential facility licensed by the Department of Social Services in which no more than eight (8) aged, infirm or disabled persons reside with one (1) or more resident counselors or other staff persons shall be considered a residential occupancy by a single-family. 
HOME FOR ADULTS-A dwelling unit, organized within one (1) or more buildings, providing a residence for more than five (5) persons for purposes of providing special training, education, habilitation, rehabilitation, custodial care or supervision, or providing a residence for the elderly; provided that a licensed residential facility for eight (8) or fewer mentally ill, intellectually or developmentally disabled persons, with one (1) or more resident counselors or other support staff, shall be considered a single-family residence. 
MANUFACTURED HOME-A structure subject to federal regulation, which in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities; and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. Some manufactured homes are also referred to as mobile homes. 
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING-A building or portion thereof which contains three (3) or more dwelling units for permanent occupancy, regardless of the method of ownership. Included in the use type would be garden apartments, low and high rise apartments, apartments for elderly housing and condominiums. 
SHELTER-A facility providing temporary protective sanctuary for victims of crime or abuse including emergency housing during crisis intervention for individuals, such as victims of rape, child abuse, or physical beatings. 
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, ATTACHED-A grouping of three (3) or more single-family dwellings sharing two (2) or more common walls, with each dwelling on its own individual lot. Attached dwellings are not vertically stacked. Common examples are subdivided triplexes and quadplexes. 
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, DETACHED-A site built or modular building designed for or used exclusively as one (1) dwelling unit for permanent occupancy, which is surrounded by open space or yards on all sides, is located on its own individual lot, and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. 
SPECIAL HOUSING-Housing for Greek organizations, service clubs, or other chartered groups bound by a common purpose or national organization. 
TOWNHOUSE-A grouping of three (3) or more attached single-family dwellings in a row in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one (1) or more common walls. 
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING-The use of an individual lot for two (2) dwelling units (each occupied by one (1) family) that share at least one (1) common wall or ceiling that separates living space (i.e., living room, kitchen, bedroom, bathroom, etc.). This use is also referred to as a duplex. The dwelling units may be vertically stacked. The exterior appearance of the whole resembles a single structure. 
    RESOURCE EXTRACTION-A use involving on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources. Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operation, mining, and soil mining. Specifically excluded from this use type shall be grading and removal of dirt associated with an approved site plan or subdivision, or excavations associated with, and for the improvement of, a bona fide agricultural use. 
    RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN-An establishment primarily engaged in the preparation of food and beverages, for either take-out, delivery or table service, served in disposable containers at a counter and a drive-up or drive through service facility, or which offers curb service. 
    RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD-An establishment primarily engaged in the preparation of food and beverages, for either take-out, delivery or table service, served in disposable containers at a counter. This use type does not employ a drive-up or drive-through service facility, and does not offer curb service. 
    RESTAURANT, GENERAL-An establishment engaged in the preparation of food and beverages containing more than two thousand (2,000) gross square feet and characterized primarily by table service to customers in nondisposable containers. 
    RESTAURANT, SMALL-An establishment engaged in the preparation of food and beverages containing no more than two thousand (2,000) gross square feet and characterized primarily by table service to customers in non-disposable containers. Typical uses include cafes, coffee shops, and small restaurants. 
    RETAIL SALES-Sale or rental with incidental service of commonly used goods and merchandise for personal or household use but excludes those classified more specifically by these use type classifications. 
    RETAIL SALES, LARGE FORMAT-Retail sales uses, including those uses classified more specifically by these use type classifications, located in one (1) structure in excess of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet gross floor area, whether on a single lot or contiguous lots owned or operated as associated, integrated or cooperative business enterprises. 
    RETAINING WALL-Any wall built or designed to retain or restrain lateral forces of soil or other materials; the height of the wall shall be similar to the height of the soil or other materials. 
    RETAINING WALL, GABION-A retaining wall consisting of heavy gauge wire boxes enclosing large diameter rocks or other similar materials that are stacked and fastened together, often used for erosion control and soil retainment along river and stream banks. 
    RIGHT-OF-WAY-A legally established area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of passage has been recorded, and which is occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, utility service, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or other similar use. 
    SAFETY SERVICES-Facilities for the conduct of safety and emergency services for the primary benefit of the public, whether publicly or privately owned and operated, including police and fire protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services. 
    SCRAP AND SALVAGE SERVICES-Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of uses or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include paper and metal salvage yards, automotive wrecking yards, junk yards, used tire storage yards, or retail and/or wholesale sales of used automobile parts and supplies. 
    SCREENING-A method of visually shielding or obscuring one (1) abutting or nearby structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation. Screening is intended to substantially, but not necessarily totally obscure visual impacts between adjoining uses. 
    SECONDARY CONSERVATION AREA-Locally significant features of land. These features should be identified on a site-by-site basis. Types of features which may be locally significant include ridge lines, hilltops, windbreaks, stands of mature hardwood trees, woodlands, farmland, wildflower meadows, and views into and out from the site. Wildlife habitats are locally significant features of a site. Where relevant, soils suitable for septic disposal may be considered significant natural resources of a site. Historic and archaeological features, such as old farmhouses, old foundations, traces of old roads, or rail fences, may also be considered locally significant features of land. 
    SEXUALLY ORIENTED GOODS-Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs. 
    SETBACK-The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from a street right-of-way or lot line. 
    SHELTER-(See Residential Dwelling). 
    SHOOTING RANGE, INDOOR-The use of a structure for archery and/or the discharging of firearms for the purposes of target practice or temporary competitions. (Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
    SHOOTING RANGE, OUTDOOR-The use of land for archery and/or the discharging of firearms for the purposes of target practice, skeet and trap shooting, mock war games, or temporary competitions, such as a turkey shoot. Excluded from this use type shall be general hunting, and unstructured and nonrecurring discharging of firearms on private property with the property owner's permission. 
    SIGN-Any presentation or representation by letter, symbol, number or combination thereof which is visible from a public right-of-way, for the purpose of making something known. Signs include, but are not limited to, figures, letters, devices, flags, pennants, emblems and pictures. Signs do not include the interior of buildings and the delineative elements of buildings. 
    SIGN HEIGHT-The vertical distance measured from lowest adjacent grade to the highest point of the sign or sign structure. 
    SIGN SETBACK-The minimum distance required between any property line and any portion of a sign or sign structure. 
    SIGN STRUCTURE-The supports, uprights, bracing or framework of any structure exhibiting a sign, be it single-faced, double-faced, V-type or otherwise. 
    SIGNIFICANT WILDLIFE HABITATS-Habitats of threatened or endangered wildlife species. 
    SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, ATTACHED-A grouping of three (3) or more single-family dwellings sharing two (2) or more common walls, with each dwelling on its own individual lot. Attached dwellings are not vertically stacked. Common examples are subdivided triplexes and quadplexes. 
    SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING, DETACHED-(See Residential Dwelling). 
    SITE-Any geographical area. 
    SLOPES, STEEP-A grade of twenty-five (25) percent or more for a distance of fifty (50) feet or more. 
    SPECIAL HOUSING-(See Residential Dwelling). 
    SPECIALTY SHOP-A small-scale (less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet) retail use which offers for sale items of art or crafts, or which offers for sale items related to a specific theme, e.g., kitchen wares, pet care, VPI & SU gear, etc. 
    SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES-Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast. 
    STABLE, COMMERCIAL-The boarding, breeding or raising of horses or ponies not owned by the owner or occupant of the property or riding of horses by other than the owner or occupant of the property and their non-paying guests. Included in this definition are riding academies. 
    STABLE, PRIVATE-The keeping, breeding, or raising of horses or ponies exclusively for the personal use and enjoyment of the owner or occupant of the property or the riding of horses or ponies by the owner or occupant of the property and their guests. 
    STORY-That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the floor next above it, or if there is not a floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it. 
    STREET-Any vehicular way which: (1) is an existing state or municipal roadway: or, (2) is shown on a plat approved pursuant to law; or, (3) is approved by other official action. The term street shall include road, and highway. Unless otherwise indicated, the term street shall refer to both public and private streets. 
    STREET GRAPHICS-A form of art, such as but not limited to, murals and sculptures, that shall not constitute any type of outdoor advertising of a commercial message. 
    STRIP LIGHTING-Lights in a strip used to outline an portion of a structure. Such lights include, but are not limited to, tubes of neon or fluorescent lights left exposed or enclosed in a translucent structural case that may or may not be displayed as a continuous band around the exterior perimeter or a portion of the exterior perimeter of a structure. 
    STRUCTURE-Anything that is constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, signs, manufactured homes and swimming pools. Walls and fences shall not be deemed structures except as otherwise specifically provided in this ordinance. 
    STUDIO, FINE ARTS-A building, or portion thereof, used as a place of work by a sculptor, artist, or photographer; or used as a place to exhibit and offer for sale works of the visual arts (other than film). 
    SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE-Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT-Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    SURPLUS SALES-Businesses engaged in the sale of used or new items, involving regular or periodic outdoor display of merchandise for sale. Typical uses include flea markets and factory outlets, or discount businesses with outdoor display. 
    SUSPENDED SIGN-A sign which is suspended, parallel or perpendicular from a building wall, roof, facade, canopy, marquee, or porch by means of brackets, hooks, or chains and the like. 
    TEMPORARY SIGN-An attached on-premises sign, made of a nonrigid material, designed and displayed for a seasonal or brief activity such as, but not limited to, sales, specials, promotions, holidays, auctions, business grand openings, and signs advertising the lease or vacancy or rental units in multi-unit residential developments. Symbols, figures, balloons, and other similar items shall be considered temporary signs. 
    TRANSFER STATION-Any storage or collection facility which is operated as a relay point for municipal solid waste which ultimately is to be transferred to a landfill. 
    TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL-A facility for loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers, baggage, and incidental freight or package express between modes of ground transportation, including bus terminals, railroad stations, and public transit facilities. 
    TREE CANOPY-All areas of coverage by plant material exceeding five (5) feet in height. 
    TRUCK TERMINAL-A facility for the receipt, transfer, short term storage, and dispatching of goods transported by truck. Included in the use type would be express and other mail and package distribution facilities, including such facilities operated by the U.S. post office. 
    TWO-FAMILY DWELLING-Two (2) dwelling units which share at least one (1) common wall, each occupied by one (1) family, that separates living space (i.e., living room, kitchen, bedroom, bathroom, etc.); also referred to as a duplex. Each dwelling unit may be vertically stacked if not subdivided. Two-family dwellings may be subdivided along common walls so that each dwelling unit is on its own individual lot. The exterior appearance of the whole resembles a single structure. 
    UTILITY SERVICES, MAJOR-Services of a regional nature which normally entail the construction of new buildings or structures such as generating plants and sources, electrical switching facilities and stations or substations, community waste water treatment plants, and similar facilities. Included in this definition are also electric, gas, and other utility transmission lines of a regional nature which are not otherwise reviewed and approved by the Virginia State Corporation Commission. All overhead service, distribution and transmission lines are included in this definition. 
    UTILITY SERVICES, MINOR-Services which are necessary to support development within the immediate vicinity and involve only minor structures. Included in this use type are small facilities such as transformers, relay and booster devices, and well, water and sewer pump stations. Also included in this use type are wireless communication antennas which are attached to an existing building or structure, including but not limited to utility poles, signs, broadcasting or communication facilities, and water towers, and which are not greater than ten (10) feet in length. 
    VARIANCE-A reasonable deviation from the provisions regulating the shape, size or area of a lot or parcel of land, or the size, height, area, bulk or location of a building or structure when the strict application of the Zoning Ordinance would unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property, and such need for a variance would not be shared generally by other properties, and provided such variance is not contrary to the purpose of the Zoning Ordinance. It shall not include a change in use, which change shall be accomplished by a rezoning or a conditional rezoning. 
    VEGETATIVE BUFFER-Perennial vegetation established or left undisturbed adjacent to the shoreline of a watercourse intended to filter out sediment and other nonpoint source pollutants from runoff before it reaches a watercourse. 
    VETERINARY HOSPITAL/CLINIC-Any establishment rendering surgical and medical treatment of animals. Boarding of animals shall only be conducted indoors, on a short term basis, and shall only be incidental to such hospital/clinic use, unless also authorized and approved as a commercial kennel. 
    VIDEO-VIEWING BOOTH OR ARCADE BOOTH-An enclosure designed for occupancy by no more than five (5) persons, used for presenting motion pictures or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or media, or live performances or lingerie modeling, for observation by patrons therein. 
    VIRGINIA LANDMARKS REGISTER-The official list, maintained by the Department of Historic Resources, of historic resources considered by the Board of Historic Resources to be worthy of historic preservation. 
    V-SHAPED SIGN-A sign with two (2) faces arranged in a V-shaped formation. 
    WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION-Uses including storage, warehousing and dispatching of goods within enclosed structures, or outdoors. Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, moving/storage firms. 
    WAYSIDE STAND-An establishment for the seasonal retail sale of agricultural goods and merchandise primarily produced by the operator on the site, or on nearby property. Agricultural goods produced on other properties owned or leased by the operator may also be allowed provided a majority of the produce comes from land surrounding the wayside stand. This use type shall include agricultural products picked by the consumer. 
    WETLANDS-All lands that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, in 33 C.F.R. 328.3b, dated November 13, 1986. 
    WOODLANDS-Tree stands, lines of trees, and lands in active forestal use. 
    YARD-A required open space on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, unless otherwise provided by this ordinance. 
    YARD, FRONT-A yard between the building line and the street right-of-way extending across the full width of the lot. 
    YARD, REAR-A yard between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the lot extending the full width of the lot. 
    YARD, SIDE-A yard between the side line of the building and the side line of the lot extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
    ZONING ADMINISTRATOR-The Zoning Administrator of the Town of Blacksburg, Virginia, or an authorized agent thereof, also referred to in this ordinance as the Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98-Reorganization of Article; Ord. No. 1206, § 2, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1215, § 5, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1247, § 8, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1278, § 3, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1308, § 4, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 4, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1340, § 1, 8-12-03; Ord. No. 1369, § 2, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 1405, § 1, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 1415, § 4, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1450, § 1, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 1509, § 1, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 1681, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 5-13-14 ; Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-10-14 ; Ord. No. 1768, § 1, 9-8-15 ; Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 1-12-16 ; Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 4-11-17 ; Ord. No. 1845 , § 1, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 1883 , § 1, 3-12-19) 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT STANDARDS 
DIVISION 2. - RURAL RESIDENTIAL 1 

Sec. 3020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Rural Residential district is to provide for residential development at a scale intended to conserve the rural character of the district. Development within the Rural Residential district is intended to promote the following goals and objectives. Development proposals shall be evaluated for their adherence to these goals: 
(1)  Conservation of agricultural and forestal lands, including farm fields and pastures. 
(2)  Conservation of natural resources including wetlands, floodplains, natural drainage ways, aquifer recharge areas, existing tree cover, steep slopes, ridge lines, hilltops, wildlife habitats, deer wintering areas, stream valleys, locations comprising scenic views or scenic view corridors, and other outstanding natural topography. 
(3)  Conservation of a unified open space area. 
(4)  Creation of residential developments on a traditional rural scale, with small villages surrounded by agricultural, forestal, or open space lands. 
(5)  Flexibility and creativity in the design of residential subdivisions, with less suburban-style sprawl and less consumption of open land. 
    These measures will prevent soil erosion by permitting development according to the nature of the terrain, provide larger open areas with greater utility for rest and recreation, and encourage the development of more attractive and economic site design. They will create a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community, and facilitate the provision of parks, forests, playgrounds and other recreational facilities. These goals are intended to preserve existing agricultural, forestal and other lands of significance for the protection of the natural environment. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
Sec. 3021 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses and structures are permitted by right subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this Ordinance: 
Agricultural and Forestry Use Types: 
Agriculture 
Farm Employee Housing 
Forestry Operations 
Kennel, Private 
Stable, Private 
Stable, Commercial 
Wayside Stand 
Residential Use Types 
Home Occupation 
Accessory Apartment as permitted by § 1270 and in compliance with § 4201 
Single-family Dwelling, Detached 
Single-family Dwelling, Attached 
Townhouse 
Two-family Dwelling 
Civic Use Types 
Community Recreation 
Open Space 
Public Parks and Recreational Areas 
Utility Services, Minor 
Miscellaneous Use Types 
Accessory Structures 
Amateur Radio Towers 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 4-11-17 ) 
Sec. 3022 - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses may be allowed in the Rural Residential District by Conditional Use Permit: 
Civic Use Types 
Camps 
Cemetery 
Day Care Center 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Educational Facilities, College/University 
Family Day Care Home 
Home for Adults 
Life Care Facility 
Nursing Home 
Public Maintenance and Service Facility 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious Assembly 
Utility Services, Major 
Commercial Use Types 
Agricultural Services 
Antique Shops 
Bed and Breakfast 
Campgrounds 
Commercial Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Garden Center 
Golf Course 
Kennel, Commercial 
Neighborhood Convenience Store 
Studio, Fine Arts 
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic 
Miscellaneous Use Types 
Broadcasting or Communication Facility (Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97) 
Industrial Use Types 
Custom Manufacturing 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 6, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1258, § 1, 1-9-01; Ord. No. 1308, § 5, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 28, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1513, § 1, adopted Apr. 14, 2009 amended § 3022 as herein set out. Former § 3022 pertained to conditional uses. 
Sec. 3023 - Development standards. 
    Each residential lot shall be of a size and shape to provide a building site which shall be in harmony with the natural terrain and other features of the land. Residential lots shall be designed in such a way as to promote the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance. The following minimum standards shall apply. 
(a)  Density 
Maximum density shall be one (1) dwelling unit per acre, excluding acreage within the 100-year floodplain. Accessory apartments shall not be considered in the density calculation. 
(b)  Minimum Lot Requirements: 
Area: No minimum lot size 
Minimum frontage: Twenty (20) feet on a publicly owned and maintained street 
(c)  Minimum Setback Requirements: 
Front yard: 
(1)  For lots adjoining minor streets: 
Building height 16-35 feet 13 feet Building height 15 feet or less  8 feet  
(2)  For lots adjoining collector roads: 
35 feet from the abutting right-of-way of any collector road of fifty (50) feet or greater in width; 60 feet from the center line of any collector road right-of-way this is less than 50 feet in width. Rear yard: Principle structures 20 feet Side yard: 10 feet, except on corner lots, a side yard facing the street shall be 20 feet Detached garages located at the rear of a lot (i.e. behind the rear building line) and attached to a similar garage on a contiguous lot may be located within the side yard setback.  
(d)  Maximum Floor Area Ratio 
Maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.30, except Townhouse maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.50. 
(e)  Maximum Height of Structures, except church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennae, and radio aerials are exempt: Thirty-five (35) feet. Utility poles may have a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet. 
(f)  The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than three (3) unrelated persons. For a detached single-family dwelling with a nonconforming accessory apartment, or accessory apartment as allowed through the accessory apartment permit program, occupancy shall be calculated cumulatively, to include both the single-family dwelling and the accessory apartment, for a total not to exceed three (3) unrelated persons. 
(g)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1215, § 7, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1649, § 1, 8-14-2012; Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 4-11-17 ) 
Sec. 3024 - Minimum open space. 
    A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the total area shall be designated as permanent open space upon the first subdivision of any parcel subsequent to the creation of this district, or upon the approval of a conditional use permit. This requirement shall be in lieu of the requirements of Division 10 of the Blacksburg Subdivision Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
DIVISION 3. - RURAL RESIDENTIAL 2 

Sec. 3030 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Rural Residential 2 District is to encourage high-quality planned residential development, to preserve agricultural and forestal lands, to maximize the conservation of scenic and recreational open space, and to implement the Comprehensive Plan through the use of open space design and a density bonus system. In reviewing an application for RR2 zoning, the Planning Commission and Town Council should consider, among other things: (Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
(a)  Whether the proposed development will efficiently utilize available land and will protect and preserve to the maximum extent possible natural features of the land such as trees, streams and topographic features; 
(b)  Whether the development will be located in an area in which transportation, police and fire protection, other public facilities and public utilities, including sewerage, are existing or planned and funded with available capacity to adequately serve the development; 
(c)  The extent to which the proposed development is consistent with the Town's comprehensive plan and other adopted plans and policies of the Town and the overall benefits of the development to the Town. 
Rural Residential 2 zoning is a type of planned development residential zoning, tailored to the special needs of the Tom's Creek Basin. As such, the general purposes underlying the planned development residential district, stated in Zoning Ordinance Section 3110 apply equally to the Rural Residential 2 Zoning district. 
Sec. 3031 - Permitted uses. 
    Permitted uses within the Rural Residential 2 District shall be those uses permitted by right or by conditional use permit in the Rural Residential 1 District. Other Use Types which are determined to be appropriate and compatible with the proposed development and surrounding uses may be permitted in the RR2 district where they are specifically proposed in the initial preliminary development plan and approved pursuant to Section 1161. The basic design of the Rural Residential development plan shall be for residential purposes, with all other uses designed to supplement the rural and residential character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 4-11-17 ) 
Sec. 3032 - Site development regulations. 
    Each Rural Residential 2 development shall be subject to the following site development standards. 
(a)  Minimum district size: Thirty (30) acres. 
(b)  Minimum open space: A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the total area shall be designated as permanent open space. 
(c)  Maximum gross density: One (1) dwelling unit per acre, excluding acreage within the 100-year floodplain. Accessory apartments shall not be considered in the density calculation. 
(d)  The maximum gross density may be increased up to a maximum of two (2) units per acre excluded acreage within the 100-year floodplain. Town Council will consider the suitability of the site for the proposed density as well as the quality and quantity of off-site open space proffered by the applicant. Approximately seventy-five (75) percent of proffered open space may be on the off-site parcel. 
(e)  The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family, plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than three (3) unrelated persons. For a detached single-family dwelling with an accessory apartment (as allowed through the accessory apartment permit program), occupancy shall be calculated cumulatively, to include both the single-family dwelling and the accessory apartment, for a total not to exceed three (3) unrelated persons. 
(f)  The Site Development Standards applicable to the Rural Residential 1 Zoning District shall apply to Rural Residential 2 developments, except variations which are specifically approved by Council through the Final Master Plan. Proposed deviations from Rural Residential 1 site development standards shall be identified by the applicant in the preliminary development plan. 
(g)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 9, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1415, § 5, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 4-11-17 ) 
Sec. 3033 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 3034 - Application process. 
    The application procedure for conditional zoning, Article I, Division 6, shall apply to applications for RR2 zoning. 
    The preliminary development plan shall include the proposed minimum building separation, maximum floor-to-area ratio, and proposed setbacks. 
    RR2 zoning constitutes conditional zoning. The proposals in the preliminary development plan shall constitute proffers as outlined in Article I, Division 6 of this chapter [Appendix] and, once accepted by Town Council, the features in the preliminary development plan shall constitute conditions as outlined under those same sections. 
(Ord. No. 1530, § 1, 7-14-09) 
DIVISION 4. - R-4 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 3040 - Purpose. 
    The R-4 Low Density Residential District is provided in recognition of sections of the Town with low density residential development and land which appears appropriate for such development. Among these sections is land where the established use, character or density of development would be best protected by these regulations. The low density residential district is intended to define and protect residential areas of low density from the intrusion of uses not performing a function appropriate to the residential environment. Attractiveness, order and efficiency is encouraged by the requirement of adequate space for individual homes with adequate light, air and space, and maintaining an appropriate density of residential development. This district is intended to add to the physical variety of the overall residential area while promoting balance and stability. 
(Ord. No. 1883 , § 1, 3-12-19) 
Sec. 3041 - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted by right in the R-4, Low Density Residential District: 
Residential 
Single-Family, Detached 
Accessory Apartment as permitted by § 1270 and in compliance with § 4201. 
Home occupations 
Civic 
Community Recreation 
Open Space 
Public Parks and Recreation 
Utility Services, Minor 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory structures 
(b)  The following uses are allowed only by Conditional Use Permit in the R-4, Low Density Residential District: 
Civic 
Administrative Services 
Cemetery 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Center 
Educational Facilities, College/University 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Family Day Care Home 
Home for Adults 
Life Care Facility 
Post Office 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious assembly 
Safety Services 
Utility Services, Major 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting or Communication Facility 
(Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1215, § 8, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1339, § 28, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 4-11-17 ) 
Sec. 3042 - Site development regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: 
(1)  Lot area ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(2)  Lot frontage forty (40) feet. 
(b)  Minimum setback requirements: 
    Front yard thirty (30) feet: 
(1)  The front yard setback may be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet for uses with parking in rear that is fully behind the structure. 
(2)  For infill lots where more than fifty (50) percent of the lots on a block-face are developed, the front yard setback may be reduced to not less than the average of the front yard setbacks of the existing developed lots on the block-face. 
Side yard ten (10) feet, except on corner lots, a side yard facing the street will be twenty (20) feet. 
Rear yard twenty-five (25) feet. 
(c)  Maximum height of structures, except church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennae, and radio aerials are exempt: Thirty (30) feet; or forty (40) feet with an additional one (1) foot setback per foot of additional height. Utility poles may have a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet. 
(d)  Maximum coverage: 
(1)  Lot coverage forty-five (45) percent. 
(2)  Floor area ratio 0.50 FAR. The following definitions will be used for the calculation of Floor Area Ratio within the R-4 zoning district: 
i.  Attic, Habitable-Finished or unfinished area, not considered a story, that complies with all of the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code including, but not limited to, height, size, and conditioning of space, in order for the area to be considered usable occupiable space. 
ii.  Basement, Habitable-Finished or unfinished area, not considered a story, that complies with all of the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code including, but not limited to, height, size, and conditioning of space, in order for the area to be considered usable occupiable space. 
iii.  Floor Area, Gross-The sum of the horizontal areas of the several stories of a building, as measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls, or as measured from the face of the sheathing of the exterior wall, and in the case of a common wall separating two (2) buildings, from the centerline of such common wall. Gross floor area will include habitable basements, habitable attics and heated porches with a roof and walls (whether solid or screened). The surface area of tennis courts, swimming pools, driveways, surface parking spaces, decks, patios, and non-enclosed porches is not included in the total gross floor area. 
(3)  Paved driveways and off-street parking areas located between the front face of the structure and the property line must have, at any point, a maximum width of eighteen (18) feet if the lot width is less than fifty (50) feet and a maximum width of twenty (20) feet if the lot width is fifty (50) feet or greater. No sidewalk or walkway will be allowed immediately adjacent (parallel) to the driveway that has the effect of widening the driveway in excess of the maximum allowed width. No diagonal parking is allowed in the driveway and no driving of a vehicle outside of the driveway. 
(4)  Any such driveways or off-street parking areas existing as of February 12, 2019 that are greater than 20 feet in width may be retained and maintained but may not be expanded in any way. 
(e)  The maximum dwelling unit occupancy is a family plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than three (3) unrelated persons. For a detached single-family dwelling with a nonconforming accessory apartment, or an accessory apartment as allowed through the accessory apartment permit program, occupancy will be figured cumulatively including both the single-family dwelling and the accessory apartment for a total not to exceed three (3) unrelated persons. 
(f)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., will be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 9, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1649, § 1, 8-14-2012; Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 4-11-17 ; Ord. No. 1883 , § 1, 3-12-19) 
DIVISION 5. - R-5 TRANSITIONAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 3050 - Purpose. 
    The Transitional Residential District is to provide for a transitional land use between low density residential and higher intensity land uses. This is a predominantly residential district with neighborhood character. Conditional uses which are sensitive to and reinforce the residential neighborhood character are appropriate. These typically will involve the conversion or replication of single-family houses. Properties along arterial and collector roads are particularly suited for such conditional uses. The livability or small-town character of the Transitional Residential District is made up of tree lined streets, open space, and greenways interspersed within a more urban residential pattern. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 3051 - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted by right in the R-5, Transitional Residential District: 
Residential 
Single-family, Detached 
Two-family dwellings 
Home occupations 
Civic 
Community Recreation 
Open Space 
Public Parks and Recreation 
Utility Services, Minor 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory structures 
(b)  The following uses are allowed only by Conditional Use Permit in the R-5, Transitional Residential District: 
Residential 
Single-family, Attached 
Townhouse 
Multifamily 
Civic 
Administrative Services 
Club 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Center 
Educational Facilities, College/University 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Family Day Care Home 
Home for Adults 
Life Care Facility 
Nursing Home 
Post Office 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious Assembly 
Safety Services 
Shelter 
Utility Services, Major 
Commercial 
Bed & Breakfast 
Clinic 
Neighborhood Convenience 
Parking Facility 
Personal Services 
Studio, Fine Arts 
Office 
Financial Institution 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting or Communication Facility 
(Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1215, § 10, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1339, § 28, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1350, § 1, 2-10-04; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 3052 - Site development regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: 
(1)  Lot area: Eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet, except that townhouses and two-family dwellings constructed on an eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square foot or larger lot may be divided along the common wall or walls. 
(2)  Lot frontage: Forty-five (45) feet, except that a subdivided, two-family dwelling constructed on a lot having forty-five (45) feet or greater lot frontage may divide the lot frontage in half. 
(b)  Maximum density: Twenty (20) bedrooms per acre, except single-unit residential. 
(c)  Minimum setback requirements: 
(1)  Front yard: Thirty-five (35) feet (may be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet for use with parking in the rear or may be reduced to twenty (20) feet for use in the historic overlay district). 
(2)  Side yard: Ten (10) feet, except on corner lots, a side yard facing the street shall be twenty (20) feet or more. 
(3)  Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures, except church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennae, and radio aerials are exempt: Thirty-five (35) feet; or forty-five (45) feet with an additional one (1) foot setback per foot of additional height. Utility poles may have a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet. 
(e)  Maximum coverage: 
(1)  Lot coverage: Fifty-five (55) percent. 
(2)  Floor area ratio: 0.35 FAR. 
(f)  The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than three (3) unrelated persons. For a detached single-family dwelling with a nonconforming accessory apartment, occupancy shall be figured cumulatively including both the single-family dwelling and the accessory apartment for a total not to exceed three (3) unrelated persons. 
(g)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1215, § 11, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1369, § 3, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 1649, § 1, 8-14-2012) 
DIVISION 6. - OTR OLD TOWN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 3060 - Purpose. 
    The Old Town Residential district is created in recognition that those areas adjacent to campus and the Downtown are experiencing pressures for transition to commercial or high density residential use. These areas are the historic heart of the Town and lend much of its small-town character and unique architecture and pattern. The Old Town Residential District is intended to retain and protect that character while allowing broad conditional uses which ease the transition from commercial and campus to residential. The district is designed for a low and medium density residential base, with small scale office, commercial and retail uses in renovated or replicated housing, a dynamic mix of uses linked by a common historic residential character. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 3061 - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted by right in the OTR, Old Town Residential District: 
Residential 
Single-family Detached 
Home Occupations 
Civic 
Community Recreation 
Open Space 
Public Parks and Recreation 
Utility Services, Minor 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory Structures 
(b)  The following uses are allowed only by conditional use permit in the OTR, Old Town Residential District: 
Residential 
Boarding House 
Multifamily Dwelling 
Single-family, Attached 
Two-family Dwelling 
Townhouse 
Civic 
Administrative Services 
Club 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Center 
Educational Facilities, College/University 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Family Day Care Home 
Home for Adults 
Life Care Facility 
Post Office 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious Assembly 
Safety Services 
Shelter 
Utility Services, Major 
Commercial 
Bed and Breakfasts 
Clinic 
Parking Facility 
Restaurant, Small 
Specialty Shops 
Studio, Fine Arts 
Office 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting or Communication Facility 
(Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1215, § 12, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1339, § 28, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 3062 - Site development regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: 
(1)  Lot area: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet; except that townhouses and two-family dwellings constructed on a seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square foot or larger lot may be divided along the common wall or walls. 
(2)  Lot frontage: Forty (40) feet, except that a subdivided, two-family dwelling constructed on a lot having forty (40) feet or greater lot frontage may divide the lot frontage in half. 
(b)  Maximum density: Fifteen (15) bedrooms per acre, except single-unit residential. 
(c)  Minimum setback requirements: 
(1)  Front yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Side yard: Seven (7) feet, except on corner lots, a side yard facing the street shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures, except church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennae, and radio aerials are exempt: Thirty-five (35) feet; or forty-five (45) feet with an additional one (1) foot setback per foot of additional height. Utility poles may have a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet. 
(e)  Maximum coverage: 
(1)  Lot coverage: Fifty (50) percent. 
(2)  Floor area ratio: 0.30 FAR. 
(f)  The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than four (4) unrelated persons. For a detached single-family dwelling with a nonconforming accessory apartment, occupancy shall be figured cumulatively including both the single-family dwelling and the accessory apartment for a total not to exceed four (4) unrelated persons. 
(g)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1215, § 13, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1369, § 4, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 1649, § 1, 8-14-2012) 
DIVISION 8. - RM-27 LOW DENSITY MULTIUNIT RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 3080 - Purpose. 
    The RM-27 Low Density Multiunit residential district is provided in recognition of sections of the Town that are developed with multiunit structures and to allow similar development on land which appears appropriate for such development. Among these sections is land served by public water and sewer adequate to handle higher density residential development for purposes of protecting the health, convenience and safety of the inhabitants, land served by public thoroughfares designed to adequately handle traffic volume, and land served by or provided with suitable developed recreation space adequate to handle higher density residential development. The low density multi-unit residential district is intended to allow multiunit dwellings as a principal use of land. Attractiveness, order, efficiency, convenience and safety shall be encouraged by allowing a density of development appropriate for the use of public water and sewer facilities, public thoroughfares, public recreation areas and other public facilities while maintaining a suitable density for the permitted dwelling types with adequate space for light and air. It is intended that areas for low density multiunit dwellings be located on the edge of residential areas of a lower density, usually along a major traffic artery in a manner to encourage comprehensive development of the whole residential area with sustained livability and without overtaxing essential public services and facilities. 
Sec. 3081 - Permitted Uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted by right in the RM-27, Low Density Multiunit Residential District: 
Residential 
Boarding House 
Home Occupations 
Multifamily Dwellings 
Single-family, Attached 
Single-family, Detached 
Townhouse 
Two-family Dwellings 
Civic 
Community Recreation 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Center 
Family Day Care Home 
Home for Adults 
Life Care Facility 
Nursing Home 
Open Space 
Public Parks and Recreation 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious Assembly 
Shelter 
Utility Services, Minor 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory Structures 
(b)  The following uses are allowed only by Conditional Use Permit in the RM-27, Low Density Multiunit Residential District: 
Civic 
Administrative Services 
Educational Facilities, College/University 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Nursing Home 
Post Office 
Safety Services 
Utility Services, major 
Commercial 
Bed and Breakfast 
Clinic 
Club 
Commercial Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Consumer Repair Services 
Funeral Home 
Gasoline Station 
Neighborhood Convenience Store 
Parking Facility 
Personal Services 
Restaurant, Drive-in 
Restaurant, Fast Food 
Restaurant, General 
Restaurant, Small 
Retail Sales 
Studio, Fine Art 
Office 
Financial Institution 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting or Communication Facility 
(Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1215, § 14, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 6, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 29, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 3082 - Site Development Regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: 
(1)  Lot area: Eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet, except that Townhouses and two-family dwellings constructed on an eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square foot or larger lot may be divided along the common wall or walls. 
(2)  Lot frontage: Sixty (60) feet, except that a subdivided, two-family dwelling constructed on a lot having sixty (60) feet or greater lot frontage may divide the lot frontage in half. 
(b)  Maximum density: Twenty-seven (27) bedrooms per acre, except single-unit residential. 
(c)  Minimum setback requirements: 
(1)  Front yard: Thirty-five (35) feet (may be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet for uses with parking in the rear). 
(2)  Side yard: Ten (10) feet, except on corner lots, a side yard facing the street shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures, except church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennae, and radio aerials are exempt: Thirty-five (35) feet; or forty-five (45) feet with an additional one (1) foot setback per foot of additional height. Utility poles may have a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet. 
(e)  Maximum coverage: 
(1)  Lot coverage: Sixty (60) percent. 
(2)  Floor area ratio: 0.40 FAR. 
(f)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1215, § 15, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1369, § 5, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 3083 - Maximum residential occupancy. 
    The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family, plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than four (4) unrelated persons. 
DIVISION 9. - RM-48 MEDIUM DENSITY MULTIUNIT RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 3090 - Purpose. 
    The RM-48 Medium Density Multiunit Residential District is provided in recognition that certain land in the Town may be appropriately developed as areas of medium population concentration if developed in accordance with the existing and potential development character of the vicinity and if adequate public services and facilities can be provided. The RM-48 Medium Density Multiunit Residential District is intended to allow multiunit dwellings in association with other residential development types while maintaining a reasonable population density within the total residential area. To this end, the site development and architectural concept of the apartment structure together with the provision of associated facilities shall be an important consideration in achieving an attractive residential environment of sustained desirability with all development in harmony to promote stability, order and efficiency of the residential area. 
Sec. 3091 - Permitted Uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted by right in the RM-48, Medium Density Multiunit Residential District: 
Residential 
Boarding House 
Home Occupations 
Multifamily Dwellings 
Single-family, Detached 
Single-Family, Attached 
Townhouse 
Two-family Dwellings 
Civic* 
Community Recreation 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Center 
Family Day Care Home 
Home for Adults 
Life Care Facility 
Open Space 
Public Parks and Recreation 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious Assembly 
Shelter 
Utility Services, Minor 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory Structures 
*Without external speakers only. Any use which incorporates an external speaker may be permitted only with a conditional use permit. 
(b)  The following uses are allowed only by Conditional Use Permit in the RM-48, Medium Density Multiunit Residential District: 
Civic 
Administrative Services 
Educational Facilities, College/University 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Nursing Home 
Post Office 
Safety Services 
Utility Services, major 
Commercial 
Bed and Breakfast 
Clinic 
Club 
Commercial Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Consumer Repair Services 
Funeral Home 
Gasoline Station 
Hospital 
Neighborhood Convenience Store 
Parking Facility 
Personal Services 
Restaurant, Drive-in 
Restaurant, Fast Food 
Restaurant, General 
Restaurant, Small 
Retail Sales 
Studio, Fine Art 
Office 
Financial Institution 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting or Communication Facility 
(Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1215, § 16, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 7, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 29, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1415, § 6, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 3092 - Site development regulations. 
(a)  Minimum lot requirements: 
(1)  Lot area: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet, except that townhouses and two-family dwellings constructed on an eight thousand (8,000) square foot or larger lot may be divided along the common wall or walls. 
(2)  Lot frontage: Sixty (60) feet, except that a subdivided, two-family dwelling constructed on a lot having sixty (60) feet or greater lot frontage may divide the lot frontage in half. 
(b)  Maximum density: Forty-eight (48) bedrooms per acre except single-unit residential. 
(c)  Minimum setback requirements: 
(1)  Front yard: Thirty-five (35) feet (may be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet for uses with parking in the rear). 
(2)  Side yard: Ten (10) feet, except on corner lots, a side yard facing the street shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Rear yard: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(d)  Maximum height of structures, except church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennae, and radio aerials are exempt: Thirty-five (35) feet; or forty-five (45) feet with an additional one (1) foot setback per foot of additional height. Utility poles may have a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet. 
(e)  Maximum coverage: 
(1)  Lot coverage: Sixty (60) percent. 
(2)  Floor area ratio: 0.40 FAR. 
(f)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 17, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1369, § 6, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 3094 - Maximum Residential Occupancy. 
    The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family, plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than four (4) unrelated persons. 
DIVISION 11. - PR PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 3110 - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this district is to provide for the development of planned residential communities that incorporate a variety of housing options as well as certain limited commercial and office uses designed to serve the inhabitants of the district. This district is intended to allow greater flexibility than is generally possible under conventional zoning district regulations by encouraging ingenuity, imagination and high quality design to create a superior living environment for the residents of the planned community. The PR district is particularly appropriate for parcels which contain a number of constraints to conventional development. In addition to an improved quality of design, the PR district creates an opportunity to reflect changes in the technology of land development, provide opportunities for new approaches to home ownership, and provide for an efficient use of land which can result in reduced development costs. 
Sec. 3111 - Permitted Uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted in the Planned Residential district. However, no use shall be permitted except in conformity with the uses specifically included in the final master plan approved pursuant to Section 1162, "Planned Zoning Districts." 
Residential 
Home Occupation 
Multi-family Dwelling 
Single-family Dwelling, Attached 
Single-family Dwelling, Detached 
Townhouse 
Two-family Dwelling 
Civic* 
Community Recreation 
Day Care Center 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Family Day Care Home 
Life Care Facility 
Open Space 
Public Parks and Recreational Areas 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious Assembly 
Safety Services 
Shelter 
Utility Services, Minor 
Office* 
Financial Institutions (without drive-through) 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Commercial* 
Gasoline Station 
Grocery Store 
Neighborhood Convenience Store 
Personal Services 
Restaurant, Small 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory Structure 
*Without external speakers only. Any use which incorporates an external speaker may be permitted only with a conditional use permit. 
(b)  Other Use Types which are not listed above and which are determined to be appropriate and compatible with the proposed development and surrounding uses may be permitted in the PR district where they are specifically proposed in the preliminary master plan and approved pursuant to Section 1162. 
(Ord. No. 1339, § 29, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1632, § 1, 1-10-12; Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 3112 - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted in the Planned Residential Development district by a conditional use permit: 
Civic 
Utility Services, Major 
Office 
Financial Institution (with drive-through) 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting or Communication Facility (Ord. No. 1170, 11-11-97) 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1513, § 1, adopted Apr. 14, 2009, amended § 3112 to read as herein set out. Former § 3112 pertained to conditional uses. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 3113 - Site Development Regulations. 
    Each planned residential development shall be subject to the following site development standards. 
(a)  Minimum district size: One-half (1/2) acre of contiguous land. 
(b)  Minimum open space criteria. 
(1)  Minimum open space: 
a.  A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the total district area shall be designated as open space, except as provided in subsection b. 
b.  For projects less than two (2) acres in size, the applicant may apply for a reduction or elimination of the open space requirement. The determination of the need for open space for such projects shall be evaluated based on a combination of the following project criteria: 
i.  Maximizing developable area; 
ii.  Proximity to downtown; 
iii.  Walking distance to services and transit; 
iv.  Density and intensity of use in relation to neighborhood context; 
v.  Demonstrated access to nearby public open space; 
vi.  Alternative recreational space (e.g., workout room); and 
vii.  Proposed improvements to the adjoining streetscape, which may include construction of additional sidewalks or trails adjoining the street, buffer strips between the sidewalk and the street, or other streetscape amenities or improvements to public space as part of the project. 
c.  An applicant may also include a request to modify or eliminate the use and design standards for open space and recreational space contained in Sections 4216(a)(6) for multifamily dwellings 4220(b)(7) for single-family attached dwellings, 4231(b)(11) for townhouses, and 4241(a)(3) for two-family dwellings. Such a request should be made for the purpose of eliminating any conflicts between development standards in the PR district and use and design standards, or as otherwise necessary to achieve the proposed development form in a manner consistent with the purpose of the district. 
d.  If phases are proposed for the planned residential development, the percentage of required open space included in each phase shall meet or exceed the percentage of dwelling units included in each phase. 
e.  When twenty (20) percent of open space is required, a compact area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be provided for active or passive recreational activities. 
f.  When a site is part of a public master plan adopted by town council, the required open space percentage may include off-site open space and parcels under separate ownership, provided that all the parcels are being developed under the common master plan. Off-site open space cannot be counted as required open space for more than one (1) development. The cumulative total of open space utilization shall be determined as part of each rezoning where open space is required. 
(c)  Maximum area for commercial and/or office uses: Ten (10) percent of the gross area of the PR district. In addition, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Commercial and office uses shall be expressly designed for the service and convenience of the PR district; 
(2)  Commercial and office uses shall be designed and located to protect the character of the district and surrounding residential districts. Such facilities shall be screened and landscaped so as to be compatible with adjoining residences; 
(3)  Construction of commercial and office uses shall not begin until twenty-five (25) percent of the residential units or two hundred fifty (250) dwelling units, whichever is less, of the total PR district have been completed. 
(d)  Minimum setback requirements shall be specifically established during the review and approval of the master plan. The following guidelines shall be used in establishing the building spacing and setbacks, but shall not be construed as constraining creative site design: 
(1)  Building spacing shall provide privacy within each dwelling unit; 
(2)  Building spacing shall ensure that each room has adequate light and air; 
(3)  Areas between buildings used as service yards, storage of trash, or other utilitarian purposes should be designed so as to be compatible with adjoining dwellings; 
(4)  Building spacing and design shall provide privacy for outdoor activity areas (patios, decks, etc.) associated with individual dwelling units; 
(5)  Yards located at the perimeter of the PR district, not fronting a street, shall conform to the setback requirements of the adjoining zoning district, or to the setback requirements deemed appropriate during the review and approval of the master plan for the PR district; 
(6)  For the purpose of determining the depth of yards, any yards located at the perimeter of the PR district that front a street shall be treated as a front yard. The yard may be reduced, as deemed appropriate during the review, and approval of the master plan, through the application of enhanced streetscape features that promote the existing design context of the zoning district on the other side of the street. 
(e)  Setbacks in a PDR, Planned Development Residential, district adopted prior to this ordinance shall be as specified in the master plan or, if not specified, a twenty-seven (27) foot front yard, seven (7) foot side yard (except on corner lots, where a side yard facing the street shall be twenty (20) feet) and eighteen (18) foot rear yard. 
(f)  Parking in the PR district shall either be as contained in Section 5200 or as approved through: 
(1)  A rezoning to the PR district based on demonstrated parking needs, housing types and potential impacts to surrounding neighborhoods; or 
(2)  An amendment to a PR district based on demonstrated parking needs, housing types and potential impacts to surrounding neighborhoods. 
(g)  Streets in the PR district shall be public in accordance with VDOT and town standards. 
(h)  For multifamily dwellings and townhouses, the maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family, plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than four (4) unrelated persons. For detached and attached single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings, the maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family, plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family, or no more than three (3) unrelated persons. 
(i)  For Planned Residential developments, two multifamily units may be combined into one (1) multifamily unit provided that the requirements of (1), (2) and (3) below are met. All other units continue to be subject to the occupancy standards listed above. 
(1)  The total number of multifamily units combined does not exceed ten (10) percent of the total number of multifamily units within the development; 
(2)  The units to be combined are not adjacent to any single-family use; and 
(3)  All of the following criteria are met: 
a.  Combined units shall meet all building code requirements with appropriate permits and inspections obtained; 
b.  The zoning administrator shall be informed in writing of the specific units combined; 
c.  Twenty-four (24) hour on-site management is required for the multifamily area in which the combined units are located; 
d.  Occupancy in a combined unit shall be one (1) person per bedroom, plus two (2) additional persons (bedrooms include any den converted to a bedroom); 
e.  Leases for all combined units shall be available for inspection by the zoning administrator upon request; 
f.  Upon receipt of a complaint of over occupancy of combined units, the zoning administrator may inspect such units after providing written notice to the property owner or management; and 
g.  The combination of dwelling units does not change the total number of units approved with the master plan. Combined units may at a later date be returned to two (2) separate dwelling units in the original configuration provided: 
i.  All building code requirements are met with required permits and inspections obtained; and 
ii.  The zoning administrator is informed in writing of the units to be separated and returned to original configuration. 
(j)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
(k)  To encourage flexibility and creativity of design, exceptions to the use and design standards contained in Article IV may be requested pursuant to 1112 of the Zoning Ordinance as part of the review and approval of a PR rezoning request. In addition to the evaluation of the request as described in Section 1112, the creativity of the site design, the neighborhood context of the development and the design concept to be achieved will also be considered. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 18, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1415, § 7, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1632, § 1, 1-10-12; Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 3114 - Relationship to Existing Development Regulations. 
    To encourage flexibility and creativity of design, the preliminary and final PR development plans may provide for variations and deviations from the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance; provided no such action shall prejudice or diminish the protection of the health and safety of the citizens offered by the Subdivision Ordinance, as determined by the Town Council, and provided the action generally shall provide meaningful benefits such as reduced erosion, protection of the health and safety of forested areas, or preservation of scenic views. Unless so varied by action of the Town Council, the Subdivision Ordinance shall apply to PR developments. 
Sec. 3115 - Conditional Zoning. 
    Planned Residential Zoning constitutes conditional zoning. The proposals in the preliminary development plan shall constitute proffers as outlined in Article I, Division 6 of the Zoning Ordinance and the features in the final master plan shall constitute conditions of the rezoning. 
(Ord. No. 1632, § 1, 1-10-12) 
DIVISION 12. - PLANNED MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT 

Sec. 3120 - Purpose. 
    The Planned Manufactured Home Residential District is provided in recognition that certain land in the community may be appropriately developed as an area of moderate population concentration with special consideration for the location and provision of facilities for manufactured homes if properly related to the existing and potential development character of the vicinity and if adequate public services and facilities can be provided. The Planned Manufactured Home Residential District is intended to allow the development of manufactured home parks in association with other residential development type while maintaining a reasonable population density and by providing for the unique requirements for this type of development. To this end, the site development provision of associated facilities shall be an important consideration in achieving an attractive residential environment of sustained desirability with all development in harmony to promote stability, order, and efficiency of the manufactured home park and adjacent areas. 
Sec. 3121 - Permitted Uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted in the Planned Manufactured Home Residential Development district. However, no use shall be permitted except in conformity with the uses specifically included in the Final Master Plan approved pursuant to Section 1162, "Planned Zoning Districts." 
Residential 
Home Occupation 
Manufactured Home 
Manufactured Home Park 
Civic* 
Community Recreation 
Day Care Center 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Open Space 
Public Parks and Recreational Areas 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious Assembly 
Safety Services 
Shelter 
Utility Services, Minor 
Office* 
Financial Institutions 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Commercial* 
Neighborhood Convenience Store 
Gasoline Station 
Grocery Store 
Personal Services 
Restaurant, Small 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory Structures 
*Without external speakers only. Any use which incorporates an external speaker may be permitted only with a conditional use permit. 
(b)  Other Use Types which are not listed above and which are determined to be appropriate and compatible with the proposed development and surrounding uses may be permitted in the PMH district where they are specifically proposed in the preliminary master plan and approved pursuant to Section 1161. 
(Ord. No. 1339, § 29, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 3122 - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted in the Planned Manufactured Home Residential Development district by conditional use permit: 
Civic 
Utility Services, Major 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting or Communication Facility (Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97) 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1513, § 1, adopted Apr. 14, 2009, amended § 3122 to read as herein set out. Former § 3122 pertained to conditional uses. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 3123 - Site Development Regulations. 
    Each planned manufactured home residential development shall be subject to the following site development standards. 
(a)  Minimum district size: Four (4) acres of contiguous land. 
(b)  Minimum Open Space Criteria: 
(1)  A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the total district area shall be designated as permanent open space. Where phases are proposed for the planned manufactured home development, the percentage of open space in each phase shall meet or exceed the percentage of manufactured home lots included in that phase. (Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
(2)  An area for passive or active recreation uses shall be developed. Such area must be of a location, condition, size and shape to be usable for a specific recreational activity. The amount of area devoted to recreation shall be adequate, in the opinion of the Administrator, to serve the population of the development. In making this decision, the Administrator shall use the following standards: size of development, number of expected residents, topography, and natural features on the site. The open space shall be owned in common by the manufactured home park residents, or shall be made available through the use of easements to all residents of the development. 
(c)  Maximum area for commercial and/or office uses: Ten (10) percent of the gross area of the PMH. In addition, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Commercial and office uses shall be expressly designed for the service and convenience of the PRH; 
(2)  Commercial and office uses shall be designed and located to protect the character of the district and surrounding residential districts. Such facilities shall be screened and landscaped so as to be compatible with adjoining residences; 
(3)  Construction of commercial and office uses shall not begin until twenty-five (25) percent of the residential units or two hundred fifty (250) dwelling units, whichever is less, of the total PMH have been completed. 
(d)  Additional design standards. 
(1)  Private access drives built to the following specifications shall be permitted: 
a.  One (1) way private access drive: 
Twelve-foot minimum width with no parking allowed; 
Eighteen-foot minimum width with parking allowed on one (1) side. 
b.  Two-way private access drive: 
Twenty-foot minimum width with no parking allowed. 
Twenty-eight-foot minimum width with parking allowed on one (1) side of the private access drive. 
c.  Thirty-four-foot minimum width with parking allowed on both sides of the private access drive. 
(2)  Public streets. All streets to be dedicated to the Town as a public street shall be built to the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance (Appendix B) of the Town. 
(3)  Water and sewer. Each manufactured home site shall be provided with a metered water outlet connection to a public water supply and a connection to a public sewer system or an appropriate private sewer system approved by the Montgomery County Health Department. 
(4)  Identification. An identification system shall be made a part of the design of any manufactured home development and consist of a logical sequential pattern of numbering lots. Such numbers shall be displayed on a permanent marker placed on the manufactured home site fronting the street or access way to the site. Such numbers shall be visible from the street or access way. 
(5)  Parking. There shall be at least two (2) off-street parking spaces for each manufactured home site which shall be constructed to the same standards as the accompanying street. The parking spaces may be grouped in common parking areas. 
(6)  Utilities. All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
(7)  Area lighting. All manufactured home parks shall provide an adequate area lighting system. 
(8)  Underpinning. Underpinning must be accomplished within thirty (30) days of the placement of a manufactured home on a lot, except any manufactured home placed on a lot between December 1 and March 1 shall be underpinned no later than thirty days after March 1. 
(e)  Minimum requirements for all home sites: 
(1)  Minimum manufactured home lot requirements: 
3,800 square feet for each manufactured home of less than 19 feet in width; 
4,800 square feet for each manufactured home 19 feet or more in width; 
Only one manufactured home shall be permitted on each lot. 
(2)  Minimum yard requirements: 
a.  For lots where the shortest side fronts on a street: 
Front yard: 10 feet (hitch facing street) 
Side yard: 15 feet, except on corner lots, a side yard facing the street shall be 20 feet. 
Rear yard: 10 feet 
b.  For lots where the longest side fronts on a street: 
Front yard: 15 feet (hitch facing side yard) 
Side yard: 10 feet, except on corner lots, a side yard facing the street shall be 20 feet 
Rear yard: 15 feet 
(3)  Minimum yard requirements for lots located at the perimeter of the manufactured home park: 
Front setback: 30 feet from any street right-of-way which is fifty feet or greater in width or fifty-five (55) feet or more from the center line of any street right-of-way less than fifty feet in width; 
Side setback: 20 feet on each side; 
Rear setback: 20 feet 
(4)  Landing required by the Virginia Uniform Building Code may extend into a required yard, not to exceed the minimum landing requirement. 
(f)  The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family, plus two persons unrelated to the family; or no more than three unrelated persons. 
(Ord. No. 1339, § 5, 9-9-03) 
Sec. 3124 - Conditional Zoning. 
    Planned Manufactured Home Zoning constitutes conditional zoning. The proposals in the preliminary development plan shall constitute proffers as outlined in Article I, Division 6 of this chapter [Appendix], and the features in the final master plan shall constitute conditions of the rezoning. 
DIVISION 14. - DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 3140 - Purpose. 
    The Downtown Commercial district is the heart of Town culturally, geographically, and historically. It lends the Town its small-town architecture, scale, and feel. It is intended to be a predominantly pedestrian area, catering to bicycle and pedestrian traffic with shops and storefronts close to the road, pedestrian scale, wide walkways, street trees and limited off-street well screened parking. The history of the area is retained with preservation of historic structures and replication of style in additions and expansions. The core of the Downtown exudes the vitality of the interaction of people and activities. Commercial opportunities include a diversity of specialty, retail services, cultural, recreation, entertainment activities, and public functions. The district may also contain residential uses suited to a downtown urban environment. Residential uses are limited to locations in the basement of structures or on upper stories above active street level commercial uses. There may be some circumstances and locations within the district where other urban residential use types that promote year round occupancy and contribute to the fabric of the Blacksburg Historic Overlay District within Downtown may be appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 10-13-15 ) 
Sec. 3141 - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses and structures are permitted by right subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this Ordinance: 
Residential 
Home Occupation 
Multifamily Dwelling (allowed only on the upper floors of a multi-story building or in the basement of a structure) See § 3141 (b) for residential uses allowed by Conditional Use Permit. 
Civic 
Administrative Services 
Community Recreation 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Center 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Home for Adults 
Life Care Facility 
Nursing Home 
Open Space 
Post Office 
Public Parks and Recreational Areas 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious Assembly 
Safety Services 
Shelter 
Utility Services, Minor 
Office* 
Financial Institutions (without drive-through) 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Commercial* 
Brewpub 
Clinic 
Commercial Indoor Entertainment 
Commercial Indoor Amusement 
Communication Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Funeral Home 
Neighborhood Convenience Store 
Parking Facility? 
Pawn Shop 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Public Farmers Market 
Restaurant, Fast Food 
Restaurant, General 
Restaurant, Small 
Retail Sales 
Specialty Shop 
Studio, Fine Arts 
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory Structures 
*Without external speakers only. Any use which incorporates an external speaker, may be permitted only with a conditional use permit. 
On all floors except the ground floor. 
?Allowed on lots fronting Main Street only when other permitted commercial uses occupy the Main Street frontage. 
(b)  The following uses may be allowed with a Conditional Use Permit. 
Civic 
Club 
Public Assembly 
Utility Services, Major 
Commercial 
Automobile Repair 
Bed and Breakfast 
Commercial Indoor Sports and Recreation 
Dance Hall 
Gasoline Station 
Grocery Store 
Hotel/Motel 
Itinerant Vendor 
Outpatient Substance Abuse Treatment Center 
Office 
Financial Institution (with drive-through) 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Industrial 
Laboratory 
Research and Development 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting and Communication Facility 
Residential 
Townhouse or a Multi-family dwelling on the ground floor; subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  The subject property must be located within the Blacksburg Historic Overlay District; 
(2)  Development must occur in conjunction with the retention and rehabilitation of a contributing structure shown on the Blacksburg Historic District Contributing Structures List and in accordance with the District Guidelines; 
(3)  For the purpose of this section, the term "rehabilitation" shall mean substantial financial investment and physical improvements to a property or building previously in a substandard or dilapidated condition through repair, alterations, or additions that (i) return a property or building to usable condition or (ii) address improvements needed with a change of use as defined by the building code that result in certificates of occupancy being issued for more intensive uses in the zoning district. The rehabilitation shall preserve those portions or features that convey the historical, cultural, or architectural values of the property or building. 
(4)  Residential development may be within the Contributing Structure or new construction adjacent to the Contributing Structure being rehabilitated if there is a common development plan; and 
(5)  There must be compliance with Use and Design Standards for the use unless a Special Exception is granted pursuant to § 1112 to the Use and Design Standards along with the Conditional Use Permit. 
On ground floor. However, temporary offices for the management and support of a campaign for political office by a specific candidate or candidates (as defined by Code of Virginia § 24.2-101) for one (1) specific election cycle are permitted on the ground floor, subject to compliance with the following standards: 
1.  Prior to occupancy of the office space, the campaign shall register and obtain a permit from the Administrator, which shall be valid for a period of not more than six (6) calendar months and may not be renewed. Use of ground floor office space in the Downtown Commercial District for more than six (6) months requires a conditional use permit. 
2.  Each permit shall specify the location of the temporary office, the dates of occupancy by the campaign and all necessary contact information. 
(Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1215, § 19, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1278, § 4, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1339, § 29, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1369, § 7, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 1397, § 2, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 1415, § 8, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1416, § 1, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1685, § 1, 6-11-13; Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 5-13-14 ; Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 10-13-15 ) 
Sec. 3142 - Site development standards. 
(a)  Each lot must abut a public street. 
(b)  Maximum residential density: Forty-eight (48) bedrooms per acre. 
(c)  A density bonus, as authorized by Virginia Code §15.2-2286(A)(10)(a), is allowed when the project includes the retention and rehabilitation of a contributing structure in the Historic District as listed on the Blacksburg Historic District Contributing Structures List and in accordance with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The Contributing Structure(s) retained must be the structure(s) recommended for retention by the HDRB and the HDRB decision is upheld by the Town Council; 
(2)  For the purpose of this section, the term "rehabilitation" shall mean substantial financial investment and physical improvements to a property or building previously in a substandard or dilapidated condition through repair, alterations, or additions that (i) return a property or building to usable condition or (ii) address improvements needed with a change of use as defined by the building code that result in certificates of occupancy being issued for more intensive uses in the zoning district. The rehabilitation shall preserve those portions or features that convey the historical, cultural, or architectural values of the property or building. 
(3)  A one hundred (100) percent density bonus (up to ninety-six (96) bedrooms per acre) is available for parcels up to one-half (1/2) acre in size. A fifty (50) percent density bonus (up to seventy-two (72) bedrooms per acre) is available for parcels greater than one-half (1/2) acre and less than one (1) acre in size. A twenty-five (25) percent density bonus (up to sixty (60) bedrooms per acre) is available for parcels one (1) acre or greater in size. 
(4)  The density bonus will be calculated on the land area of the common development plan; and 
(5)  The common development plan must include the Contributing Structure(s). The common development plan cannot include land area that is not part of the proposed development and which has been included for the purposes of increasing the allowed density. All parcels in the common development plan shall be contiguous. All parcels in the common development plan must be within the DC zoning district. 
(d)  Maximum structure height: Sixty (60) feet. 
(e)  Building facades shall maintain a consistent street edge, with the exception of building articulation variation, passages for pedestrian access and drives to parking areas. The street elevation of principal structures shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the structure. 
(f)  All roof-top equipment shall be enclosed in building materials that match the structure or which are visually compatible with the structure. 
(g)  Sidewalk width from back of curb to the building at ground level shall be at least ten (10) feet for Main Street frontage and eight (8) feet for all other street frontage in the district. Transitioning to existing sidewalks of narrower widths shall be allowed when existing structures preclude such sidewalks from meeting minimum widths; provided, however, that no structure shall be placed within a transition area that would preclude extension of the sidewalk in the future to the widths required by this section. 
(h)  Automobile entrances to the site shall be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on the surrounding area. A maximum of two (2) curb cuts shall be allowed per street frontage. Factors including the number of existing curb cuts in the area, the potential for increased traffic hazards and congestion, and the number of travel lanes of the street that serves the site shall be used to determine the number of curb cuts permitted. 
(i)  Sidewalk displays of retail merchandise are permitted, provided that: 
(1)  at least five (5) feet of clearance is maintained at the store front entrance for adequate and uncluttered pedestrian access; 
(2)  the display is located against the building wall and does not extend more than three (3) feet into the sidewalk; and 
(3)  the display area does not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the length of the storefront. 
(j)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 10, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1339, § 6, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1397, § 2, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 10-13-15 ) 
Sec. 3143 - Downtown building design. 
(a)  This section applies to all new structures and to additions of four hundred (400) square feet or more to existing structures. 
(b)  The use of contemporary interpretations of earlier design styles of surrounding structures in the Downtown Commercial District is encouraged; including characteristics such as scale, massing, roof shape, window size, shape and spacing, and exterior materials. The Historic District Advisory Guidelines should also be used as reference materials. 
(c)  The street elevation of principal structures shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the structure. 
(d)  Illustrations submitted for review shall include drawings, renderings, or perspectives of a professional quality which illustrate the scale, massing, roof shape, window size, shape and spacing, and exterior materials of the structure and the context of the structure(s) on the site. Floor plans and samples of building materials shall also be included. 
(e)  The Historic or Design Review Board shall review the rezoning, conditional use permit, special exception, site plan or other types of development applications when exterior building changes are proposed and make recommendations to the applicant for amendments to achieve consistency with this section. These recommendations are generally advisory only. It is not mandatory that the applicant comply with the recommendations of this Board except (i) in accordance with Zoning Ordinance §§ 3284 and 3287 regarding demolition or relocation of Contributing Structures in the Blacksburg Historic Overlay District or (ii) to obtain the density bonus permitted by Zoning Ordinance § 3142. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-30-98; Ord. No. 1215, § 20, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 10-13-15 ) 
Sec. 3144 - Maximum residential occupancy. 
    The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family, plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than four (4) unrelated persons. Other lesser occupancy standards may be applied as conditions for residential uses if approved through the conditional use permit process. 
( Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 10-13-15 ) 
DIVISION 15. - GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 3150 - Purpose. 
    The General Commercial district is designed for a variety of commercial uses, both pedestrian and automobile oriented. The intent of the district is to provide for more intense commercial uses than the Downtown Commercial district, but in a manner which is consistent with the Town's character. Modern "strip" commercial development is not in keeping with the small-town character of Blacksburg, and this district is intended to discourage such development. Instead, a vital and lively streetscape, created by commercial buildings with windows and entrances oriented to the street, is an important goal of this district. While residential uses are allowed in the district under some circumstances, such uses should complement the commercial uses that serve as the primary intent in this district. 
(Ord. No. 1884 , § 1, 2-12-19) 
Sec. 3151 - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses and structures are permitted by right subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this ordinance: 
Residential 
Single-family, Detached, existing as of February 12, 2019 
Civic* 
Administrative Services 
Community Recreation 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Center 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Educational Facilities, College/University 
Home for Adults 
Laboratory 
Life Care Facility 
Nursing Home 
Open Space 
Post Office 
Public Parks and Recreational Areas 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious Assembly 
Safety Services 
Shelter 
Utility Services, Minor 
Office* 
Financial Institutions 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Commercial* 
Adult Entertainment Establishment 
Adult Store 
Automobile Renting/Leasing 
Automobile Parts/Supply, Retail 
Bed & Breakfast 
Brewpub 
Business Support Services 
Car Wash 
Clinic 
Commercial Indoor Establishment 
Commercial Indoor Amusement 
Commercial Indoor Sports and Recreation 
Communication Services 
Construction Sales and Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Funeral Home 
Garden Center 
Grocery Store 
Hospital 
Hotel/Motel 
Kennel, Commercial 
Neighborhood Convenience Store 
Parking Facility 
Pawn Shop 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Private Farmers Market 
Public Farmers Market 
Restaurant, Fast Food 
Restaurant, General 
Restaurant, Small 
Retail Sales 
Specialty Shop 
Studio, Fine Arts 
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory Structures 
*Without external speakers only. Any use which incorporates an external speaker may be permitted only with a conditional use permit. 
(b)  The following uses may be permitted with a conditional use permit: 
Residential 
Multi-family on the ground floor in accordance with Section 3151(d) 
Townhouses on the ground floor in accordance with Section 3151(d) 
Civic 
Club 
Public Assembly 
Utility Services, Major 
Commercial 
Automobile Dealership 
Automobile Repair Services 
Commercial Outdoor Recreation 
Commercial Outdoor Entertainment 
Dance Hall 
Equipment Sales/Rental 
Gasoline Station 
Mini-Warehouse 
Restaurant, Drive-in 
Retail Sales, Large Format 
Industrial 
Custom Manufacturing 
Research and Development 
Transportation Terminal 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting and Communication Facility 
Outpatient Substance Abuse Treatment Center 
(c)  Residential uses are permitted by right on upper floors of multi-story buildings, and in basements of structures in the General Commercial District: 
(1)  Residential Use Types 
Two-family Dwelling 
Multifamily Dwelling 
Home Occupation 
(2)  Residential support facilities 
i.  All support facilities associated with residential uses must be located (i) on upper floors of multi-story buildings or (ii) in basements, including, but not limited to facilities such as clubhouses, meeting rooms, study areas, tanning salon and fitness centers. A leasing office may be located on the ground floor but must be scaled to the size of a residential project component and be accessory to other ground floor uses. 
ii.  When residential uses are included in a development, parking located on the ground floor within the building envelope is not allowed unless the following criteria, as appropriate, are met: 
a.  For a lot size of one acre or greater, parking spaces within the building envelope must comprise less than 30% of the square footage of the ground floor and the remaining seventy (70) percent is comprised of non-residential uses; 
b.  For a lot size of less than one acre, parking spaces within the building envelope can comprise up to 50% of the square footage of the ground floor and the remaining fifty (50) percent is comprised of non-residential uses; 
c.  Lots must be existing as of February 12, 2019 and may not be subdivided for the purpose of creating multiple lots of less than 1 acre; and 
d.  Parking spaces must be screened from view from the public street or screened from a driveway that functions as a private street. 
iii.  Parking spaces that are entirely below grade (located underneath the main ground floor of the building) is allowed. 
(d)  A single or multi-story building with residential uses on all floors, with or without residential parking on the ground floor, may be requested by Conditional Use Permit when the residential building is part of a mixed-use development. The following criteria must be met: 
1.  The applicant must demonstrate that the residential development is not the principal use in the mixed-use development project. This can include a comparison of the square footage and acreage of the project components; 
2.  The residential and non-residential components of the mixed-use project must be integrated and share common infrastructure which can include, but is not limited to, the following: common access to the public right-of-way, shared parking areas, common utility lines, and joint stormwater management facilities; 
3.  The design of the residential development should incorporate principles from the Residential Infill Guidelines in the Comprehensive Plan to promote a walkable and pedestrian scaled urban environment; 
4.  The residential development should be oriented to the public street or to the driveway that may be functioning as a private street for access; 
5.  Public streets and driveways functioning as a private street must contain sidewalks to connect the residential development to the non-residential portions of the mixed-use development project and must contain street trees; and 
6.  Parking must be screened from the public street or driveways functioning as a private street. Parking must be located behind the front building line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1215, § 21, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1278, § 5, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1339, § 29, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1340, § 2, 8-12-03; Ord. No. 1369, §§ 8, 9, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 1415, § 9, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1416, § 2, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1450, § 1, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 5-13-14 ; Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-10-14 ; Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 1-12-16 ; Ord. No. 1884 , § 1, 2-12-19) 
Sec. 3152 - Site development standards. 
(a) Minimum lot size: 15,000 square feet (b) Minimum street frontage: 30 feet (c) Minimum Setbacks: Front: 10 feet Rear: None Side: None, except on corner lots, a side yard facing the street shall be 10 feet or more (d) Maximum Residential Density: 48 bedrooms per acre (e) Maximum Lot Coverage: 85% by impervious surfaces (f) Maximum Structure Height: 60 feet; 70 feet with additional one foot front, side, and rear setback per foot of additional height.  
(g)  The street elevation of principal structures shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the structure, with the exception of structures in a courtyard style. 
(h)  All roof-top equipment shall be enclosed in building materials that match the structure or which are visually compatible with the structure. 
(i)  Automobile entrances to the site shall be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on the surrounding area. A maximum of two (2) curb cuts shall be allowed per street frontage. Factors including the number of existing curb cuts in the area, the potential for increased traffic hazards and congestion, and the number of travel lanes of the street that serves the site shall be used to determine the number of curb cuts permitted. 
(j)  Except where specifically excepted, outside storage of materials such as but not limited to tools, supplies, materials, or equipment, shall be screened in compliance with the requirements of Article V, Division 3. 
(k)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1247, § 11, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1308, § 8, 8-13-02) 
Sec. 3153 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 3154 - Joint and cross access. 
(a)  These provisions will provide adequate driveway spacing along commercial corridors and reduce the potential for strip commercial development along the major roads of the Town. 
(b)  Adjacent commercial properties that generate one hundred (100) trips or more per day according to the Institute of Transportation Engineer's Trip Generation Manual, shall provide a cross access drive to allow circulation between sites. The Administrator or Town Council, as appropriate, may modify or waive the requirements of this section where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical. 
(c)  A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be established along all streets designated as "collector" or greater and the building site shall incorporate one or more of the following: 
(1)  Service drive connections or cross access corridors between sites preferably visible from the street; a design speed of ten (10) mph and sufficient width to accommodate two-way travel aisles designed to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles; 
(2)  Stub-outs and other design features to show that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross-access via a service drive; 
(3)  A unified access and circulation system plan that includes coordinated or shared parking areas is required where practicable. 
(d)  Applicants for a building permit, site plan shall: 
(1)  Record an easement allowing cross access to and from other properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access or service drive; and 
(2)  Record an agreement with the Town that remaining access rights along the public road will be dedicated to the Town and pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after completion of the joint-use driveway; and 
(3)  Record a joint maintenance agreement defining maintenance responsibility of adjoining property owners. 
(e)  The Zoning Administrator or Town Council, as appropriate, may reduce required separation distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Joint access driveways and cross access easements are provided wherever feasible in accordance with this section. 
(2)  The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation system in accordance with this section. 
(3)  The property owner has entered into a recorded agreement with the Town, that pre-existing connections on the site will be closed and eliminated after completion of each side of the joint use driveway. 
Sec. 3155 - Maximum residential occupancy. 
    The maximum dwelling unit occupancy will be a family, plus two persons unrelated to the family; or no more than four unrelated persons. 
(Ord. No. 1884 , § 1, 2-12-19) 
DIVISION 16. - PLANNED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT PC 

Sec. 3160 - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of the Planned Commercial District is to provide for the development of planned commercial centers or parks. These areas have all the necessary services and facilities comprehensively provided in accordance with a predetermined development plan. Because these concentrations of retail, service and office establishments are generally stable and offer unified internal arrangement and development, potentially detrimental design effects can be recognized and addressed during the review of the development. For these reasons, the Planned Commercial District standards allow greater development latitude. Districts should be proposed and planned for areas that provide for adequate development and expansion space, landscaped parking areas and service, utilities, and other facilities. Because the development of the planned commercial district takes place in accordance with an approved development plan, adequate separation from adjacent areas of incompatible land use can be achieved. 
(b)  Planned commercial districts can be a visual asset to the community. Buildings within the district are to be architecturally similar in style and the tract well landscaped. Parking and loading areas are to be screened and pedestrian-vehicular separation achieved. The relationship among individual establishments is to be harmonious. Since the character of the principal tenants, the size of the land to be developed, the relationship of the development to the community, and prospects for economic success of the project have much to do with the physical character of the development, these factors shall be considered in reviewing a planned commercial district application. 
Sec. 3161 - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted in the Planned Commercial district. However, no use shall be permitted except in conformity with the uses specifically included in the Final Master Plan approved pursuant to Section 1162. 
Residential 
Single-family Dwelling, Detached 
Single-family Dwelling, Attached 
Two-family Dwelling 
Multifamily Dwelling 
Home Occupation 
Civic* 
Administrative Services 
Community Recreation 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Center 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Home for Adults 
Life Care Facility 
Nursing Home 
Open Space 
Post Office 
Public Parks and Recreational Areas 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious Assembly 
Safety Services 
Shelter 
Utility Services, Minor 
Office* 
Clinic 
Financial Institution (without drive-through) 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Commercial* 
Automobile Dealership 
Automobile Repair Services/Minor 
Automobile Rental/Leasing 
Automobile Parts/Supply 
Business Support Services 
Car Wash 
Commercial Indoor Amusement 
Commercial Indoor Entertainment 
Commercial Indoor Sports and Recreation 
Communications Services 
Construction Sales/Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Funeral Home 
Garden Center 
Gasoline Station 
Hospital 
Hotel/Motel/Motor Lodge 
Kennel, Commercial 
Laboratory 
Neighborhood Convenience Store 
Outpatient Substance Abuse Treatment Center 
Parking Facility 
Pawn Shop 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Restaurant, General 
Restaurant, Small 
Retail Sales 
Specialty Shop 
Studio, Fine Arts 
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory Structures 
*Without external speakers only. Any use which incorporates an external speaker may be permitted only with a conditional use permit. 
(b)  The following uses are allowed only by conditional use permit in the PC, Planned Commercial District: 
Civic 
Public Assembly 
Utility Service, Major 
Commercial 
Commercial Outdoor Entertainment 
Commercial Outdoor Recreation 
Dance Hall 
Equipment Sales and Rental 
Manufactured Home Sales 
Mini-Warehouse 
Restaurant, Drive-in 
Industrial 
Custom Manufacturing 
Transportation Terminal 
Miscellaneous Uses 
Broadcasting and Communication Facility (Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97) 
Office 
Financial Institution (with drive-through window) (Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
(c)  Other use types which are not listed above and which are determined to be appropriate and compatible with the proposed development and surrounding uses may be permitted in the PC district where they are specifically proposed in the preliminary master plan and approved pursuant to Section 3134. 
(d)  Residential uses shall be limited to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total site area. A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the portion of the site devoted to residential use shall be set aside as open space, pursuant to the standards set forth in Article IV. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 22, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1278, § 6, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1339, § 29, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1415, § 10, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 3162 - Site development regulations. 
    Each planned commercial development shall be subject to the following site development standards. 
(a)  Minimum district size: Two (2) acres of contiguous land. 
(b)  Minimum frontage: Seventy-five (75) feet measured at the right-of-way of a publicly-maintained street. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements: 
(1)  Yards for lots internal to the site will be established through the master plan. 
(2)  Yards for lots which abut land zoned Residential, shall have a transitional yard pursuant to Article V. 
(3)  For any lot which abuts a collector road, a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from the property line shall be established. 
(d)  Minimum open space requirement: Twenty-five (25) percent 
(e)  Lot coverage: 
(1)  More than one (1) principle structure may be placed on a lot. 
(2)  Maximum lot coverage shall be determined through the preliminary development plan process. 
(f)  Maximum height of structures, except church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennae, and radio aerials are exempt: sixty (60) feet 
(g)  Building facades shall maintain a consistent street edge, with the exception of passages for pedestrian access and drives to parking areas. The street elevation of principal structures shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the structure, with the exception of structures in a courtyard style. 
(h)  All roof-top equipment shall be enclosed in building materials that match the structure or which are visually compatible with the structure. 
(i)  Parking facilities shall be located behind the front building line. The Administrator or Town Council may grant exceptions if necessary due to the shallow depth of a parcel, the location of existing mature trees, or other similar circumstances. 
(j)  Automobile entrances to the site shall be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on the surrounding area. A maximum of two (2) curb cuts shall be allowed per street frontage. Factors including the number of existing curb cuts in the area, the potential for increased traffic hazards and congestion, and the number of travel lanes of the street that serves the site shall be used to determine the number of curb cuts permitted. 
(k)  Except where specifically excepted, outside storage of materials such as but not limited to tools, supplies, materials, or equipment, shall be screened in compliance with the requirements of Article V, Division 3 [of this Appendix]. 
(l)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
Sec. 3163 - Building design. 
(a)  All building design styles within the PC district shall be compatible with each other and shall exhibit consistency in terms of their exterior materials, architectural style, size, shape, scale, and massing. 
(b)  The street elevation of principal structures shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the structure, with the exception of structures in a court-yard style. 
(c)  Site plans shall include drawings, renderings, or perspectives of a professional quality which illustrate the scale, massing, roof shape, window size, shape and spacing, and exterior materials of the structure. 
Sec. 3164 - Joint and cross access. 
(a)  These provisions will provide adequate driveway spacing along commercial corridors and reduce the potential for strip commercial development along the major roads of the Town. 
(b)  Adjacent commercial properties that generate one hundred (100) trips or more per day according to the Institute of Transportation Engineer's Trip Generation Manual, shall provide a cross access drive to allow circulation between sites. The Administrator or Town Council, as appropriate, may modify or waive the requirements of this section where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical. 
(c)  A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be established along all streets designated as "collector" or greater and the building site shall incorporate one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Service drive connections or cross access corridors preferably visible from the street between sites; a design speed of ten (10) mph and sufficient width to accommodate two-way travel aisles designed to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles; 
(2)  Stub-outs and other design features to show that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross-access via a service drive; 
(3)  A unified access and circulation system plan that includes coordinated or shared parking areas is required where practicable. 
(d)  Applicants for a building permit, site plan shall: 
(1)  Record an easement allowing cross access to and from other properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access or service drive; and 
(2)  Record an agreement with the Town that remaining access rights along the public road will be dedicated to the Town and pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after completion of the joint-use driveway; and 
(3)  Record a joint maintenance agreement defining maintenance responsibility of adjoining property owners. 
(e)  The Zoning Administrator or Town Council, as appropriate, may reduce required separation distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Joint access driveways and cross access easements are provided wherever feasible in accordance with this section. 
(2)  The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation system in accordance with this section. 
(3)  The property owner has entered into a recorded agreement with the Town, that pre-existing connections on the site will be closed and eliminated after completion of each side of the joint use driveway. 
Sec. 3165 - Conditional zoning. 
    Planned Commercial Zoning constitutes conditional zoning. The proposals in the preliminary development plan shall constitute proffers as outlined in Article I, Division 6 of this chapter [Appendix] [Appendix], and the features in the final master plan shall constitute conditions of the rezoning. 
Sec. 3166 - Maximum residential occupancy. 
    The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family, plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than four (4) unrelated persons. 
DIVISION 18. - OFFICE DISTRICT 

Sec. 3180 - Purpose. 
    The Office district is provided in recognition that certain areas are suitable for low intensity office uses. Such uses when properly designed may generate a minimum of light, noise, and traffic. The Office District provides a transitional zoning district between commercial and less intensive uses. This district is designed to encourage an aesthetically considerate development of the property in a manner that respects the character of adjacent properties. In addition, the district is intended to provide a healthy, balanced environment for people who work in the buildings, where improvements are planned and designed in concern with natural characteristics of the site. Size, scale, mass and siting of improvements in this district should be compatible with surrounding improvements. 
Sec. 3181 - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses and structures are permitted by right, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this ordinance: 
Residential 
Single-family, Attached 
Single-family, Detached 
Two-family Dwellings 
Townhouses 
Multifamily Dwelling 
Home Occupation 
Civic* 
Administrative Services 
Community Recreation 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Center 
Educational Facilities, College/University 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Home for Adults 
Life Care Facility 
Nursing Home 
Open Space 
Post Office 
Public Parks and Recreational Areas 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious Assembly 
Safety Services 
Utility Service, Minor 
Office* 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Commercial* 
Business Support Services 
Clinic 
Communication Services 
Funeral Home 
Laboratory 
Parking Facility 
Personal Services 
Restaurant, Fast Food 
Restaurant, General 
Restaurant, Small 
Studio, Fine Arts 
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory Structures 
*Without external speakers only. Any use which incorporates an external speaker may be permitted only with a conditional use permit. 
Permitted by right only as part of a multi-establishment building; otherwise, by conditional use permit. 
(b)  The following uses may be permitted by conditional use permit: 
Civic 
Utility Services, Major 
Commercial 
Hospital 
Hotel/Motel 
Outpatient Substance Abuse Treatment Center 
Personal Improvement Services 
Industrial 
Research and Development 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting and Communication Facility 
(Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1278, § 7, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1339, §§ 7, 29, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1415, § 11, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1416, § 3, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 3182 - Site development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, except that Townhouses and two-family dwellings constructed on a fifteen thousand (15,000) square foot or larger lot may be divided long the common wall or walls. 
(b)  Lot frontage: Thirty (30) feet, except that a subdivided, two-family dwelling constructed on a lot having thirty (30) feet or greater lot frontage may divide the lot frontage in half. 
(c)  Minimum Yards: 
(1)  Front: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(2)  Rear: Ten (10) feet. 
(3)  Side: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: Sixty (60) percent. 
(e)  Maximum floor to area ratio: .40. 
(f)  Maximum structure height, except church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennae, and radio aerials are exempt: Forty-five (45) feet; sixty (60) feet with additional one (1) foot per each foot of heights, front, side and rear setbacks. 
(g)  Maximum percentage of the site which may be devoted exclusively to residential use: Thirty (30) percent of total site. 
(h)  Minimum open space: Thirty (30) percent of the total site devoted to residential use. 
(i)  Maximum residential density: Twenty-seven (27) bedrooms per acre for acreage of the site devoted to residential use. 
(j)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed under ground. 
(Ord. No. 1278, § 8, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1369, § 10, 10-12-04) 
Sec. 3183 - Joint and cross access. 
(a)  These provisions will provide adequate driveway spacing along commercial corridors and reduce the potential for strip commercial development along the major roads of the Town. 
(b)  Adjacent commercial or office properties that generate one hundred (100) trips or more per day according to the Institute of Transportation Engineer's Trip Generation Manual, shall provide a cross access drive to allow circulation between sites. The Administrator or Town Council, as appropriate, may modify or waive the requirements of this section where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical. 
(c)  A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be established along all streets designated as "collector" or greater and the building site shall incorporate one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Service drive connections or cross access corridors preferably visible from the street between sites; a design speed of ten (10) mph and sufficient width to accommodate two-way travel aisles designed to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles; 
(2)  Stub-outs and other design features to show that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross-access via a service drive; 
(3)  A unified access and circulation system plan that includes coordinated or shared parking areas is required where practicable. 
(d)  Applicants for a building permit, site plan shall: 
(1)  Record an easement allowing cross access to and from other properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access or service drive; and 
(2)  Record an agreement with the Town that remaining access rights along the public road will be dedicated to the Town and pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after completion of the joint-use driveway; and 
(3)  Record a joint maintenance agreement defining maintenance responsibility of adjoining property owners. 
(e)  The Zoning Administrator or Town Council, as appropriate, may reduce required separation distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Joint access driveways and cross access easements are provided wherever feasible in accordance with this section. 
(2)  The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation system in accordance with this section. 
(3)  The property owner has entered into a recorded agreement with the Town, that pre-existing connections on the site will be closed and eliminated after completion of each side of the joint use driveway. 
Sec. 3184 - Maximum residential occupancy. 
    The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family, plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than four (4) unrelated persons. 
DIVISION 19. - RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 3190 - Purpose. 
    The Research and Development district is to provide for light industry and research facilities in an office park environment. These facilities typically generated little outside effect such as noise, odor, dust, or smoke, yet provide a use more intensive and less dependent on visibility and access than general commercial. The intent is to make single establishment or multi-establishment buildings to be located in areas accessible to primary highways and arterials, within an office park environment that includes greenways, space, and light for the benefit of research and development and light industry. Typically, Research and Development districts would be adjacent to University, Industrial, or more intensive commercial uses. 
Sec. 3191 - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses and structures are permitted by right, subject to all other applicable requirements in this ordinance: 
Civic 
Administrative Services 
Community Recreation 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Center 
Educational Facilities/Primary, Secondary 
Open Space 
Public Parks and Recreational Areas 
Safety Services 
Utility Services, Minor 
Office* 
Financial Institution 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Commercial* 
Business Support Services 
Business or Trade Schools 
Communication Services 
Event Center 
Hospital 
Laboratory 
Personal Improvement Services 
Restaurant, Fast Food 
Restaurant, General 
Restaurant, Small 
Industrial 
Light Industrial 
Research and Development 
Miscellaneous* 
Aviation Facilities 
Accessory Structures 
*Without external speakers only. Any use which incorporates an external speaker may be permitted only with a conditional use permit. 
Permitted by right only as part of a multi-establishment building; otherwise by conditional use permit. 
(b)  The following uses may be permitted by conditional use permit: 
Civic 
Educational Facilities, College and University 
Nursing Home 
Utility Services, Major 
Commercial 
Commercial Indoor Recreation 
Outpatient Substance Abuse Treatment Center 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting and Communication Facility 
(Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1215, § 23, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1247, § 12, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1278, § 9, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1286, § 1, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1339, § 8, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1415, § 12, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 1-12-16 ; Ord. No. 1845 , § 1, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 3192 - Site development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: One (1) acre 
(b)  Minimum street frontage: Thirty (30) feet 
(c)  Minimum Yards: 
(1)  Front: twenty (20) feet 
(2)  Rear: Fifteen (15) feet 
(3)  Side: Ten (10) feet, except on corner lots, a side yard facing the street shall be twenty (20) feet or more 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: Sixty-five (65) percent 
(e)  Maximum structure height: sixty (60) feet 
(f)  Minimum District Size: Five (5) acres 
(g)  Minimum Open Space: Twenty (20) percent with interconnected pedestrian system 
(h)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed under ground. 
Sec. 3193 - Maximum residential occupancy. 
    The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family, plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than four (4) unrelated persons. 
DIVISION 20. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 3200 - Purpose. 
    The Industrial District is provided in recognition of the location and space needs of a broad range of industrial activities diverse in products, operational techniques, and size, but possessing compatible development characteristics and seeking similar locations. These industrial uses are encouraged to group in industrial areas where greater economics can be achieved by sharing necessary services and facilities and where individual plant efficiency can be improved by a larger, more appropriately developed, and stable industrial environment. The Industrial District is intended to define areas suitable to the development of a variety of industrial activities, and to set forth development standards for the mutual protection of these industrial areas and areas for other land use activity in the vicinity. Industry should be protected from the intrusion of other land uses which neither perform a function appropriate to an industrial environment nor provide an essential service to the establishments or the employees of the industrial area. This district is intended to encourage the development and maintenance of an industrial area of limited size. Important in determining the location and size of an industrial area is the accessibility of the location to transportation facilities, the availability of public utilities, and the adequacy of fire and police protection. The topography of the area should be relatively level with no flood hazard. Industrial areas may be in close proximity to other land use areas, but wherever possible, appropriate physical features should be used as boundaries. 
Sec. 3201 - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted by right subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this ordinance: 
Civic 
Administrative Services 
Day Care Center 
Open Space 
Public Maintenance and Service Facilities 
Safety Services 
Utility Services, Minor 
Office 
Financial Institution 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Commercial 
Business Support Services 
Business or Trade Schools 
Communications Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Event Center 
Laboratory 
Restaurant, Fast Food 
Industrial 
Construction Yards 
Custom Manufacturing 
Industry, Light 
Research and Development 
Transportation Terminal 
Truck Terminal 
Warehousing and Distribution 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory Structures 
Permitted by right only as part of a multi-establishment building. 
(b)  The following uses may be permitted by conditional use permit: 
Civic 
Utility Services, Major 
Commercial 
Automobile Repair Services 
Commercial Indoor Recreation 
Equipment Sales/Rental 
Laundry 
Mini-warehouse 
Shooting Range, Indoor (Ord. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
Industrial 
Industry, Medium 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting and Communication Facility 
(Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1278, § 10, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1290, § A, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 1308, § 9, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1845 , § 1, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 3202 - Site development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: One (1) acre 
(b)  Minimum street frontage: Seventy-five (75) feet 
(c)  Minimum Yards: 
(1)  Front: Twenty (20) feet 
(2)  Rear: Fifteen (15) feet 
(3)  Side: Ten (10) feet, except on corner lots, a side yard facing the street shall be twenty (20) feet or more 
(d)  Maximum lot coverage: Seventy (70) percent 
(e)  Maximum structure height: sixty (60) feet 
Seventy (70) feet with additional one (1)foot per each foot of height front, side, and rear setbacks 
(f)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
Sec. 3203 - Building design. 
(a)  This section applies to all new structures and to additions of four hundred (400) square feet or more to existing structures. 
(b)  The use of contemporary interpretations of earlier design styles of surrounding structures in the Industrial District is encouraged; including characteristics such as scale, massing, roof shape, window size, shape and spacing, and exterior materials. 
(c)  The street elevation of principal structures shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the structure, with the exception of structures in a court-yard style. 
(d)  Site plans shall include drawings, renderings, or perspectives of a professional quality which illustrate the scale, massing, roof shape, window size, shape and spacing, and exterior materials of the structure. 
(e)  The Historic or Design Review Committee shall review the site plans and make recommendations to the applicant for amendments to achieve consistency with this section. These recommendations are advisory only. It is not mandatory that the applicant comply with the recommendations of this committee. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 24, 5-11-99) 
DIVISION 21. - PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 3210 - Purpose. 
    The Planned Industrial District is provided in recognition that certain industries of a clean, efficient and environmentally non-deleterious nature may wish to locate in an area of like industries, in what is generally known as an industrial park, developed under a complete, comprehensive development plan. Development and performance standards for the mutual protection of uses in the district, adjacent districts and the Town of Blacksburg are provided. High standards are provided for landscaping and open space to encourage high technology industries and to ensure a park-like atmosphere. Important in determining the location and size of an industrial area are the accessibility of the location, the availability of public utilities, fire and police protection and the suitability of the topography for industrial purposes. 
Sec. 3211 - Permitted uses. 
    All of the residential, civic, office, commercial use types listed in Article II of this ordinance, and "Industry, light, Industry, medium, Research and Development, Laboratory and Custom Manufacturing" are permitted in the PID district. All other Industrial and Miscellaneous use types may be permitted by conditional use permit. Residential Use Types shall be limited to no more than fifteen (15) percent of the district area. No use shall be permitted except in conformity with the uses specifically included in the Final Master Plan approved pursuant to Article I. 
(Ord. No. 1278, § 11, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 3212 - Site development standards. 
(a)  Minimum district size: Ten (10) acres 
(b)  Minimum frontage: Seventy-five (75) feet measured at the right-of-way of a publicly-maintained street. 
(c)  Minimum yard requirements: 
(1)  Yards for lots internal to the site will be established through the preliminary master plan. 
(2)  For any lot which abuts a collector road, a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from the property line shall be established. 
(d)  Minimum lot size: Two (2) acres 
(e)  Minimum open space: Twenty (20) percent 
(f)  Lot coverage: 
(1)  More than one (1) principle structure may be placed on a lot. 
(2)  Maximum lot coverage shall be determined through the preliminary development plan process. 
(g)  Maximum height of structures, except church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennae, and radio aerials are exempt: sixty (60) feet 
(h)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed under ground. 
Sec. 3213 - Maximum residential occupancy. 
    The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family, plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than four (4) unrelated persons. 
Sec. 3214 - Building design. 
(a)  This section applies to all PI districts of less than twenty-five (25) acres. 
(b)  The use of contemporary interpretations of earlier design styles of surrounding structures in the Planned Industrial district is encouraged; including characteristics such as scale, massing, roof shape, window size, shape and spacing, and exterior materials. The preliminary master plan for a Planned Industrial district shall contain detailed architectural standards for all structures within the district. These standards shall include requirements pertaining to building scale and massing; roof shape; window size, shape and spacing; and exterior building materials. 
Sec. 3215 - Conditional zoning. 
    Planned Industrial Zoning constitutes conditional zoning. The proposals in the preliminary development plan shall constitute proffers as outlined in Article I, Division 6 of this Appendix, and the features in the final master plan shall constitute conditions of the rezoning. 
( Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
DIVISION 22. - UNIVERSITY AND COLLEGE DISTRICT UNIV 

Sec. 3220 - Purpose. 
    The main campus of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University is located near the geographical center of the Town, and the presence of the university is central to the Town's character. The purpose of the UNIV, University and College District is to provide for the orderly growth and development of the university campus. 
Sec. 3221 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted by right subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this ordinance. 
Civic Uses 
Educational Facilities, College/University 
Sec. 3222 - Site development regulations. 
(a)  Maximum height: Seventy-five (75) feet 
(b)  All utility lines, electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc., shall be placed underground. 
DIVISION 23. - CREEK VALLEY OVERLAY 

Sec. 3230 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Creek Valley District is to regulate land use and development on lands adjacent to streams in such a manner as to: (1) ensure that development adjacent to creeks will not result in substantial damage to significant environmental resource areas; (2) ensure that creek valley development complements and enhances the protection of natural floodplains provided by the floodplain regulations of this district; (3) control the development that impacts wetlands, steep slopes, and vegetative buffer areas along creeks; (4) ensure that proper planning and design precedes land disturbing activities near creeks; (5) ensure that creek valley drainage and soil conditions are properly identified and incorporated into the planning process for subdivision and site plan review; (6) implement the intent of the Comprehensive Plan; (7) protect and enhance water quality and groundwater recharge processes by protecting the natural capacity of vegetation areas along creeks to filter and purify stormwater runoff; and (8) protect aquatic environments from the warming effects of solar radiation by preserving riparian tree canopy cover. 
Sec. 3231 - Creek Valley district established. 
    The following creek valley areas of the Town of Blacksburg are hereby established as the Creek Valley District. This district is overlaid upon other districts, including the Floodplain Overlay District, meaning that land within the district may be used in a manner permitted in the underlying district only if and to the extent such use is also permitted in the overlay district. 
(1)  Tom's Creek and the Tom's Creek 100-year floodplain, Stroubles Creek and the Stroubles Creek floodplain west of West Campus Drive, and Slate Branch and the Slate Branch floodplain west of U.S. 460 Bypass; 
(2)  All areas of twenty-five (25) percent or greater slopes adjacent to the floodplain, or if no floodplain is present, twenty-five (25) percent or greater slopes that begin within fifty (50) feet of the creek channel; 
(3)  All wetlands contiguous to lands described in numbers (1) and (2), above; 
(4)  All the land within a corridor defined by a boundary line which is fifty (50) feet from the center line of the creek, provided this land is not included in the Creek Valley Overlay as a result of number (1), (2), or (3), above. (Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
The boundaries of the district shall be shown on the Creek Valley District Map which is adopted as part of this ordinance. This map may be amended by ordinance. The boundaries shown on the map as constituting the limits of the Creek Valley District create a rebuttable presumption that lands within those boundaries meet the criteria for such designation. Site specific boundaries showing the boundary of the Creek Valley District may be delineated by an applicant through a certified survey of the property. However, where the floodplain has been altered through piping, channelization, dyking, or other similar method, the boundaries of the Creek Valley Overlay shall not be altered. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 25, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 3232 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted by right subject to all other applicable requirements contained in this ordinance. 
Agricultural 
Agriculture; however, no accessory structures may be located within the Creek Valley Overlay 
Forestry; Provided, however, that timber harvesting is permitted only in accordance with a Timber Management Plan that has been approved by the Virginia Department of Forestry. 
Residential 
None, except that a required yard may be located within the Creek Valley District. Provided, however, that no accessory structures may be located within the Creek Valley District. 
Civic 
Community Recreation. Provided, however, that only water dependent or passive recreation uses are permitted. Such uses include picnic grounds, wildlife and nature preserves, hunting and fishing areas, greenway parks, pedestrian, bicycle, and horseback riding trails. 
Open Space 
Public Parks and Recreation Areas. Provided, however, that only water dependent or passive recreation uses are permitted. Such uses include picnic grounds, wildlife and nature preserves, hunting and fishing areas, greenway parks, pedestrian, bicycle, and horseback riding trails. 
Utility Services, Minor 
Sec. 3233 - Conditional uses. 
Civic 
Utility Services, Major 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1513, § 1, adopted Apr. 14, 2009, amended § 3233 to read as herein set out. Former § 3233 pertained to conditional uses. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 3234 - Transfer of residential development potential. 
    Development density (units per acre) otherwise allowed on land located within the Creek Valley District and outside the 100-year floodplain may be transferred to those portions of the same lot, or to other lots within the same planned development, which are located outside the Creek Valley District. 
Sec. 3235 - Disturbance. 
    No grading or other ground disturbing activities shall be permitted in the Creek Valley Overlay District, unless authorized, in writing, by the Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 26, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 3236 - Vested rights. 
    The provisions of this article shall not impair the vested rights of any landowner under existing law. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 26, 5-11-99) 
DIVISION 24. - FHO FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1529, § 1, adopted Aug. 11, 2009, amended Div. 24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 24, §§ 3240-3249.1, pertained to FHO Floodplain Overlay District. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 3240 - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of these floodplain provisions is to prevent the following hazards: 
(1)  The loss of life and property; 
(2)  The creation of health and safety hazards; 
(3)  The disruption of commerce and governmental services; 
(4)  The extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief; and, 
(5)  The impairment of the tax base. 
(b)  These provisions are designed to accomplish the above purposes by: 
(1)  Regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies; 
(2)  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within areas subject to flooding; 
(3)  Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in floodprone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage; 
(4)  Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3241 - Applicability. 
    These provisions shall apply to all lands in the Town of Blacksburg. Floodplain areas shall be identified as follows: 
(a)  Areas within the 100-year floodplain, as identified in the Flood Insurance Study Report (FIS) and accompanying maps prepared for the Town by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration. 
(b)  Areas within the 100-year floodplain of a tributary with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or more, except in the Downtown Commercial or General Commercial zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3242 - Compliance and liability. 
(a)  No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this Section and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this Section. 
(b)  The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This ordinance does not imply that areas outside the floodplain area or that land uses permitted within such area will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(c)  Records of actions associated with administering this ordinance shall be kept on file and maintained by the Department of Engineering and GIS. 
(d)  This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Blacksburg or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3243 - Delineation of areas. 
(a)  The various floodplain areas defined in [sub]section 3241(a) shall include areas subject to inundation by waters of the 100-year flood. The primary basis for the delineation of these areas shall be the flood insurance study for Montgomery County and Incorporated Areas as prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, dated September 25, 2009, as amended. These areas are more specifically defined as follows: 
(1)  The floodway is delineated for purposes of this ordinance, using the criteria that a certain area within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the 100-year flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. These Floodways are specifically defined in Table 4 of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and shown on the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) (on file with the Blacksburg Engineering and GIS department). 
(2)  The Special Flood Hazard Area shall be that area of the 100-year floodplain not included in the Floodway. The basis for the outermost boundary of the Special Flood Hazard Area shall be the 100-year flood elevations contained in the flood profiles of the above-referenced Flood Insurance Study and as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map accompanying the study. 
(3)  The Approximated Floodplain shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a 100-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas may be on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. For these areas, the 100-year flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used, when available. Where the specific 100-year flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information Reports, U.S. Geological Survey Flood Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the Town of Blacksburg. 
(b)  The various floodplain areas defined in [sub]section 3241(b) shall include areas subject to inundation by the 100-year flood. The primary basis for delineation of these areas shall be submitted by the applicant, as established by a professional engineer using acceptable methods of study. If a previous study exists in the floodplain area that is no older than one (1) year from its date of recordation with the Town, and the conditions of the floodplain have remained unchanged since their recordation with the Town, the applicant may use this floodplain information for their delineation. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3244 - Creation of overlay. 
(a)  The floodplain areas described in [sub]section 3241(a) above shall be an overlay to the existing underlying zoning districts as shown on the FIRM map and as such, the provision for the floodplain areas shall serve as a supplement to the underlying zoning district provisions. 
(b)  The floodplain areas described in [sub]section 3241(b) above shall be an overlay to existing underlying zoning districts as shown on a recorded plat or plan on file in the Engineering and GIS Department. 
(c)  In case of conflict between the provisions or requirements of this district and the underlying district, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3245 - Official zoning map. 
(a)  The boundaries of the floodplain areas described in [sub]section 3241(a) above are established as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map which is declared to be a part of this ordinance and which shall be kept on file at the Town of Blacksburg, Engineering and GIS Department. 
(b)  The boundaries of the floodplain areas described in [sub]section 3241(b) above are established as shown on plats or plans recorded and filed with the Planning and Building Department. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3246 - Floodplain boundary changes and interpretation. 
(a)  The delineation of any floodplain areas described in Section 3241 above may be revised by Town Council where natural or manmade changes have occurred and /or where more detailed studies conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, or an individual documents the need for such change. However, prior to any such change of floodplain areas described in [sub]section 3241(a), approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(b)  Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain areas shall be made by the Administrator. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the floodplain areas, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the floodplain area boundary shall be given an opportunity to present his or her case to the Board of Zoning Appeals and to submit technical evidence. Procedures for such appeals shall be as outlined in Section 1243 of this ordinance. 
(c)  Where floodplain areas described in [sub]section 3241(b) above exist, initial interpretations of the boundary of the floodplain areas shall be made by the Administrator. If the boundary was recorded longer than one (1) year ago, or if floodplain changes have occurred, the Town Engineer may require the applicant to conduct a boundary study. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3247 - Floodplain area provisions, generally. 
(a)  All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain area shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a zoning permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this Section and with all other applicable codes and ordinances such as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and the Town of Blacksburg Subdivision Ordinance. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the Administrator shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws. 
(b)  Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways or any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
(c)  Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this district a permit shall be obtained from the U.S. Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission. (A joint permit application is available from any of these organizations.) Furthermore, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management (Department of Conservation and Recreation) and the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(d)  All applications for development within any floodplain district and all building permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the following information: 
(1)  The elevation of the base flood at the site. 
(2)  The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement). 
(3)  For structures to be floodproofed (nonresidential only), the elevation to which the structure will be floodproofed. 
(e)  Recreational vehicles shall not be placed within this zoning district. 
(f)  For areas described in [sub]section 3241(a) and for floodplain areas described in [sub]section 3241(b) no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3248 - Floodway development regulations. 
(a)  In the Floodway, Special Flood Hazard Area, and Approximated Floodplain, no development shall be permitted except where the effect of such development on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements which have been approved by all appropriate authorities as required above. 
(b)  The placement of any manufactured home within the Floodway, Special Flood Hazard Area, and Approximated Floodplain is specifically prohibited. No manufactured home park within a flood hazard district may be expanded beyond the present capacity at the adoption date of this section. 
(c)  In the Floodway, Special Flood Hazard Area, and Approximated Floodplain, the following Use Types and activities are permitted provided that they are permitted by the provisions of the underlying Zoning District, provided, that any structures associated with these uses are permitted only if they have no walls: 
Agriculture 
Agriculture 
Residential 
Accessory residential uses such as yard areas, gardens, play areas, and parking areas. 
Civic 
Community Recreation 
Public Recreation 
Open Space 
Commercial 
Golf Course 
(d)  The following uses and activities may be permitted by conditional use pursuant to Article I, Division 8 of this ordinance [Appendix] provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying Zoning District and are not prohibited by this or any other ordinance: 
(1)  Certain utilities and public facilities and improvements such as pipe lines, water and sewage treatment plants, and other similar or related uses. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3249 - Variances. 
(a)  The following guidelines and conditions will be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals in granting or denying variances to the requirements of this section, in addition to the conditions contained in Article I of this ordinance [Appendix]: 
(1)  Variance requests may be granted for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed work will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(2)  Variances shall not be granted within any floodway for any use, development or activity that will cause any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
(3)  Variances may be granted only after the Board of Zoning Appeals has determined that the granting of a variance will not result in: 
(a)  Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights, 
(b)  Additional threats to public safety; 
(c)  Extraordinary public expense; and will not 
(d)  Create nuisances, 
(e)  Cause fraud or victimization of the public, or 
(f)  Conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued after the Board of Zoning Appeals has determined that the variance will be the minimum relief to any hardship. 
(b)  The Board of Zoning Appeals may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for protection and other related matters. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider the following factors, in making its determinations under subsection (a), above: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others; 
(2)  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(9)  The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in time of flood; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site. 
(c)  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall notify the applicant for a variance, in writing, that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the 100-year flood elevation (a) increases the risks to life and property, and (b) will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. A record of the above notification as well as all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, shall be maintained and any variances which are issued shall be noted in the annual report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3249.1 - Existing structures in floodplain areas. 
(a)  A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, shall be considered a "nonconforming" use or structure, governed by the provisions of Article I, Division 13 of this ordinance {Appendix]. 
(b)  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain areas to an extent or amount of less than fifty (50) percent of its market value shall conform to the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(c)  The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its location in a floodplain area to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or more of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with this ordinance and shall require the entire structure to conform to the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3249.2 - Supplemental definitions (Floodplain Overlay District only). 
    For the purposes of this Division, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows: 
    BASEMENT-Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    ELEVATED BUILDING-A nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers). 
    ENCROACHMENT-The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION-A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION-The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    FLOOD OR FLOODING: 
(1)  A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (a) the overflow of inland or tidal water, or (b) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; 
(2)  The collapse or subsistence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in [paragraph] (1)(a) of this definition; 
(3)  Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph (a)(2) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME-A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. Manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
    MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION-A parcel (or contiguous parcels) or land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    NEW CONSTRUCTION-For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map on or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    SHALLOW FLOODING AREA-A special flood hazard area with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA-The land in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year. 
    START OF CONSTRUCTION-The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory building, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    WATERCOURSE-A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which water flows at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
DIVISION 25. - SPECIAL HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 3250 - Purpose. 
    The Special Housing Overlay District is established to designate areas of Town which are suitable for housing for student organizations including Greek organizations and service clubs, or other chartered groups bound by a common purpose or national organization. Ideally, special housing would be among the most attractive and well-maintained housing in a college community. Special housing use also may serve to preserve older residences and contributing historical structures within the Town, preserving the residential character of a neighborhood as well. 
    Special housing poses significant challenges to the harmony of a neighborhood. These challenges stem from the number of people living together within the residence, the number of nonresident members of the organization that visit the house for organization business, and the number of people who attend social and entertainment events sponsored by the organization. In addition, through hard use, special housing can fall into disrepair. 
    Through the conditional use permit requirements contained in this Overlay District, the Town seeks to permit special housing, and to address the unique challenges that this type of housing entails. In this way, the Town seeks to facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 3251 - Applicability. 
    The following areas of the Town of Blacksburg are hereby established as the Special Housing Overlay District: 
Turner Street between South Main Street and Gilbert Street; 
The Special Housing Overlay District may be extended to additional areas of Town, by the Town Council. However, the District is not intended for single-lot application. The standards of this overlay district are in addition to the district standards of the underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1339, § 15, 9-9-03) 
Sec. 3252 - Permitted uses. 
    In addition to those uses permitted by right or by conditional use permit in the underlying zoning district, the following use is permitted by conditional use permit in the Special Housing Overlay District: 
Residential 
Special Housing 
The standards to be applied in considering any application for Special Housing are found in Article IV, Use and Design Standards, of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 3253 - Term, renewal, and revocation of conditional use permit. 
(a)  Any conditional use permit issued pursuant to these provisions shall be effective for a term of five (5) years, unless a greater or lesser term is specified by Town Council in granting the permit. 
(b)  Any conditional use permit issued pursuant to these provisions may be renewed, upon application of the holder, for such term as specified by Town Council. The application for renewal should document the applicant's adherence to the Site Occupancy Standards, contained in Article IV. The application should also document any change in circumstances related to the Site Development Standards, contained in Article IV. The Town Council shall renew the conditional use permit if it finds that the applicant is in compliance with the Site Occupancy and Site Development Standards. 
(c)  Any conditional use permit issued pursuant to these provisions may be revoked by the Town Council, upon recommendation by the Zoning Administrator following notice of the grounds for the proposed revocation, and a public hearing, at which the holder shall have an opportunity to be heard. Failure to meet the Site Development Standards or the Site Occupancy Standards of Article IV, "Use and Design Standards," or violation of any other term of the conditional use permit shall constitute grounds for its revocation. Town Council's power to revoke the conditional use permit is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other enforcement power the Administrator possesses. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1513, § 1, adopted Apr. 14, 2009, amended § 3253 to read as herein set out. Former § 3253 pertained to term, renewal, and revocation of conditional use permit. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
DIVISION 26. - OPEN SPACE DESIGN OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 3260 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Open Space Design Overlay District is to encourage open space residential design within residential zoning districts. Open space residential design is an alternative method of designing a residential subdivision, at the density prescribed by the underlying zoning district, while preserving thirty (30) percent or more of the site as open space. Open space design results in the more efficient use of land, lower development infrastructure costs, the conservation of land for recreation or aesthetic and environmental enrichment, and an attractive and pleasing living environment. This district is intended to foster high quality site design, significant landscaping and innovative, efficient construction techniques, and promote the establishment of the Town-wide greenway network. Through the use of this overlay district, open space design is permitted in residential zoning districts, without an application for planned residential development zoning. 
Sec. 3261 - Overlay district. 
    The Open Space Design Overlay District is overlaid upon the following residential zoning districts within the Town of Blacksburg: 
R-4 Single Unit Residential R-5 Transitional Residential OTR Old Town Residential RM-27 Low Density Multiunit Residential RM-48 Medium Density Multiunit Residential  
    The effect of the Open Space Design Overlay District is to permit within these residential zoning districts open space subdivisions which comply with the provisions of the overlay district, as an alternative to the subdivision permitted by the underlying zoning district. 
Sec. 3262 - Permitted uses. 
    Those uses permitted by right or by conditional use permit in the underlying zoning district shall be permitted by right or by conditional use permit in the Open Space Design Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 3263 - Site development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: Seventy (70) percent of the minimum lot size of the underlying district. 
(b)  Minimum setbacks: 
Front yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
Side yards: Five (5) feet. 
Rear yard: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(c)  Lots abutting existing public streets or conventionally developed subdivisions shall have the same side and front yard setbacks as provided for in the underlying zoning district. 
(d)  Open space: 
(1)  A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the total district area shall be designated as open space. 
(2)  At least twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum required open space shall be designated for active recreation purposes, and no more than fifty (50) percent shall be so utilized, in order to preserve a reasonable proportion of natural areas on the site. The purposes for which open space areas are proposed shall be documented by the applicant. 
(3)  This requirement shall be in lieu of the requirements of sections 5-1000, 5-1001, 5-1002 and 5-1003 of the Blacksburg Subdivision Ordinance. 
(e)  Open Space Design Overlay Districts shall provide a type B buffer where the developed area of the district abuts RR1, RR2, R-4, R-5, OTR or PR districts. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1369, § 11, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 1415, § 13, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 3264 - Application process. 
    Whenever an open space design subdivision is proposed, the procedures and standards of Article IV, "Approval of Plats" of the Town of Blacksburg Subdivision Ordinance shall apply. 
DIVISION 27. - HISTORIC OR DESIGN REVIEW OVERLAY DISTRICT 
SUBDIVISION 1 - [PURPOSE AND DESIGNATION] 

Sec. 3270 - Purpose. 
    A Historic or Design Review Overlay District is provided in recognition that certain buildings or structures within the Town have important historic, architectural, archaeological or cultural interest. In addition, certain areas of Town have special public value because of notable architectural, archaeological or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community, of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation. The historic overlay provides a vehicle for regulating building design, construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, and demolition in these areas. 
    The purpose of any such District is to provide for protection against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas, buildings, monuments or other features, or buildings and structures of recognized architectural significance which contribute or will contribute to the cultural, social, economic, political, artistic, or architectural heritage of the Town of Blacksburg and the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    This District is also intended to encourage compatible development in areas of the Town having historic or unique architectural value. Specifically, the district is intended to encourage new buildings which are compatible with the existing scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood, encourage the protection of existing neighborhoods and their physical characteristics, and encourage revitalization of the area. 
    The Historic or Design Review Board is intended to be used to implement architectural proffers for conditional or planned zoning districts, in addition to implementing the appropriate standards for any Historic or Design Review District. Any person who proffers architectural controls for a planned district should consider proffering the Historic or Design Review Board as the body which will implement those standards. 
(Ord. No. 1206, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2306. 
Sec. 3271 - Historic or Design Review Board. 
(a)  The Historic or Design Review Board, or "Board," shall have a membership of at least seven (7) and at most nine (9) members who are residents of the Town. All members shall be appointed by the Town Council, and shall have a demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in historic preservation. The membership shall include a member of the Planning Commission, a registered architect, an owner of commercial property within the District and two (2) owners of property within the District who also reside within the District. At least two (2) of the members should have professional training or equivalent experience in any of the following disciplines: architecture, history, architectural history, planning, building or development. The remaining members shall be persons interested in the District or historic preservation, or additional residents and business owners in the District. The members shall serve staggered terms of four (4) years, and each member shall serve until his or her replacement is appointed. The Town Council may appoint members whose property ownership, residence in the district or training or experience satisfies more than one (1) of the requirements of this section; however, in no case shall there be less than three (3) property owners on the Board. 
(b)  The Board shall review applications for development within an historic overlay district as directed by the ordinance establishing the district. The Board shall also hear appeals from decisions of the zoning administrator to deny a certificate of appropriateness. 
(c)  Where the application of design criteria is mandatory, the Board shall issue or deny a certificate of appropriateness based upon the design criteria for the particular Historic or Design Review Overlay District in which the development is proposed to occur. 
(d)  Any decision to deny a certificate of appropriateness shall be set forth in writing, stating the reasons therefore. 
(e)  The Board may ask the Town Council to initiate a study of a proposed historic overlay district. The Board shall comment on studies and rezoning proposals as requested by the Planning Commission or Town Council. 
(f)  The Board shall implement and enforce proffered conditions of conditional or planned zoning districts, if it is so designated in the ordinance creating the district. 
(g)  The Board shall undertake such other tasks as the Town Council may direct. 
(Ord. No. 1206, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 3272 - Designation of a Historic or Design Review Overlay District; process; overview. 
    There shall be a two-step process for designating any area as an Historic or Design Review Overlay District. The first step in the process shall be a study of the proposed district. The second step of the process shall consist of a zoning amendment, which shall be initiated or not pursuant to the provisions of Article I, Division 5 of this chapter [Appendix]. 
(Ord. No. 1206, § 3, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 3273 - Same-Initiation of study. 
(a)  The study of an area for possible Historic or Design Review Overlay designation may originate in one (1) of the following ways: 
(1)  By petition signed by at least fifty-one (51) percent of the owners of real property within the proposed district; 
(2)  By motion of the Planning Commission; 
(3)  By request of the Board; 
(4)  By resolution of Town Council. 
(b)  Only Town Council has the authority to order the study of any proposed historic or design review district. 
(c)  A petition signed by fifty-one (51) percent of the owners of real property within the proposed district may be submitted to the zoning administrator, who shall refer it to the Planning Commission, which shall hold a public hearing and make a recommendation to Town Council. Town Council shall hold a public hearing on the petition, after which it may order the study as requested, deny the petition, or order a study with some modifications to the petition's request. 
(d)  The Planning Commission may make a recommendation to initiate a study on its own motion after a public hearing. The Town Council shall act to initiate a study only after a public hearing. 
(e)  Public hearings conducted by the Planning Commission and Town Council under this section shall be conducted after notice and publication as provided in Zoning Ordinance section 1153, and Virginia Code § 15.2-2204. 
(f)  The area to be studied shall have logical boundaries based upon existing streets, alleys, blocks, and established neighborhoods. A single lot may be designated for study. 
(g)  Any proposed Historic or Design Review Overlay District, for which a study meeting the requirements of section 3271 and section 3273 has been completed prior to the original effective date of this section, shall be exempt from compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1206, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 3274 - Same-Study of proposed area. 
    A study of an area proposed for Historic or Design Review Overlay District designation shall address the following issues, among such other issues as may be identified by Town Council: 
(1)  Does the study area contain one (1) or more buildings or structures, or other features with important historic, architectural, archaeological or cultural interest? 
(2)  Does the study area have special public value because of notable architectural, archaeological or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community, of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation? 
(3)  What design criteria are related to the study area's significance or character? 
(4)  What types of development should be subject to an administrative review or board review? 
(5)  What types of development, if any, should be exempt from administrative or board review? 
(6)  Should the application of the design criteria be advisory or binding? 
    In addressing questions numbers (4) and (5), above, the purpose of the study shall be to recommend review procedures which will be relatively simple with minimum delay for those actions which will have little if any permanent effect on the character of the district or on a significant structure, but to require a more thorough review for actions which may have a substantial effect on the character of the district or on a significant structure. When the study is completed, it shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, who shall refer the study to the Planning Commission for review. 
(Ord. No. 1206, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 3275 - Same-ReZoning Ordinance. 
    Any ordinance rezoning an area to a Historic or Design Review Overlay District shall contain the following provisions, among such others as Town Council may deem appropriate: 
(1)  A finding that: 
(a)  The district includes buildings or structures or other features with important historic, architectural, archaeological or cultural interest, or 
(b)  The district has special public value because of notable architectural, archaeological or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community, of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation. 
(2)  Design review criteria which shall apply to development in the district. Design review criteria may be incorporated by reference to a separate document. The design criteria may include provisions for building materials; building orientation; building massing, volume, and scale; architecture; continuity of building facades; or other criteria necessary to preserve the features which qualify the district for historic or design review overlay designation. 
(3)  The types of development which shall be subject to the design criteria, including a designation of an administrative or board review for different types of development. 
(4)  The types of development, if any, which shall be exempt from the design criteria. 
(5)  Whether the application of the design criteria is advisory or binding. 
(Ord. No. 1206, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 3276 - Effect of designation. 
(a)  Upon the designation of any area as a Historic or Design Review Overlay District, no building or structure, including signs, shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, restored, relocated, or demolished within any such district unless reviewed and where required approved by the zoning administrator or Board or, on appeal, by the Town Council, unless the development is declared exempt from the design criteria in the ordinance designating the district. 
(b)  Any designated Historic or Design Review Overlay District shall be an overlay to the existing underlying zoning districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map and, as such, the provisions for the overlay district shall serve as a supplement to the underlying zoning district provisions. In case of conflict between the provisions or requirements of this district and the underlying district, the provisions of this district shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1206, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 3277 - Administrative review. 
(a)  The zoning administrator shall review applications for development within a historic overlay district as provided by ordinance. Where the application of the design criteria is mandatory, the Board shall issue or deny a certificate of appropriateness based upon the design criteria for a District in which the development is proposed to occur. Any decision to deny a certificate of appropriateness shall be set forth in writing, stating the reasons therefore. 
(b)  The applicant or any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board to grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness may appeal the decision to the Town Council. The appeal shall be initiated by submitting a written notice of appeal to the zoning administrator, setting forth the grounds of the appeal, within thirty (30) days of the Board's decision. 
(Ord. No. 1206, § 3, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 3278 - Appeal to Town Council. 
    The applicant or any person aggrieved by a binding decision of the Historic or Design Review Board may appeal the decision to Town Council, by submitting a written notice of appeal to the Zoning Administrator, setting forth the grounds for the appeal, within thirty days of the Historic or Design Review Board's decision. Town Council shall schedule a public hearing, and shall hear and decide the appeal within sixty days of receipt by the Zoning Administrator. Failure of the Town Council to decide the appeal within this time shall constitute denial of the appeal. The Town Council may uphold, reverse, or modify the Historic or Design Review Board's decision. 
(Ord. No. 1206, § 3, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 3279 - Appeal to circuit court. 
    The applicant or any person aggrieved by a final decision of the Town Council may appeal to the Circuit Court for Montgomery County by filing a petition at law, setting forth the alleged illegality of Town Council's action, within thirty days after the final decision is rendered by the Town Council. The filing of the petition shall stay the decision of the Town Council pending the outcome of the appeal to the court, except the filing of the petition shall not stay the decision of the Town Council if the decision denies the right to raze or demolish a historic landmark, building or structure. The court may reverse or modify the decision of the Town Council, in whole or in part, if it finds upon review that the decision is contrary to law or that its decision is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of discretion, or it may affirm the decision of the Town Council. 
(Ord. No. 1206, § 3, 5-11-99) 
Sec. 3280 - Definitions applicable in Historic or Design Review Overlay Districts. 
    For the purposes of administering Historic or Design Review Overlay Districts, certain terms are defined as follows: 
    "Alteration" means any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, affecting the exterior of a building or structure, or any enlargement or reduction of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the relocating of a building or a structure from one (1) location to another. This term includes any change of, including removal of, any architectural details, or any addition to a part or the entire exterior of any structure. Depending upon the extent or nature of an alteration, it may constitute "demolition" and be subject to the provisions of this Article governing demolition. 
    "Certificate of Appropriateness" means a permit issued by the Historic or Design Review Board granting an applicant approval for the alteration, change, demolition, relocation, excavation, or new construction of a contributing site, contributing structure, landmark, noncontributing structure, or noncontributing site in an historic district. 
    "Contributing structure or property" means any building, structure, or site which contributes to the overall historic and architectural significance of the district and architectural integrity with little or no diminishment in value reflecting the character of that time or is capable of yielding important information about the historically significant period. Qualities of the building, structure or site which contribute to the overall historic and architectural significance of the district include, but are not limited to, setback, massing, height, materials, architectural features and/or fenestration. As approved by the Town Council and on file in the Town Clerk's Office, all contributing structures within the district(s) are set forth in the document entitled "Blacksburg Historic District Contributing Structures List." 
    "Demolish" or "demolition" means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in significant part, of a building, structure, site or object. Demolition includes the removal of a building, structure, or object from its site or the removal or destruction of the façade or exterior surface, or exterior changes that destroy the historical significance of the building, structure or object. 
    "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or storage of equipment or materials. The term "development" includes construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, and demolition of a structure. It also includes the erection of a new sign. 
    "Reconstruction" means the act or process of reproducing by new construction the form and detail of a vanished site, structure, landmark, or a part thereof, as it once appeared. 
    "Restoration" means the act or process of returning a building, structure, site or landmark to its former condition and/or appearance, such as a house museum to the time period of a famous resident. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
SUBDIVISION 2 - [ESTABLISHMENT AND DESIGN CRITERIA] 

Sec. 3281 - Establishment of Blacksburg Historic Overlay District. 
(a)  The Blacksburg Historic Overlay District, or "District," originally established by Ordinance 1222 in 1999, is hereby re-enacted. The boundaries of the District are shown on the "Blacksburg Historic District Boundary & Contributing Structures Map" dated November 29, 2010, and amended October 13, 2015, as approved by the Town Council. 
    The District was established for the purpose of promoting the general welfare, education, and recreational benefit of the public through the recognition of this area of the Town as having historic, architectural, and cultural significance. Regulations of the District are intended to protect, restore, and preserve the architectural integrity of existing structures, to create an atmosphere for compatible growth for the future and to ensure that new structures and uses will be in keeping with the character of the District. 
(b)  In re-enacting the District, the Town Council expressly re-affirms its earlier findings that it includes buildings or structures or other features with important historic, architectural, archaeological or cultural interest, including but not limited to the original Town plat, established in 1798, known as the "Sixteen Squares," which is a defining feature of the Town; the Croy-Dawson House of 1839; "Five Chimneys," built in 1840; the Andy Camper House, circa 1850; the Price House, built in 1853; the Thomas-Conner House, built in 1878; and the additional historic contributing buildings identified on the "Blacksburg Historic District Boundary & Contributing Structures Map" and the document entitled "Blacksburg Historic District Contributing Structures List," as amended on October 13, 2015 and approved by the Town Council. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 10-13-15 ) 
Sec. 3282 - Design criteria. 
(a)  Town Council adopts the design criteria contained in the pamphlets entitled "Blacksburg Historic District Design Guidelines," prepared by Landmark Preservation Associates and Dunay + Albright Architects, as amended, dated November 5, 1999, as guidelines for development within this District. No building or structure, including signs, shall be erected, reconstructed, altered, or restored within this District until reviewed for conformance with these design criteria by the zoning administrator or the Board as appropriate. This review shall be an advisory review, except as set forth in the following paragraph. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the advisory nature of the guidelines as applied to the foregoing types of development, no contributing structure within this District shall be razed, demolished, or relocated until the razing, demolition, or relocating thereof is approved by the Board, or, on appeal, by the Town Council after consultation with the Board. Furthermore, no new building or structure shall be constructed or erected on the site of a razed, demolished or relocated contributing structure until a redevelopment plan for the site is approved and a certificate of appropriateness issued by the Board, or on appeal by the Town Council. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 3283 - Applicability of design guidelines. 
(a)  For all structures in the District, the following types of development shall be exempt from the design guidelines: 
(1)  Repainting, except painting of masonry that has been unpainted; 
(2)  Interior alterations that have no visible effect upon the exterior of the structure; 
(3)  Minor repairs that maintain the integrity of existing walls, roofs, windows, doors, fences, and other property features where no change in design or material is proposed; 
(4)  Planting grass, trees, and shrubs. 
(b)  For all structures in the District, the following types of development shall require an advisory administrative staff review for conformance to the design guidelines: 
(1)  Any construction or alterations not visible from a public street; 
(2)  Construction or replacement of fences in rear or side yards; 
(3)  Development of decks in rear yards; 
(4)  Replacement of side or rear stairs, stoops or porches; 
(5)  Replacement of windows, doors and shutters where different material is proposed; however enlargement or redesign of windows visible from the street requires Board review; 
(6)  Removal of trees or landscaping plants. 
(c)  The following types of developments for non-contributing structures within the District shall require an advisory administrative staff review for conformance to the design guidelines: 
(1)  Demolition of noncontributing accessory structures; 
(2)  Exterior alteration of noncontributing structures, except proposed additions are subject to an advisory review by the Board. 
(d)  Any other type of development of any structure within the District shall require the advisory review of the Board. 
(e)  The razing, demolition or relocation of a noncontributing structure within the District shall be subject to an advisory review by the Board. 
(f)  The razing, demolition or relocation of a contributing structure shall be subject to the mandatory review and approval of the Board. A mandatory review and approval of a plan shall be required by the Board for the redevelopment of a site that contains a contributing structure or previously contained a contributing structure that was razed, demolished or relocated. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 3284 - Mandatory review by Historic or Design Review Board. 
(a)  No contributing structure within this District shall be razed, demolished or relocated until the razing, demolition or relocating thereof is approved by the Board, or, on appeal, by the Town Council after consultation with the Board. If the razing, demolition or relocation of a contributing structure is (i) approved by the Board or the Town Council or (ii) permitted by Zoning Ordinance section 3286, no new building or structure shall be constructed or erected on the site of the razed, demolished or relocated contributing structure until a redevelopment plan for the site is approved by the Board, or, on appeal, by the Town Council. Once the redevelopment plan is approved, a certificate of appropriateness for the new construction shall be issued. 
(b)  In determining the appropriateness of any application for the razing, demolition, or removal, the Board, or the Town Council on appeal, shall consider the criteria set forth in the "Relocation and Demolition" guidelines approved by Town Council. Where a development plan for a new use of the site is proposed and submitted, the Board shall review the proposed development pursuant to the regulations and intent of the district. The demolition application and redevelopment plan are not required to be submitted at the same time for review by the Board. Consideration shall be given to the benefits of the proposed redevelopment and the trade-offs for demolition of the building or structure. 
(c)  Appeals of the decision of the Board regarding redevelopment plans shall be processed in the manner provided by Zoning Ordinance section 3285. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 3285 - Appeals to Town Council. 
(a)  The owner of a contributing structure who is denied approval to raze, demolish, develop or relocate by the Board may appeal the denial to Town Council as provided by Zoning Ordinance section 3278. The applicant or any person aggrieved by a final decision of Town Council to grant or deny a permit to raze, demolish, develop or relocate an historic landmark, building or structure may appeal Town Council's decision to the Montgomery County Circuit Court in accordance with Zoning Ordinance section 3279. 
(b)  An owner of property subject to the requirement of a redevelopment plan and certificate of appropriateness for construction or erection of a new building or structure on the property who is denied approval by the Board may appeal the denial to Town Council. The applicant or any person aggrieved by a final decision of Town Council to grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness may appeal Town Council's decision to the Montgomery County Circuit Court in the manner provided by Zoning Ordinance section 3279. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 3286 - Demolition as matter of right. 
(a)  In addition to the right of appeal to Town Council, the owner of a contributing structure shall, as a matter of right, be entitled to raze or demolish the contributing structure provided that: 
(1)  The owner has appealed the Board's decision to the Town Council; 
(2)  The owner has for the period of time set forth in the same schedule hereinafter contained and at a price no more than its fair market value, made a bona fide offer to sell the contributing structure, and the land pertaining thereto, to the Town or to any person, firm, corporation, government or agency thereof, which gives reasonable assurance that it is willing to preserve and restore the contributing structure and the land pertaining thereto; and 
(3)  No bona fide contract, binding upon all parties thereto, shall have been executed for the sale of any such contributing structure, and the land pertaining thereto, prior to the expiration of the applicable time period as set forth in the time schedule contained below in subsection (b). 
(b)  As required by Virginia Code § 15.2-2306, the time schedule for offers to sell shall be as follows: 
(1)  Three (3) months when the offering price is less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00); 
(2)  Four (4) months when the offering price is twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more but less than forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00); 
(3)  Five (5) months when the offering price is forty thousand dollars ($40,000.00) or more but less than fifty-five thousand dollars ($55,000.00); 
(4)  Six (6) months when the offering price is $55,000 or more but less than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00); 
(5)  Seven (7) months when the offering price is seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or more but less than ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00); 
(6)  Twelve (12) months when the offering price is ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00) or more. 
(c)  When a property owner has met the requirements in preceding subsection (a) to demolish or raze a contributing structure as a matter of right, the zoning administrator shall, upon request by the property owner, certify this fact in writing. 
(d)  Any appeal to the Montgomery County Circuit Court from the decision of the Town Council, whether instituted by the owner or by any other aggrieved party, shall not affect the right of the owner to make a bona fide offer to sell the property per the terms of this section. 
(e)  The time schedule in preceding subsection (b) shall commence when the owner has filed (i) the required appeal to Town Council and (ii) a statement documenting the bona fide offer to sell the property. If the property is not for sale at the time of the final action of Town Council the applicant shall proceed in a timely manner to offer the property for sale. In no case shall the offer to sell the property be made more than one year after the final action of Town Council. Upon the expiration of the applicable time schedule contained in subsection (b), the owner, or subsequent owner, shall have the right to relocate, raze or demolish the structures on the property. 
(f)  Before making a bona fide offer to sell, an owner shall first file a statement with the director of the Planning and Building Department identifying the property, stating the offering price, the basis for the offering price, the date the offer of sale is to begin and the name of the real estate agent, if any. No time period as set forth in the schedule above shall begin to run until such statement has been filed. Within fourteen (14) days of receipt of a statement, the director of the Planning and Building Department shall distribute copies to the Board and to Town Council and the town manager. 
(g)  When relocating, razing or demolition is authorized by this section, the director of the Planning and Building Department shall inform the property owner in writing of the requirements for a redevelopment plan and a certificate of appropriateness for any new building or structure to be constructed on the site of the relocated, razed, demolished or relocated historic landmark, building or structure. 
(h)  Any appraisals required by this section to determine the fair market value shall be obtained and paid for by the Town. However, the property owner may submit an independent appraisal. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 3287 - Redevelopment plan criteria. 
(a)  Within three (3) months prior to the submission of a redevelopment plan, the property owner or the owner's agent shall schedule a pre-application meeting with the director of Planning and Building. The property owner or the owner's agent shall attend the pre-application meeting, which shall consist of a discussion of the proposed redevelopment and the requirements of this ordinance. The chair of the Board may assign two (2) members of the Board to attend the pre-application meeting. 
(b)  The following is the redevelopment plan submittal criteria for sites where a contributing structure has been razed, demolished, or relocated. The Board reserves the right to request applicants return with additional specifications. In consideration of a redevelopment plan, and in addition to any required site plans, architectural plans or building permits, the Board may require any or all of the following information and any other relevant materials as may be deemed necessary for its review at the pre-application meeting or at a formal review of the redevelopment plan at a Board meeting: 
(1)  Statement of proposed use. 
(2)  Description of how the proposed project meets the design elements outlined in the Blacksburg Historic District Design Guidelines, "New Construction," specifically: 
(a)  Building type and design considerations; 
(b)  Strengthening street and continuous landscape; 
(c)  Balancing pedestrian areas and parking; and 
(d)  Material and craftsmanship. 
(3)  Proposed building materials, including their composition, texture, finish, quality and appearance, which may include product brochures, specifications, and samples. 
(4)  Designs for exterior signage, lighting and graphics, to include description of materials, colors, placement and means of physical support, lettering style and size. 
(5)  The following supplemental information may be submitted, but is not required: 
(a)  Statement of estimated construction time; 
(b)  Description of how the proposed project meets the goals, objectives and action strategies outlined in the Town's Comprehensive Plan, Blacksburg 2046; 
(c)  Design and material details of doors and windows, ornamentation, including any product specifications; 
(d)  A written statement concerning construction methods to be employed. 
(c)  No redevelopment plan shall be deemed complete until the zoning administrator has determined that the use of the proposed building or structure is permitted under the current zoning for such property. 
(d)  A certificate of appropriateness shall become null and void if no significant improvement or alteration is made in accordance with the approved redevelopment plan within two (2) years from the date of approval. On written request from an applicant, the Board may grant a single extension for a period of up to two (2) years, if, based upon submissions from the applicant, the Board finds that conditions on the site and in the area of the proposed project are essentially the same as when approval originally was granted. 
(e)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy permit by the building official, the applicant shall obtain a certificate of compliance from the zoning administrator indicating the compliance of the final building or structure with the terms and conditions of the approved redevelopment plan. The zoning administrator shall base the certificate of compliance on the certificate of appropriateness from the Board. The zoning administrator shall notify the chair of the Board when any certificate of compliance has been requested and provide the Board with copies of all correspondence related to the approval or denial of a certificate of compliance. The zoning administrator shall issue all certificates of compliance, whether the Board approved the redevelopment plan or whether the governing body approved it upon appeal. An applicant may appeal the denial of a certificate of compliance to the Board. The owner may appeal the decision of the Board on the certificate of compliance to Town Council in the manner provided by Zoning Ordinance section 3285. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 3288 - Right to repair or rebuild. 
    If any contributing structure in the District is damaged or destroyed by a natural disaster, act of God or accidental fire, the property owner may repair or rebuild the contributing structure to restore it to its structural configuration immediately preceding the damage or destruction without the requirement of a redevelopment plan as described in the preceding paragraph. Prior to any building permit being issued for such repairs or rebuilding, the Board shall review the proposed measures for repair or rebuilding to confirm that the measures will restore the contributing structure to its structural configuration immediately preceding the damage or destruction. In all other cases a redevelopment plan shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 1604, § 2, 3-8-11) 
DIVISION 28. - MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 3300 - Purpose. 
    The purposes of the Mixed Use Development (MXD) District are as follows: 
(a)  Providing a flexible tool for developing a mix of land uses that are consistent with the Town's Comprehensive Plan, while protecting adjacent residentially zoned property from adverse impacts. 
(b)  Facilitating and promoting mixed-use developments that are transit-oriented as well as pedestrian friendly. 
(c)  Promoting investment - consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and compatible with the character and quality of adjacent parcels - in locations where investment is otherwise impeded due to small lot sizes, inefficient shape of the property, the shallow depth of the property on the primary street frontage, existing underutilized development, or development that exhibits functional obsolescence. 
(d)  Facilitating a diversity of housing types. 
(e)  Creating vibrant public spaces through the use of pedestrian-oriented design principles and enhanced aesthetic design of buildings and structures. 
(Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 3301 - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses and structures are permitted by right, subject to all other applicable requirements contained in the Zoning Ordinance: 
Residential 
Multifamily Dwelling 
Single-family, Attached 
Townhouse 
Two-family Dwelling 
Home Occupation 
Civic* 
Administrative Services 
Community Recreation 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Center 
Home for Adults 
Life Care Facility 
Nursing Home 
Open Space 
Post Office 
Public Parks and Recreational Areas 
Public Recreation Assembly 
Religious Assembly 
Safety Services 
Shelter 
Utility Services, Minor 
Office * 
Financial Institutions (without drive-through) 
General Office 
Medical Office 
Commercial* 
Automobile Renting/Leasing 
Automobile Parts/Supply 
Brewpub 
Clinic 
Commercial Indoor Entertainment 
Communication Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Hotel/Motel 
Neighborhood Convenience Store 
Outdoor Display (pursuant to Section 3302) 
Parking Facility 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Restaurant, Fast Food 
Restaurant, General 
Restaurant, Small 
Retail Sales 
Specialty Shop 
Studio, Fine Arts 
Veterinary Hospital/Clinic 
Miscellaneous 
Accessory Structures 
*Without external speakers only. Any use that incorporates an external speaker may be permitted only with a conditional use permit. 
(b)  The following uses may be allowed with a conditional use permit: 
Residential 
Single-family, detached 
Civic 
Club 
Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary 
Educational Facilities, College/University 
Lighting, public park and recreation area field 
Public Assembly 
Utility Services, Major 
Office 
Outpatient Substance Abuse Treatment Center 
Financial Institutions (with drive-through) 
Commercial 
Automobile Repair 
Bed & Breakfast 
Business Support Services 
Car Wash 
Commercial Indoor Sports and Recreation 
Funeral Home 
Gasoline Station 
Grocery Store 
Pawn Shop 
Restaurant, Drive-in 
Retail Sales, Large Format 
Miscellaneous 
Broadcasting and Communication Facility 
Laboratory 
Research & Development 
(Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 3302 - Site development standards. 
(a)  Minimum lot size: None. 
(b)  Minimum street frontage: Thirty (30) feet. 
(c)  No setbacks are required for structures with elevations facing inward to another use or common area within the same MXD Development. Setbacks for structures with elevations facing an abutting public road (excluding alleys) shall be as follows: 
(1)  Existing or Designated Local Street 
a.  Front: None 
b.  Side: None 
c.  Rear: None 
(2)  Existing or Designated Collector Street 
a.  Front: Ten (10) feet 
b.  Side: None; provided that with corner lots, a side yard facing the street shall be five (5) feet 
c.  Rear: None 
(3)  Existing or Designated Arterial Street 
a.  Front: Ten (10) feet 
b.  Side: None; provided that with corner lots, a side yard facing the street shall be five (5) feet 
c.  Rear: None 
(d)  Maximum Residential Density: Forty-eight (48) bedrooms per acre in the MXD Development. This density shall be calculated by multiplying the total MXD Development area (encompassed by the project boundaries exclusive of any public rights-of-way existing at the time the site development plan is submitted) by the number of bedrooms permitted per acre. 
(e)  Maximum Lot Coverage: None. 
(f)  Maximum MXD Development Coverage: Eighty-five (85) percent of the total MXD Development area. 
(g)  Maximum Structure Height: Sixty (60) feet; provided that when a building abuts a RR1, RR2, R-4, R-5, OTR, RM-27, RM-48 or a PR zoning district boundary, its height shall not exceed the base maximum height permitted in the abutted zoning district by more than ten (10) feet for any part of a structure within one hundred (100) feet of the abutted district. When a public right-of-way abuts a MXD Development area, one half of the width of this right-of-way shall be included in the one hundred (100) foot dimension when calculating maximum building height for the area abutting the right-of-way. 
(h)  Automobile/vehicle entrances shall be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on the surrounding area. A maximum of two (2) curb cuts shall be allowed per street frontage of any lot. Factors including the number of existing curb cuts in the area, the potential for increased traffic hazards and congestion, and the number of travel lanes of the street that serves the site shall be used to determine the number of curb cuts permitted. 
(i)  All utility lines (electric, telephone, cable television lines, etc.) shall be placed underground. 
(j)  The gross residential floor area in any MXD Development shall be no less than a minimum of ten (10) percent and no greater than a maximum of seventy-five (75) percent of gross floor area within the MXD Development. 
(k)  The maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family, plus two (2) persons unrelated to the family; or no more than four (4) unrelated persons. 
(l)  If the MXD Development is to be implemented in phases, each phase shall have adequate provision for access, parking, storm water management, utilities, and other public improvements to serve that phase of development. Each phase shall be provided with temporary and/or permanent transitional features, buffers, or protective areas to prevent adverse impact on completed phases, future phases, and adjoining property. Open space areas shall be reasonably proportioned in each phase of the project. Provision of recreational area and construction of any recreation facilities shall be required to meet the residential component of each phase. Each site plan or subdivision phase shall incorporate a statistical record of requirements of the overall MXD Development, as provided in prior approved phases, and provided within the subject phase. Such statistical information shall address the following: 
(1)  Open space; 
(2)  Parking; 
(3)  Recreation space; 
(4)  Landscaping; and 
(5)  Lot coverage 
(Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 3303. - Additional site development standards. 
(a)  A minimum of ten (10) percent of the MXD Development gross land area shall be reserved as open space. Land devoted to extensions/connections to greenways and pocket parks or pedestrian plazas that are at least three hundred (300) sq. ft. in area shall count towards open space. 
(b)  A specific recreational activity area or areas shall be developed and maintained for the residents of the MXD Development that may be part of the required open space, site facility or interior to buildings. This recreational activity area shall be a minimum of five (5) percent of the residential gross floor area in the MXD Development. Such recreational area shall be provided within one thousand (1,000) feet of the residences served. This distance shall be measured from the closest point of the building housing the residential dwelling units to the recreational activity area via the shortest, straight-line distance. The recreational area shall be developed and maintained as follows: 
(1)  The location, shape, slope, and condition of land shall be suitable for a specific recreational activity; 
(2)  The amount of land devoted to recreation shall be a function of the population to be served. Consideration shall be given to the size of the development, number and characteristics of expected residents, proximity to other available recreational facilities, topography, and natural features on the site; and 
(3)  An indoor recreational area may be used as a specific recreational activity area, but shall not be considered as part of the open space required. 
(c)  Street Connectivity and Circulation. In MXD Developments, street connectivity and circulation shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Adjacent commercial uses that generate one hundred (100) trips or more per day according to the Institute of Transportation Engineer's Trip Generation Manual shall provide a cross access drive(s) to allow circulation within the Mixed Use Development and between the Mixed Use Development and adjacent nonresidential or Mixed Use Development sites. The Administrator may modify or waive the requirements of this subsection where the characteristics or layout of abutting properties would make development of a unified or shared access and circulation system impractical. 
(2)  A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be established along all streets designated as "collector" or greater and the building site shall incorporate one or more of the following: 
a.  Service drive connections or cross access corridors between Mixed Use Developments and adjacent sites preferably visible from the street; a design speed of ten (10) mph and sufficient width to accommodate two-way travel aisles designed to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles; 
b.  Stub-outs and other design features to show that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross-access via a service drive; and 
c.  A unified access and circulation system plan that includes coordinated or shared parking areas is required where practicable. 
(3)  To implement this subsection, applicants for a building permit or site plan shall do the following: 
a.  Record an easement allowing cross access between properties served by the joint use driveways and cross access or service drive; and 
b.  Pedestrian paths and sidewalks shall be connected with all building entrances, with each other and with public rights-of-way in a manner that is direct and convenient for the pedestrian. Pedestrian and bike paths for a MXD Development shall allow for residents of surrounding residential neighborhoods to access the Development without requiring travel along a major thoroughfare. 
(d)  Pedestrian Amenities and Transit Facilities. 
(1)  General Pedestrian Amenities. Each new structure and every expansion to an existing building shall provide pedestrian amenities located to serve the subject structure, as specified herein. The number of general pedestrian amenities provided shall comply with the following schedule: 
Size of Structure in Gross Floor Area Number of Amenities <5,000 sq. ft. 1 5,000-10,000 sq. ft. 2 10,000-50,000 sq. ft. 3 >50,000 sq. ft. 4  
Acceptable pedestrian amenities include the following: 
a.  A public outdoor seating plaza adjacent to or visible and accessible from the street (minimum useable area of three hundred (300) square feet); 
b.  Installation of street trees that exceed the minimum caliper requirement or minimum height requirement by twenty-five (25) percent; 
c.  Public art including but not limited to sculptures, fountains, or clocks with a value equal to or greater than one percent of construction value of the structure; 
d.  Pocket parks with a minimum usable area of three hundred (300) square feet; 
e.  Transit facilities; or 
f.  Similar pedestrian amenities as determined by the Administrator in considering the characteristics of the proposed development. 
(2)  Transit Facilities. In addition to general pedestrian amenities, any MXD Development with gross floor area in excess of seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet shall provide a transit shelter immediately served by either a publicly dedicated bus pull-in lane in the adjacent right-of-way or an internal road with a turn-around area meeting the minimum dimensional requirements of section 5-309 of the Subdivision Ordinance. At least one such transit facility shall be located so that no occupiable structure's main entrance is more than one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) feet away as measured along an improved walking path. If transit shelters already exist in conformity with these requirements at the time of site plan approval, new shelters shall not be required. If transit stops already exist in conformity with these requirements but no shelter exists, a shelter shall be provided at the existing stop. 
(Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 3304. - Outdoor display. 
    The outdoor display of merchandise for sale shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  Outdoor display of merchandise for sale shall be accessory and limited to products that are customarily associated with the operation of the principal business located on the premises and conducted by employees of such principal business. There shall be no outdoor display of merchandise for sale by any person or entity operating or conducting a business that is different or distinct from the principal business; 
(b)  The outdoor display area shall not be located in areas intended for traffic and pedestrian circulation or parking as identified on the approved site development plan; and, 
(c)  Any proposed outdoor display area(s) shall be approved by the Administrator as part of a Site Development Plan Review. 
(Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 3305. - Building design standards. 
    In addition to the other regulations set forth in this Division, the building design standards set forth in this Section shall apply to the exterior appearance and design of all new construction and exterior building renovations in the MXD District. 
(a)  To the extent possible, new buildings in a MXD Development should be oriented toward both adjacent and internal streets in a manner that addresses both streets and pedestrian areas along those streets. 
(b)  Each principal structure shall have at least one street or major access oriented entrance which serves as a major entrance for the structure. For the purposes of this section, loading docks, service entries and similar entries shall not be considered to be major entries. 
(1)  If any public road-facing elevation of a principal structure does not contain a major entrance as described above, a minimum twenty (20) foot perimeter landscaping bed shall be provided immediately adjacent to the public road. 
(2)  Specifications for the perimeter landscaping bed are as follows: 
a.  Plantings within this area shall include trees located no more than eighteen (18) feet on center and vegetative ground cover. 
b.  Berms may be used in addition to, but not instead of plantings. 
c.  If the structure is one hundred (100) feet or less from the public street, the planting bed shall be at least as long as and centered (as much as practical) on an orthographic projection of the structure perpendicular to the subject right-of-way. 
d.  If the structure is more than one hundred (100) feet from the public street, the planting bed shall be at least twice as long as and centered (as much as practical) on an orthographic projection of the structure perpendicular to the subject right-of-way. 
e.  Drives serving the Mixed Use Development may be placed through the planting bed only when impractical to avoid the planting bed. 
(c)  It is the intent of this section to avoid MXD Developments with long or tall monotonous facade designs including, but not limited to, those characterized by unrelieved repetition of shape or form or by unbroken extension of line. Each facade, other than that area regulated by subsections below, shall have no more than thirty (30) feet of contiguous horizontal wall length devoid of transparent windows on any floor, unless that length of wall includes architectural features such as piers, columns, defined bays, or other planer change of the building, so that scale, rhythm, and visual interest are created. However, compliance with this requirement is not required for walls that meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Two (2) walls face one another, are separated by not more than thirty (30) feet and the space between the two (2) walls is used for servicing the buildings; or, 
(2)  The wall faces an area devoted solely to loading and delivery and is screened from view from all public rights-of-way, parking areas and abutting residential areas. 
(d)  Building entrances, not including service entrances, shall be clearly defined by a building projection or recess, or accented by a sheltering element such as an awning, overhang, arcade, or portico. 
(e)  All roof-top equipment shall be screened in building materials that match the structure or which are visually compatible with the structure. 
(Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07) 
DIVISION 29. - LIVE/WORK/SELL ARTS OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Sec. 3400 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the Live/Work/Sell Arts Overlay District, hereinafter referred to as the "Arts Overlay District" is to provide an optional set of development standards in a targeted sub-area of the Town's Arts and Cultural District that includes residential areas around the downtown. The creation of an optional Arts Overlay District, as permitted by Code of Virginia § 15.2-1129.1, allows zoning regulations to be more responsive to the needs of artists in the community, encourages more owner-occupied dwellings in this geographic area and expands the economic opportunities for home owners, property owners and artists. 
(Ord. No. 1655, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Sec. 3401 - Applicability. 
(a)  The following area of the town is hereby established as the Live/Work/Sell Arts Overlay District: 
Land in and around the downtown area generally located from Clay Street to Giles Road and around Progress Street as depicted on the map entitled "Boundaries of the Live/Work/Sell Arts Overlay District" prepared by the Engineering and GIS Department and dated April 11, 2016 which is filed in the planning and building department and incorporated herein by reference. The boundaries of the Arts Overlay District as depicted are hereby adopted. 
(b)  The provisions of the Arts Overlay District shall be available for use only on parcels containing a detached single-family dwelling unit. Parcels with a two-family dwelling unit shall be eligible for the provisions of the Arts Overlay District only if both dwelling units are owned by the same person or entity and a conditional use permit is granted. Parcels with two-family dwelling units that do not meet the provisions above, multifamily dwelling units or single-family dwelling units with an accessory dwelling unit are not eligible for the Arts Overlay District, unless the existing structures are converted to one (1) single-family dwelling unit. 
(c)  Using the Arts Overlay District can benefit a property owner by allowing greater intensity and variety of uses than would otherwise be allowed in the base Zoning District. 
(d)  The use of the Arts Overlay District is optional. However, if the owner or artist opts to use the Arts Overlay District, the provisions and requirements of the Arts Overlay District must be used in their entirety. An owner or artist may not select only specific elements from the Arts Overlay District regulations. 
(e)  Not all types of arts uses will be appropriate for the residential areas eligible for the optional Arts Overlay District. The addition of arts uses can be very compatible and add to the character of a neighborhood, but some more intensive uses with negative impacts such as noise, fumes, or dust will not be suitable for location in the Arts Overlay District. 
(f)  All applicable standards and reviews must be met for properties located within the Historic or Design Review Overlay District. 
(g)  To the extent that the Arts Overlay District does not address a specific development requirement, the regulations contained in the base zoning district and in the entirety of the Zoning Ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1655, § 1, 12-11-12; Ord. No. 1794, § 1, 6-14-16 ) 
Sec. 3402 - Definition of terms and use types. 
    For purposes of the Arts Overlay District, the words and phrases listed below shall have the following meanings: 
    ARTS RELATED PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT SERVICES: Establishments primarily engaged in providing instruction in (i) the visual arts, including, but not limited to, painting, sculpting, photography and folk arts, or (ii) the performing arts including, but not limited to, music, dance, and theatre. This does not include any instruction related to tattooing or body piercing. 
    ARTIST STUDIO, SINGLE-ARTIST (or "Single-Artist Studio"): A building, or portion thereof, used as a place of work by a single artist engaged in (i) the visual arts, including, but not limited to, painting, sculpting, photography and folk arts, or (ii) the performing arts, including, but not limited to, music, dance, and theatre. A single-artist studio includes the creation of work and the accessory sale of work produced only by the artist in his or her own studio. Works from other artists may not be offered for sale. This does not include a studio for tattooing or body piercing. 
    ARTIST STUDIO, MULTIPLE-ARTISTS (or "Multiple-Artists Studio"): A building, or portion thereof, used as a place of work by multiple artists engaged in (i) the visual arts, including, but not limited to, painting, sculpting, photography and folk arts, or (ii) the performing arts, including, but not limited to, music, dance, and theatre. A multiple-artists studio includes the creation of work and the accessory sale of work produced by multiple artists using or sharing the studio(s). Works from other artists may not be offered for sale. This does not include a studio for tattooing or body piercing. 
    GALLERY: A building or portion thereof, used as a place to exhibit and offer for sale the works of visual artists, including, but not limited to, painting, sculpting, photography and folk arts. 
(Ord. No. 1655, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Sec. 3403 - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The permitted and conditional uses shall be as allowed in the underlying base residential zoning districts except as modified herein. 
(b)  The following use(s) are permitted by right in the Arts Overlay District: 
-  Single-Artist Studio in a single-family dwelling unit. 
-  Multiple-Artists Studio in a single-family dwelling unit and meeting the criteria in subsection 3404(e)(3). 
(c)  The following uses, which due to potential scale, intensity or other possible negative impacts to the residential neighborhood, are allowed only by conditional use permit, so that each request may be considered on a case-by-case basis: 
-  Arts-related personal improvement service. 
-  Art restoration. 
-  Framing and presentation of other artists' work. 
-  Gallery. 
-  Multiple-Artists Studio not meeting the standards in [subsection] (b) above. 
-  Parking in front of the building line for Single-Artist Studio. 
-  Repair of musical instruments. 
-  Single-Artist Studio in a two-family dwelling unit. 
(d)  The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the Arts Overlay District: 
-  Framing and presentation of the artist's own works associated with a Single-Artist Studio. 
-  Instruction of a maximum of two (2) students at any one (1) time associated with a Single-Artist Studio. 
(Ord. No. 1655, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Sec. 3404 - Site development standards. 
(a)  The standards of this Arts Overlay District for qualifying uses are the district standards of the underlying residential zoning district, except as modified herein. 
(b)  Setbacks: 
Front: Twenty (20) feet or the existing building line, whichever is less. 
Side: Seven (7) feet. 
Rear: Ten (10) feet. 
Other: Additions to existing structures are allowed to continue the building line of the existing structure. When a new freestanding structure is constructed on a corner lot, the structure shall meet the front yard setback for the street frontage determined to be the front yard, and shall meet a ten-foot setback on the second street frontage. The size of additions or new structures is not limited, provided that the requirements for lot coverage and floor area ratio are met. 
(c)  Lot coverage: Fifty-five (55) percent. 
(d)  Floor area ratio: Thirty-five one-hundredths (.35). 
(e)  Residential density and occupancy: 
(1)  Dwelling units in the Arts Overlay District may be owner occupied or rented. 
(2)  For a Single-Artist Studio in a single family dwelling unit the artist must be a resident in the dwelling unit. For a Single-Artist Studio in a two-family dwelling, the artist must be a resident in one (1) of the dwelling units. 
(3)  For a Multiple-Artists Studio as a permitted use, the maximum number of artists allowed shall be two (2) and both artists must be full time residents in the dwelling unit. 
(4)  In all cases, maximum dwelling unit occupancy shall be a family plus one (1) individual unrelated to the family. 
(5)  No additional dwelling units shall be created and no accessory structures shall be used for living purposes. 
(f)  Outdoor storage: Outdoor storage is not allowed. All materials and work products must be stored in a completely enclosed building. 
(g)  Outdoor impacts: 
(1)  Any creation of art that generates excessive noise, or is not compliant with Section [Chapter] 13 of the Town Code or otherwise not in keeping with noise levels appropriate to a residential zoning district, is prohibited. Noise generating activities must be located in a completely enclosed building that attenuates the noise. 
(2)  Excessive lights, dust, fumes, odors, and vibrations are prohibited unless the impacts are mitigated and the activity is located in a completely enclosed building that attenuates the lights, dust, fumes, odors and vibrations. Excessive lights, dust, fumes, odors and vibrations are those that due to intensity, frequency, or duration disrupt the ability of the neighbors to enjoy and use their property. 
(h)  Solid waste disposal: All solid waste shall be disposed of in individual residential pick-up containers. No dumpsters are allowed. 
(i)  Parking: 
(1)  Parking shall be determined pursuant to Schedule B of Section 5220(a) or by the terms of a conditional use permit. 
(2)  No additional parking is required for a Single-Artist Studio. If additional parking is added, it shall be located behind the front building line unless approved through a conditional use permit. 
(j)  Signage: 
(1)  One (1) sign to identify the arts use shall be allowed. The sign may be either an attached sign or a freestanding sign, and shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area. 
(2)  One (1) arts affiliation sign is allowed. An arts affiliation sign may be single- or double-sided and may not exceed one and one-half (11/2) square feet in area. Arts affiliation signs shall be issued by the member arts organization. 
(3)  One (1) directional sign is allowed, not to exceed four (4) feet in height and three (3) square feet in area. 
(4)  No other signage is allowed for the arts or the residential use except for address purposes with address numbers not to exceed twelve (12) inches in height and except as in compliance with the provisions below. 
(5)  An attached sign may be attached as follows: 
a.  Attached to the façade of the main building. 
b.  Attached to a structure containing an arts studio. 
c.  Attached to a fence on the property, provided it does not impede pedestrians or impact sight distances. 
(6)  A projecting or suspended sign is allowed in lieu of an attached sign. The projecting sign may be hung from a porch or other portion of the main structure or studio. No portion of any sign is allowed above the first floor. 
(7)  A freestanding sign shall be a maximum of five (5) feet in height. Such freestanding sign may be placed within five (5) feet of the property line provided that the sign does not impede pedestrians or impact sight distances. A freestanding sign may be a pole sign, but may not be a monument sign. 
(8)  Signs may be double-sided. 
(9)  Changeable copy is not allowed. 
(10)  The sign may only be illuminated externally. No internal illumination, either of a sign box or individual channel letters, shall be allowed. Illumination is allowed only after dusk and only when the arts use is open for business. No light source shall create an unduly distracting or hazardous condition to a motorist, pedestrian or the general public. Lighted signs shall be placed, shielded or deflected so as not to shine into residential dwelling units or structures, or impair the road vision of the driver of any vehicle. Light sources for a sign shall be directed and shielded to limit direct illumination of any object other than the sign. 
(11)  Neon signage is not allowed. 
(12)  Strip lighting is not allowed. 
(13)  Alterations to the sign regulations contained in the Arts Overlay District may be requested as part of a conditional use permit. This can include a greater number or size of signs, location of signs or the use of artistic sign embellishments. 
(Ord. No. 1655, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Sec. 3405 - Use and design standards. 
(a)  The use and design standards of this Arts Overlay District are the use and design standards of the underlying residential zoning district, except as modified herein. 
(b)  Artist studio, single-artist: 
(1)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement, is encouraged. 
(2)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  Hours of operation when open to the public shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(4)  No employees are allowed except for occasional paid labor for special events. 
(5)  New driveway entrances shall meet residential construction standards. 
(6)  For new construction and additions, the scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and residential in character. The principal structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(7)  The architecture and historic character of existing structures shall be retained. 
(8)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. 
(9)  New parking areas shall be located behind the front line of the principal building and screening is required between the parking and adjacent properties and streets. Any modification to this standard regarding the location of parking requires the processing of a conditional use permit. 
(c)  Artist studio, multiple-artists: 
(1)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use adds value to the neighborhood based on the nature, condition, and neighborhood impact of adjacent uses. 
(2)  The architecture and historic character of existing structures shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(3)  For new construction and additions, the scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and residential in character. The principal structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(4)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. 
(5)  Hours of operation when open to the public are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday, unless modified through the conditions of the conditional use permit. 
(6)  The number and duration of special events and the number of employees shall be set forth in the conditional use permit application and will be regulated through conditions of the conditional use permit based on neighborhood compatibility. 
(7)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(8)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement, is encouraged. 
(9)  New entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on the surrounding residential neighborhood. New driveways shall meet residential construction standards. 
(10)  All proposed parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. An exception may be granted as part of the conditional use permit based on the parcel configuration, the location of existing structures, existing parking and mature trees, or other similar circumstances. Parking shall be screened from adjacent properties and streets with the intent of blocking car headlights. 
(d)  Arts related personal improvement services: 
(1)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use adds value to the neighborhood based on the nature, condition, and neighborhood impact of adjacent uses. 
(2)  The architecture and historic character of existing structures shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(3)  For new construction and additions, the scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and residential in character. The principal structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(4)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. 
(5)  Hours of operation when open to the public are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday, unless modified through the conditions of the conditional use permit. 
(6)  The number and duration of special events and the number of employees shall be set forth in the conditional use permit application and will be regulated through conditions of the conditional use permit based on neighborhood compatibility. 
(7)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(8)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement, is encouraged. 
(9)  New entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. New driveways shall meet residential construction standards. 
(10)  All proposed parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. An exception may be granted as part of the conditional use permit based on the parcel configuration, the location of existing structures, existing parking and mature trees, or other similar circumstances. Parking shall be screened from adjacent properties and streets with the intent of blocking car headlights. 
(e)  Gallery: 
(1)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use adds value to the neighborhood based on the nature, condition, and neighborhood impact of adjacent uses. 
(2)  The architecture and historic character of existing structures shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(3)  For new construction and additions, the scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and residential in character. The principal structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(4)  For existing structures no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. 
(5)  Hours of operation when open to the public are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday, unless modified through the conditions of the conditional use permit. 
(6)  The number and duration of special events and the number of employees shall be set forth in the conditional use permit application and will be regulated through conditions of the conditional use permit based on neighborhood compatibility. 
(7)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(8)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement, is encouraged. 
(9)  New entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(10)  All proposed parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. An exception may be granted as part of the conditional use permit based on the parcel configuration, the location of existing structures, existing parking and mature trees, or other similar circumstances. Parking shall be screened from adjacent properties and streets with the intent of blocking car headlights. 
(Ord. No. 1655, § 1, 12-11-12) 
Sec. 3406 - Application and administration process. 
(a)  The Planning and Building Department shall maintain a registry of all users of the Arts Overlay District. 
(b)  Use of the Arts Overlay District provisions requires registration with the Planning and Building Department prior to the commencement of any use allowed herein and prior to any building or site improvements. 
(c)  The artist (any person actually engaging in the arts activities described in this division) shall be the applicant for the registration. If the artist is not the owner of the property, consent from the owner to apply for the Arts Overlay District must be included in the application. 
(d)  A pre-application meeting is required for Arts Overlay District registration. This meeting will serve as the pre-application meeting for the filing of a site plan or conditional use permit if required. 
(e)  Upon successful demonstration of compliance with the requirements of the Arts Overlay District, the applicant shall be given a letter of registration confirmation from the Planning and Building Department. 
(f)  The registration must be renewed on a yearly basis and staff shall be allowed to inspect the property to determine continued compliance with the requirements contained herein. 
(g)  The registration approval shall not transfer to subsequent owners. Potential purchasers may apply and receive pre-purchase approval of registration with an inspection for compliance within thirty (30) days of purchase. If the arts studio installation is not complete to the extent necessary for an inspection within the thirty (30) days, the applicant may request in writing one (1) sixty (60) day extension from the Planning and Building Department. 
(Ord. No. 1655, § 1, 12-11-12) 
ARTICLE IV. - USE AND DESIGN STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - AGRICULTURAL USES 

Sec. 4100 - Agricultural and forestry uses. 
Sec. 4101 - Agriculture. 
(a)  General Standards: The keeping of swine for commercial purposes shall be prohibited except in the Agricultural and Forestal District. 
(b)  Rural Residential and Rural Residential II: 
Minimum lot size: Two (2) acres. 
Sec. 4102 - Farm employee housing. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  No more than one (1) farm employee dwelling for every twenty-five (25) acres of land, or portion thereof, in the agricultural use shall be permitted. 
(2)  All farm employee housing shall comply with the setback requirements for a principal structure. 
Sec. 4103 - Forestry operations. 
(a)  Creek Valley District standards: Forestry operations conducted in the Creek Valley District shall be conducted in accordance with a Timber Management Plan that has been approved by the Virginia Department of Forestry. 
Sec. 4104 - Stables, private. 
    General standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: Two (2) acres. 
(2)  On lots of less than five (5) acres, no more than two (2) horses or ponies shall be permitted. 
(3)  Stables and corrals shall comply with all the setback and minimum building separation requirements for accessory buildings. 
(4)  Stables shall properly manage animal waste so as to not create a nuisance or health hazard to adjoining or nearby property owners. 
Sec. 4105 - Wayside stands. 
    General standards: 
(1)  Front yard setback: Fifteen (15) feet from any public right-of-way, except twenty-five (25) feet from right-of-way of a collector road. 
(2)  At least fifty (50) percent of the goods and/or merchandise shall be produced on the site of the stand, on adjoining contiguous property or on other properties owned or leased by the owner of the site on which the wayside stand is located. 
(3)  Entrances and exits to roads shall be clearly delineated, shall be so located as to provide safe ingress and egress from roads, and shall be approved by the Town. 
(4)  Maximum size: Two hundred (200) square feet. 
(5)  A minimum of three (3) parking spaces shall be provided. 
Sec. 4106 - Kennel, private. 
(a)  Generally: 
(1)  Private kennels are permitted only on land included in the Agricultural and Forestal District. 
(2)  A private kennel shall be permitted only when accessory to a single-family dwelling. 
(3)  Exterior runs, pens and other confined areas designed to house four (4) or more animals shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from any property line. For the purposes of this section, six-foot high architectural perimeter fencing of a yard shall not be considered a confined area, and is not subject to this setback requirement. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL USES 

Sec. 4200 - Residential uses. 
Sec. 4201 - Accessory apartment. 
(a)  All accessory apartments subject to these Use and Design Standards shall be registered through the accessory apartment permit program pursuant to Zoning Ordinance § 1271. 
(b)  General standards: 
(1)  The accessory apartment shall be clearly secondary and accessory to primary dwelling unit and shall not change its character as a detached single family residence. 
(2)  The accessory apartment must be within the primary structure. The accessory apartment shall not be located in a separate freestanding structure. 
(3)  The maximum size of an accessory apartment shall be eight hundred (800) square feet. 
(4)  The accessory apartment shall have working smoke detectors in each room of the apartment. Carbon monoxide detectors are required with the use of gas heating or appliances. 
(5)  The accessory apartment shall have an egress window in any sleeping area. 
(6)  No commencement of use of an accessory apartment shall occur until the property owner has an approved accessory apartment permit from the Town of Blacksburg and any building permits have been issued for construction related to the accessory apartment and the work completed and approved by the Town. 
(7)  The underlying zoning district development standards for lot coverage, height, setbacks and floor area ratio that apply to the primary dwelling shall also include the accessory apartment in the calculations of these standards. 
(8)  Off-street parking is not required for the accessory apartment. If any parking is proposed, the parking shall be of a pervious surface such as pervious pavers, pervious concrete or other pervious material as approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(9)  Occupancy standards are set forth in the underlying zoning district regulations. 
(10)  Incorporation of universal design standards. 
To promote aging-in-place and housing for differently-abled individuals, universal design features are required in accessory apartments based on the chart below. Any appeals to the applicability of these requirements shall be submitted to the Planning and Building Department with the accessory apartment permit application and will be reviewed and acted upon by the Planning Commission. 
Design Feature Required Use of existing finished space Conversion of unfinished to finished space New Construction Universal design door handles X X X Zero step entry+ X X 36" wide entry doorway+ X 36" wide hallways+ X No step or low step shower+ X X Sleeping area, full bathroom and kitchen on same level+ X X  
+ Excludes basement apartments where steps are needed to access the apartment 
( Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 4-11-17 ) 
Secs. 4202-4210 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4211 - Home occupations. 
(a)  Intent-Under certain unique circumstances a small-scaled commercial activity may be an appropriate use within a residential dwelling. The standards and procedure for establishing such uses are intended to limit the scope and nature of such uses and ensure compatibility with the adjoining properties. 
(b)  General standards: 
(1)  Home occupations shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and shall not change its character as a residence. The use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, or other means inconsistent with a residential use shall be prohibited. 
(2)  No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which creates noise in excess of 60 dB(A) measured at the property line, or vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the premises or through common walls. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or through common walls. 
(3)  There shall be no outside storage of goods, products, equipment, or other materials associated with the home occupation, nor shall these materials be stored inside an accessory structure. No toxic, explosive, flammable, radioactive, or other hazardous materials used in conjunction with the home occupation shall be used, sold, or stored on the site. 
(4)  The maximum floor area permitted for a home occupation shall be twenty-five (25) percent of the finished floor area of the dwelling unit. Storage of goods or products shall not exceed five (5) percent of the finished floor area. 
(5)  One (1) person who is not a permanent resident of the dwelling may be engaged or employed in the home occupation. 
(6)  The street address of the home occupation may be used in advertisements. 
(7)  No sign may be placed on the property advertising the home occupation. 
(8)  The type and volume of traffic generated by a home occupation shall be consistent with the traffic generation characteristics of other dwellings in the area. In addition, the lot or property on which the home occupation is conducted shall not have any parking spaces added to it during the time the home occupation is being conducted. 
(9)  The home occupation shall not increase demand on water, sewer, or garbage collection services to the extent that the combined demand for the dwelling and home occupation is significantly more than is normal to the use of the property for residential purposes. 
Secs. 4212-4215 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4216 - Multifamily dwelling. 
(a)  Generally: 
(1)  Except in the DC district, the minimum separation between each multifamily dwelling shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall connect each unit to the parking area serving that unit, to other units on-site, and to other buildings or uses on adjacent lots. 
(3)  The street elevation of the residential buildings shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the front unit. 
(4)  All parking spaces shall be located behind the front building line. However, Town Council may grant a special exception as authorized by § 1112. 
(5)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  Except in the Downtown Commercial District and the MXD District, for any development of twenty (20) or more bedrooms, a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross land area shall be reserved as open space. A specific recreational activity area or areas shall be developed and maintained for the residents of the development as part of this open space, as follows: 
a.  The size, location, shape, slope, and condition of the land shall be suitable for a specific recreational activity. 
b.  The amount of land devoted to recreation shall be a function of the population to be served. Consideration shall be given to the size of the development, number and characteristics of expected residents, proximity to other available recreational facilities, topography, and natural features on the site. 
c.  Safety buffers shall be provided for users of recreational facilities and equipment using recognized engineering and recreation standards. 
d.  Indoor recreational area may be used as a specific recreational activity area. The indoor recreational area shall count as a part of lot coverage, as regulated by the district standards. 
(7)  The site development plan or the conditional use permit application shall contain a floor plan of the proposed multifamily dwellings, showing the location, size, and type of rooms proposed. 
(8)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is permitted. Courtyard style parking is permitted. 
(9)  An approved owner's association shall be established for multiunit structures having individually-owned units and common open space and facilities, including but not limited to parking and streets. The charter of the owner's association shall contain provisions for maintenance of the common facilities and shall be subject to the approval of the Administrator. The Charter and covenants relating to maintenance of the common facilities shall be recorded prior to issuance of the certificate of zoning compliance. 
(b)  Additional Standards in the OTR and R-5 zoning districts: 
(1)  The minimum side setback for all new principal structures is twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  A type B buffer yard as specified in Article V, Division 3 shall be provided when the lot is adjacent to property zoned R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1, or RR2. 
(3)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(4)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. The architecture and historic character of structures in the OTR zoning district shall be retained. 
(5)  The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(6)  Newly constructed multifamily dwelling shall be residential in scale. Building height, massing, and size shall be compatible with adjacent residential development. 
(c)  Additional standards in the DC zoning district: 
(1)  The design of new structures containing multifamily dwellings should be in keeping with the character of the area of downtown in which they are to be located. The design should include a transition in height and scale to adjacent less intensive land uses. This is particularly important for new structures located on side streets and on sites that are abutting or across the street from existing one (1) and two-story single family homes. The Historic District Advisory Guidelines should be considered in the design of multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Off-street parking must be provided for bedrooms obtained through use of the density bonus in § 3142(c). Required parking is for the bonus bedrooms only and may be provided on-site or provided off-site within one-fourth (1/4) mile walking distance of the site and secured through a lease agreement. Any area used for off-site parking may be leased on a yearly basis but the parking requirements must continue to be met throughout the life of the project; a letter demonstrating compliance with this requirement must be provided to the Zoning Administrator each year by July 1st. On-site parking must be located in the rear of the buildings. 
(3)  In the DC district, courtyard parking is not allowed on the street frontage and may only occur in the rear yard behind buildings. 
(4)  Durable building materials must be used and no vinyl siding is allowed on any façade visible from the public right-of-way. Vinyl siding is not in keeping with the character of the Downtown Commercial zoning district or the Blacksburg Historic Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 10-13-15 ) 
Secs. 4217-4219. - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4220 - Single-family, attached. 
(a)  Intent- The following provisions are intended to offer greater flexibility in providing a variety of housing options to meet the changing demands and needs of the public. The standards below are intended to accommodate new developments of attached single-family dwellings, as well as to allow attached single-family dwellings as in-fill development on scattered sites in existing residential areas. In addition, these standards are intended to insure that single-family attached units will be residential in scale, and compatible with surrounding residential development. 
(b)  General standards: 
(1)  Vertical stacking of attached units is not permitted. 
(2)  A maximum of four (4) units may be attached. 
(3)  The principal orientation of each residential building shall be parallel to the street it faces. The street elevation of each residential building shall have at least one (1) street oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the unit. 
(4)  Public street frontage shall not be required for attached units. 
(5)  District standards regarding building height and floor to area ratios shall apply to individual single-family attached units on a lot-by-lot basis. 
(6)  All parking spaces shall be located behind the front building line except for individual driveways serving individual units. Shared driveways are encouraged, with the recordation of perpetual easements to provide for the use and maintenance of the shared driveway. Courtyard style parking is permitted, as is the use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement. 
(7)  For any development of five (5) or more single-family attached dwellings, a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross land area shall be reserved as open space. A specific recreational activity area or areas shall be developed and maintained for the residents of the development as part of this open space, as follows: 
a.  The size, location, shape, slope, and condition of the land shall be suitable for a specific recreational activity. 
b.  The amount of land devoted to recreation shall be a function of the population to be served. Consideration shall be given to the size of the development, number and characteristics of expected residents, proximity to other available recreational facilities, topography, and natural features on the site. 
c.  Safety buffers shall be provided for users of recreational facilities and equipment using recognized engineering and recreation standards. 
d.  Indoor recreational area may be used as a specific recreational activity area. The indoor recreational area shall count as a part of lot coverage, as regulated by the district standards. 
(8)  Sidewalks shall connect each unit to the parking area serving that unit, to other units on-site, and to other buildings or uses on adjacent lots. 
(9)  Trash dumpsters, trash containers, recycling containers, and mechanical equipment shall be screened per the requirements of Article V. 
(10)  A subdivision plat shall be submitted with the site development plan or with the conditional use permit application, where individual attached units are to be constructed on individual lots. The subdivision plat shall meet the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance, except the dedication of park land shall not be required where twenty (20) percent open space is provided. 
(11)  The final subdivision plat shall not be submitted for review until the foundation has been constructed. 
(12)  All new buildings shall be residential in style and consistent in character with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  Additional standards in the RR1, RR2, OTR, and PR districts: 
(1)  A maximum two (2) single-family attached buildings may be constructed adjacent to each other. 
(2)  Minimum side setback for new construction of single-family attached units: 
15 feet. 
(3)  A type A buffer yard (see Article V) shall be required on any lot which abuts the R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1, or RR2 zoning district. 
(4)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(d)  Additional standards in the OTR district: The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(e)  Additional standards in RR1 and RR2: Townhouses, two-family dwellings, and single-family attached combined shall constitute a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the dwelling units in any subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1415, § 14, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Secs. 4221-4223 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4225 - Special housing. 
(a)  Intent. These standards are intended to minimize the potential conflicts between special housing and nearby residential uses, to insure that any residence used for special housing is used in a safe manner, and to provide for adequate parking and recreational facilities as required by the resident organization. 
(b)  Standards in the Special Housing Overlay District: 
(1)  Site development standards: 
a.  Minimum lot size: Eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet 
b.  Parking 
1.  A minimum of one (1) space per resident plus one (1) space per ten (10) nonresident active members shall be provided. Parking must be provided off-street, behind the front building line, with an all-weather surface. 
2.  Multiple student organizations may share one (1) parking area, under the following conditions, in addition to those contained in Article V, Division 2 [of this Appendix]: 
Meetings and/or social events are not held on the same date; 
The parking facilities must be within eight hundred (800) feet of each house; 
3.  Safe and convenient pedestrian access must exist or be provided; 
4.  The area must contain at least one (1) space for each bed available at both houses combined, plus one (1) space per ten (10) nonresident active members of the larger of the organizations sharing parking. 
5.  Parking requirements may be reduced with an approved mass transit or alternative transit plan per Article V, Division 2 [of this Appendix]. 
c.  Location. The house must be located on a Blacksburg Transit bus route or within 0.5 mile of campus. 
d.  Storage. There shall be no outside storage of bicycles or other equipment, except a bike rack is permitted behind the front building line. 
e.  Solid Waste. A solid waste dumpster with appropriate screening shall be provided for the use of the occupants of the house. As an alternative, a trash enclosure may be provided, behind the front building line. Dumpsters may be clustered in a shared location to serve adjacent special housing uses. The special housing shall meet the requirements for commercial solid waste and commercial recycling of Chapter 22 of the Town Code. 
f.  Screening. Architectural screening of brick or wood panel, at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided for any lot which abuts a single-family, single-family attached, two-family or townhome structure. The purpose of the architectural screening is to provide a visual barrier, as well as a noise barrier and physical obstacle between the properties, and the proposed design of the fence must accomplish these purposes. The architectural screening shall extend along the side yards from the front building line to the rear lot line, and along the rear lot line. Landscaping shall be provided adjacent to this screening on the exterior face. 
g.  Recreation facilities. A specific recreational activity area or areas may be developed and maintained for the members of the organization. Any proposal for an outdoor recreational facility must be included in the conditional use permit application, or in the renewal request, or an application for conditional use permit amendment. The outdoor recreational facility should be designed to minimize the impacts upon adjacent properties, e.g. noise, lighting, and hours of operation. No overhead outdoor lighting shall be permitted for the illumination of an outdoor recreational facility. 
h.  Outdoor furniture. Outdoor furniture shall be appropriate for such use. Indoor furniture, such as upholstered chairs and couches, shall not be used on porches, in yards, or other outside areas. 
i.  Signs. An identification sign, attached to the residence, of a maximum size per the underlying district is permitted, with lighting directed toward the sign. The lighting shall not cause a glare onto adjacent properties or oncoming traffic. Any sign must be approved as an element of the conditional use permit. 
(2)  Site Occupancy Standards: 
a.  Maximum occupancy shall be in compliance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code for Existing Structures and the conditional use permit. The Town will conduct an annual inspection of the property to verify compliance. 
b.  Building maintenance shall be in compliance with the Virginia Uniform statewide Building Code for Existing Structures. The Town will conduct an annual inspection of the property to verify compliance. 
c.  The organization shall have a Resident Manager. The name of the Resident Manager shall be registered annually with the Planning and Building Department. This person, or his or her designee, must be present during social events held at the house. The name of any designee shall be registered with the Police Department prior to the event. 
d.  The organization shall make a prompt and effective response to neighborhood complaints concerning lifestyle conflicts such as, but not limited to, excessive noise, accumulation of debris, public intoxication of members or guests, trespassing, and property damage. A "neighborhood relations committee," consisting of representatives from the organization the neighborhood, civic organizations, and the Town, shall be established to receive, investigate, and respond to such complaints. For fraternities and sororities, membership in the umbrella organization created by the Town, Virginia Tech, the Interfraternal Council, and the Panhellenic Council, will fulfill this requirement. 
e.  The organization shall take effective measures to ensure that activities conducted at the residence are conducted in compliance with Town and Virginia laws, including, but not limited to, laws pertaining to under-age drinking, public drunkenness, excessive noise, weeds and debris, overcrowding, sexual assault, and anti-hazing rules. 
f.  The architecture and historic character of structures in the Special Housing Zoning District shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1339, § 16, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(c), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Secs. 4226-4230 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4231 - Townhouse. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section that townhouses be allowed in areas where they are or may be appropriately intermingled with other compatible types of housing. The purpose of the following design standards is to ensure the efficient, economical, comfortable and convenient use of land and open space and serve the public purposes of zoning by providing an alternative to conventional arrangements of yards and buildable areas. 
(b)  General standards: 
(1)  Except in the DC District a maximum of eight (8) dwelling units may be constructed in a contiguous series of townhouses. No more than two (2) contiguous series shall be constructed adjacent to each other. 
(2)  Proposals for facades and treatment of external materials shall be submitted as a condition of site plan approval. Townhouse design, scale, and building materials shall be single-family residential in appearance. 
(3)  Except in the DC District, the minimum separation between any contiguous series of townhouse units shall be twenty (20) feet from any other contiguous series of townhouse units. The minimum separation between any contiguous series of townhouse units shall be forty (40) feet from any other adjacent principle structure. Zoning district setback requirements do not apply to individual townhouse lots. Setback requirements do apply to the lot or parcel from which the individual townhouse lots are subdivided. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall connect each townhouse to the parking area serving that townhouse, to other buildings within the site, and to other buildings or uses on adjacent lots. 
(5)  The principal orientation of all townhouses shall be the street or parking area on which the lot has frontage. There shall be at least one (1) entrance facing the street, and the principal windows of the townhouse shall also face this street. 
(6)  Shared driveways are permitted, with the recordation of perpetual easements to provide for the use and maintenance of the shared driveway. Courtyard style parking is permitted. Only one (1) yard, either the front yard or the rear yard, or in the case of an end unit, the side yard, shall be improved with a driveway or parking spaces. All parking spaces shall be located behind the front building line. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by § 1112. 
(7)  Entrances to the townhouse development shall be minimized and designed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any adjacent residential neighborhood. 
(8)  All accessory structures must be located behind the rear building line of the townhouse. 
(9)  A subdivision plat shall be submitted with the site development plan or with the conditional use permit application, where individual attached units are to be constructed on individual lots. The subdivision plat shall meet the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance, except the dedication of park land shall not be required where twenty (20) percent open space is provided per subsection (11), below. 
(10)  The final subdivision plat shall not be submitted for review until the foundation has been constructed. 
(11)  Except in the MXD and DC Districts, for any development of five (5) or more townhouses a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross land area shall be reserved as open space for community recreation use. A specific recreational activity area or areas shall be developed and maintained for the residents of the development as part of this open space, as follows: 
a.  The size, location, shape, slope, and condition of the land shall be suitable for a specific recreational activity. 
b.  The amount of land devoted to recreation shall be a function of the population to be served. Consideration shall be given to the size of the development, number and characteristics of expected residents, proximity to other available recreational facilities, topography, and natural features on the site. 
c.  Safety buffers shall be provided for users of recreational facilities and equipment using recognized engineering and recreation standards. 
d.  Indoor recreational area may be used as a specific recreational activity area. The indoor recreational area shall count as a part of lot coverage, as regulated by the district standards. 
(12)  The site development plan or the conditional use permit application shall contain a floor plan of the proposed townhouses, showing the location, size, and type of rooms proposed. 
(13)  The floor to area ratio shall be computed as the gross floor area of all dwelling units to the parent parcel. 
(14)  Front yard setbacks for adjacent units shall vary a minimum of three (3) feet and a maximum of eight (8) feet. 
(15)  Public street frontage shall not be required for any lot of record platted for townhouse development. 
(c)  Additional standards in the R-5 district: 
(1)  Newly-constructed townhouses shall be residential in scale. Building height, massing and size shall be compatible with adjacent residential development. 
(2)  Minimum side setback for new structures: Ten (10) feet. 
(3)  A buffer yard of at least ten (10) feet shall be required on any lot which abuts the R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1, or RR2 zoning district. 
(4)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(d)  Additional standards in the RR1 and RR2 zoning districts: 
(1)  A maximum of four (4) dwelling units may be constructed in a contiguous series of townhouses. No more than two (2) contiguous series shall be constructed adjacent to each other. 
(2)  Townhouse units shall constitute a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the dwellings in any subdivision. 
(e)  Additional standards in the DC zoning district: 
(1)  Townhouses shall be oriented to the street and the primary entrance shall be facing the street. Differentiation between the public sidewalk space and the townhouse is required and may be accomplished with one (1) or more of the following design elements: 
a.  Variation in building articulation and setback in keeping with the character of the historic district; or 
b.  Elevation of the entrance above or below sidewalk a minimum of two (2) feet and maximum of five (5) feet. 
(2)  The ground floor space of the townhouses adjacent to the sidewalk/street must contain conditioned habitable living space and not consist solely of garage parking space for the residential unit. 
(3)  Townhouse shall be setback no further than ten (10) feet from the street facing property line as measured from the back of the sidewalk. 
(4)  No off-street parking or one (1) parking space per residential unit are the preferred design options in the DC district. Off-street parking, however, must be provided for bedrooms permitted by the density bonus in § 3142(c). Parking is required for the bonus bedrooms only and may be provided on-site or provided off-site within one-fourth (1/4) mile walking distance of the site secured through a lease agreement. Any area used for off-site parking may be leased on a yearly basis but the parking requirements must continue to be met throughout the life of the project; a letter demonstrating compliance with this requirement must be provided to the Zoning Administrator each year by July 1st. On-site parking must be located in the rear of the buildings. 
(5)  Individual driveways are not permitted. Multiple townhouses must share a common access drive. If parking is provided to multiple units through a common driveway, the driveway may be less than the standard width but in no case less than twelve (12) feet and subject to the Zoning Administrator's determination that the reduced width is still maneuverable and is appropriate to the urban setting of the development. 
(6)  The Residential Infill Guidelines as referenced in the Comprehensive Plan and the Historic District Advisory Guidelines should be considered in the design of the townhouses. The design of new townhouse structures should be in keeping with the character of the area of downtown in which they are to be located. The design should include a transition in height and scale to adjacent less intensive land uses. This is particularly important for new structures located on side streets and on sites that are abutting or across the street from existing one (1) and two-story single family homes. 
(7)  Durable building materials must be used and no vinyl siding is allowed on any façade visible from the public right-of-way. Vinyl siding is not in keeping with the character of the Downtown Commercial zoning district or the Blacksburg Historic Overlay District. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1369, § 14, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 10-13-15 ) 
Secs. 4232-4240 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4241 - Two-family dwellings. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Except in the MXD District, the principal orientation of each residential unit shall be parallel to the street it faces. The street elevation of each residential unit shall have at least one (1) street oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the unit. 
(2)  All parking spaces shall be located behind the front building line. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. Shared driveways are permitted, with the recordation of perpetual easements to provide for the use and maintenance of the shared driveway. Courtyard style parking is permitted, as is the use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement. 
(3)  Except in the MXD District, for any development of five (5) or more two-family attached dwellings, a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross land area shall be reserved as open space for community recreation use. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall connect each unit to the parking area serving that unit, to other units on-site, and to other buildings or uses on adjacent lots. 
(5)  Trash dumpsters, trash containers, recycling containers, and mechanical equipment shall be screened per the requirements of Article V. 
(6)  A subdivision plat shall be submitted with the site development plan or with the Conditional Use Permit application, where individual attached units are to be constructed on individual lots. The subdivision plat shall meet the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance, except the dedication of park land shall not be required in the MXD District or when twenty (20) percent of the area is reserved as open space per subsection (3), above. 
(7)  The final subdivision plat shall not be submitted for review until the foundation has been constructed. The final subdivision plat must be submitted within twelve (12) months of the approval of the preliminary plat. 
(8)  The street elevation of the residential buildings shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the front unit. 
(b)  Additional standards in the OTR district: 
(1)  Minimum side setback: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(2)  A type A buffer yard shall be required on any lot which abuts the R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1, or RR2 zoning district. 
(3)  The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood is encouraged. 
(4)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(c)  Additional standards in the RR1 and RR2: Townhouses, two-family dwellings, and single-family attached, combined shall constitute a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the dwelling units in any subdivision. 
(d)  Additional standards in the R-5 district: 
(1)  Require landscaping: 
Street trees: One (1) tree per thirty (30) feet of road frontage. 
Tree canopy coverage: R-5 requirement is twenty (20) percent. 
Parking lot landscaping: Five (5) percent of the parking lot shall be landscape with trees and groundcover. 
Tree replacement requirement: Any trees on the site which are a caliper of five (5) inches or more at a height of one (1) foot above the ground, or ornamental trees over twelve (12) feet in height which are to be removed during site development shall be replaced. 
(2)  The applicant must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(3)  The historic or design review board shall review all building permit applications and make recommendations to the applicant and Zoning Administrator for amendments to achieve consistency with this Section. These recommendations are advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1278, § 12, 11-13-0; Ord. No. 1308, § 11, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
DIVISION 3. - CIVIC USES 

Sec. 4300 - Civic uses. 
Secs. 4301-4303 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4304 - Administrative services. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet 
(2)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(b)  Additional standards in the R-4, R-5, and OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(2)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  Minimum side setback for new structures: Twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  A type B buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(5)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4305 - Camps. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Any outdoor activity area, swimming pool, or ball field or court which adjoins a residential use type shall have a thirty (30) feet transitional yard, which shall be landscaped in accordance with Article V of this ordinance. Where night-time lighting of such areas is proposed large evergreen trees shall be required in a location appropriate to screen adjoining residences. Any such night-time lighting shall be constructed in accordance with the standards for a residential district contained in Article V of this ordinance. 
(2)  The minimum area for a camp shall be ten (10) contiguous acres. 
(3)  Multiple structures may be constructed on the property, such as cabins, lodges and other facilities typical of a camp provided that all structures comply with the setback requirements for a principal structure from adjoining property lines. 
(4)  Each building intended to accommodate members shall be accessible via an all weather road suitable to accommodate emergency vehicles serving the property. 
(5)  One (1) year-round residence may be constructed as a caretaker's home in addition to other facilities on the property. 
Sec. 4306 - Cemeteries. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot requirement: Ten (10) acres. 
(2)  Minimum frontage: One hundred (100) feet on an arterial street. 
(3)  Any structure used as a religious assembly, office, maintenance building, parking, or similar use shall have a type B buffer yard. 
(4)  A type A buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to an R-4, R-5, RM-27, RM-48, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(5)  No graves shall be located within the buffer yards. 
(6)  Exterior speakers may be permitted by condition of the conditional use permit. 
(7)  All driveway shoulders shall be constructed with a reinforced grass system approved by the Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1258, § 2, 1-9-01; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 4307 - Clubs. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(b)  Additional standards in the R-4, R-5, and OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(2)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  Minimum side setback for new structures: Twenty (20) feet. 
(4)  A type B buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(5)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  The architecture and historic character of structures in the R-5 and OTR zoning districts shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1258, § 2, 1-9-01; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4308 - Community recreation. 
(1)  General standards: Any outdoor activity area, swimming pool, or ball field or court which adjoins a residential use type shall be landscaped in accordance with Article V of this ordinance. Where night-time lighting of such areas is proposed large evergreen trees shall be required in a location appropriate to screen adjoining residences. Any such night-time lighting shall be constructed in accordance with the standards for a residential district contained in Article V of this ordinance. 
(2)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1258, § 2, 1-9-01; Ord. No. 1308, § 12, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4309 - Cultural services. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet 
(b)  Additional standards in the R-4, R-5, and OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  Minimum side setback: Twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  A type B buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(3)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(4)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(5)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(6)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(c)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1258, § 2, 1-9-01; Ord. No. 1308, § 13, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4310 - Day care center. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  All day care centers shall be licensed by the Commissioner of Social Services. 
(2)  Minimum lot size: One (1) acre. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RR1, R-4, R-5, and OTR zoning districts. 
(1)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. Any new buildings shall be residential in character, street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street, and compatible with the surrounding residential development. For existing or new buildings, drop off areas may be located in the front yard, but shall maintain a residential character and appearance. 
(2)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five (45) percent including building and all paved areas. 
(4)  Minimum side setback for new structures: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(5)  A type B buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(6)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(7)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(8)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(9)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(c)  Additional standards in the OTR zoning district: 
The architecture and historic character of structures in the OTR zoning district shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(d)  Additional standards in the RR1 and RR2 zoning districts: Maximum lot coverage: Forty (40) percent. 
(e)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 14, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4311, 4312 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4313 - Education facilities. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Any outdoor activity area, swimming pool, or ball field or court which adjoins a residential zoning district shall have a type C buffer yard. Where exterior lighting of such areas is proposed, large evergreen trees shall be required in a location appropriate to screen adjoining residences. 
(2)  A type B buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(3)  Any area constructed in conjunction with an educational facility intended for the overnight storage of school buses which adjoins a residential zoning district shall provide a type C buffer yard meeting the specifications of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance [Appendix]. 
(4)  Minimum lot size: One (1) acre for the first thirty-five (35) students. Each additional student will require an additional one thousand (1,000) square feet, but no school site will be required to exceed five (5) acres. 
(5)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RR1, R-4, R-5, and OTR zoning districts. 
(1)  Minimum side setback for new structures: Thirty (30) feet. 
(2)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(3)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(4)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(5)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  Additional standards in the RR1 zoning district: 
(1)  The height of any educational facility for which a conditional use permit was granted on or before May 31, 2000, may be a maximum of fifty (50) feet, provided that additional front, side, and rear setbacks of five (5) feet per each foot of height over thirty-five (35) feet shall be provided. 
(2)  Effective October 1, 2000, the conditional use permit for an educational facility may authorize a maximum height of fifty (50) feet, provided that an additional five (5) feet per front, side and rear setback shall be provided for each one (1) foot of height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet. Council may consider the rural character of the area, the impact upon vistas, the building's proportionality to the site, and any factors that may reduce the impact of the proposed height. 
(d)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1247, § 13, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1308, § 15, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4314-4318 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4319 - Home for adults. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  All homes for adults shall be licensed by the Commissioner of Social Services. 
(2)  Minimum lot size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RR1, R-4, R-5, and OTR zoning districts. 
(1)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. Any new buildings shall be residential in character, street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street, and compatible with the surrounding residential development. 
(2)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five (45) percent including building and all paved areas. 
(4)  Minimum side setback for new structures: Twenty (20) feet. 
(5)  A type B buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(6)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(7)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(8)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  Additional standards in the OTR zoning district: The architecture and historic character of structures in the OTR zoning district shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(d)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 16, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4320 - Lighting, public park and recreation area field. 
    The purpose of this lighting is to allow fields in public park and recreation areas to be illuminated at a higher intensity while (i) controlling the spillover of light onto adjacent properties and (ii) protecting public safety by reducing glare from outdoor luminaries. 
(a)  Conditional Use Permit. A conditional use permit is required for public park and recreation area field lighting. Appropriate conditions shall be applied to the conditional use permit to minimize impact on surrounding properties and neighborhoods. 
(b)  General Standards. 
(1)  No public park and recreation area field lighting shall be located in a required buffer yard. 
(2)  Large evergreen trees or other screening technique shall be required in appropriate locations to screen adjoining residences from light trespass or glare. 
(3)  Light sources shall not cast excessive light upon adjacent property or upon a public right-of-way. The maintained horizontal illuminance at grade at adjoining streets shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles, and the maintained horizontal illuminance at grade at adjoining residential properties shall not exceed 0.1 footcandles. 
(4)  The Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to submit a report from a professional lighting engineer detailing how these standards will be met. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 2, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 4321 - Life care facility. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  All life care facilities shall be licensed by the Commissioner of Social Services. 
(2)  Minimum lot size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RR1, R-4, R-5, and OTR zoning districts. 
(1)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. Any new buildings shall be residential in character, street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street, and compatible with the surrounding residential development. 
(2)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(3)  Minimum side setback for new structures: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(4)  A type A buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(5)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(6)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(7)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  Additional standards in the OTR zoning district: The architecture and historic character of structures in the OTR zoning district shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(d)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, §§ 17, 18, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4322-4325 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4326 - Nursing home. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  All nursing homes shall be licensed by the Commissioner of Social Services, as required by Virginia law. 
(2)  Minimum lot size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(3)  All new principal structures shall be residential in character and visually compatible with any surrounding residential development. Principal structures shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(4)  Entrances to the site shall be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety and efficient traffic circulation, and to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. 
(b)  Additional standards in the R-5 district: 
(1)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. 
(2)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(3)  Minimum side setback for new structures: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(4)  A type A buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(5)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(6)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(7)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 19, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4327 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4328 - Open space. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Composition of open space. Open space shall include the most sensitive resource areas of the site. All primary conservation areas located within the development shall be designated open space. In addition, the open space area should include locally significant features of the property. To the greatest extent practicable, all secondary conservation areas, up to at least the minimum required percentage of the remainder of the site, shall be designated open space. In addition, open space shall include areas of the site adjacent to designated open space on adjoining lots. 
(2)  Configuration of Open Space. To the greatest extent practicable, open space land should be designated as a single block with logical straightforward boundaries. Fragmentation of open space land shall be minimized so that it is not divided into numerous small parcels located in various parts of the district. Long, thin strips of open space shall be avoided, unless necessary to connect other significant areas, or when they are designed to protect linear resources such as streams or trails. 
(3)  Recreational Use of Open Space. Open space intended for use as community or public recreation shall be integrated into the residential community in such a way as to maximize its accessibility to residents. It should have appropriate physical characteristics for recreational use. 
(4)  Maintenance of Open Space by an Owner's Association. In the event open space is owned by a Condominium or Homeowner's Association, the following requirements apply: 
a.  Membership must be automatic for all purchasers of house lots or homes; 
b.  By-laws must authorize the Association to place liens on members properties for non-payment of dues; 
c.  The membership of the Association must be of sufficient size to maintain the open space amenities at a reasonable cost to members. 
d.  By-laws must require the Association to maintain insurance coverage to meet possible court judgments arising from the operation of the open space. 
e.  The Charter or covenants relating to maintenance of the open space shall be recorded prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance. 
(5)  Open space shall not include required yards, except for single-family detached. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RR1 and RR2 zoning districts: 
(1)  Walkways or sidewalks shall link residential areas to the open space, if the open space is in a recreational use. 
(2)  Use of open space. 
a.  Permitted uses of open space. Permitted uses of open space are agriculture, horticulture, forestry, and open space, as those terms are defined by Code of Virginia 1950 § 58.1-3230, as amended, and cemeteries. 
b.  Prohibited uses of open space. The following activities are prohibited in open space: 
1.  Any commercial or industrial use of the property other than those uses expressly permitted in subsection (a), above. 
2.  The placement or construction of any buildings, structures, or other improvements, except those accessory to a permitted use of the property. 
3.  The excavation or removal of soil, sand, gravel, rock, peat, or sod, except as may be required in the course of any activity permitted in subsection (a), above. 
4.  The destruction or removal of live trees, except as necessary, in accordance with generally accepted forestry conservation practices, to control or prevent hazard, disease, or fire; provided that trees may be harvested for any purpose, including, without limitation, commercial timber production on a sustained yield basis in accordance with a plan prepared in consultation with a registered professional forester that is designed to protect the conservation values of the open space, including without limitation, scenic and wildlife habitat values. 
5.  The establishment or maintenance of any commercial feedlot, which is a confined area or facility within which the land is not grazed or cropped at least annually and which is used to receive livestock that has been raised off the property for feeding and fattening for market. 
6.  The dumping or other disposal of wastes, refuse, and debris. 
7.  The above-ground installation of new utility systems or extensions of existing utility systems, including, without limitation, water, sewer, power, fuel, and communication lines and related facilities, but excluding irrigation systems. 
8.  The placement of any signs or billboards in the open space. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 27, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1247, § 13, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1258, § 3, 1-9-01; Ord. No. 1339, § 17, 9-9-03) 
Secs. 4329, 4330 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4331 - Post office. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(2)  The use of alternative paving material, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is permitted. 
(b)  Additional standards in the R-4, R-5, and OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  Minimum side setback: Twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  A type B buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(3)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(4)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the office. 
(5)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(6)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(7)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance [Appendix] shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type D buffer yard shall be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(c)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 20, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4331.1 - Public assembly. 
    Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 21, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4332 - Public parks and recreational areas. 
    General standards: 
(1)  Any outdoor activity area, ball field or court, or stadium which adjoins a residential use type shall have a type C buffer yard. 
(2)  Where nighttime lighting of such areas is proposed large evergreen trees shall be required in a location appropriate to screen adjoining residences. Any such night-time lighting shall be constructed in accordance with the standards for a residential district. 
Sec. 4333 - Public recreation assembly. 
(a)  General standards: Any facility which adjoins a R-4, R-5, OTR, RR1, RR2, or PR zoning district shall have a type B buffer yard. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RR1, R-4, R-5, and OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  Minimum side setback for new structures: Twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(3)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking and appearance. Drop-off areas may be located in the front yard, but shall maintain a residential character and appearance. 
(4)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(5)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  The scale, massing, and building design shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(7)  The structure shall be street oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(c)  Additional standards in the RR1 and RR2 zoning districts: 
(1)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.20. 
(2)  Maximum lot coverage: Forty (40) percent. 
(Ord. No. 1339, § 18, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4334-4337 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4338 - Religious assembly. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Any outdoor activity area, swimming pool, or ball field or court which adjoins a residential use type shall have a type C buffer yard. 
(2)  Where exterior lighting of such areas is proposed large evergreen trees shall be required in a location appropriate to screen adjoining residences. 
(3)  A place of religious assembly which adjoins a R-4, R-5, OTR, RR1 RR2 or PR zoning district shall have a type B buffer yard. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RR1, R-4, R-5, and OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  Minimum side setback for new structures: Twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(3)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. Drop off areas may be located in the front yard, but shall maintain a residential character and appearance. 
(4)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(5)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  The scale, massing, and building design shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(7)  The structure shall be street oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(c)  Additional standards in the RR1 and RR2 zoning districts: 
(1)  Maximum floor area ratio: 0.20. 
(2)  Maximum lot coverage: Forty (40) percent. 
(d)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 22, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4339 - Safety services. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(b)  Additional standards in the R-4, R-5, and OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  Minimum side setback: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  A type C buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(3)  Parking for nonemergency vehicles shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(4)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(5)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(6)  Plans for outdoor speakers, emergency siren structures, and antennae towers shall be included with the conditional use permit application, for evaluation of the impact of these uses on the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 23, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4341 - Shelter. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  All new principal structures shall be residential in character and visually compatible with any surrounding residential development. Principal structures shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(b)  Additional standards in the R-5 and OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. 
(2)  Maximum lot coverage: Forty-five (45) percent including building and all paved areas. 
(3)  Minimum side setback for new structures: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(4)  A type A buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(5)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(6)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(7)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(8)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  Additional standards in the OTR zoning district: The architecture and historic character of structures in the OTR zoning district shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(d)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 24, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4342-4349 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4350 - Utility services, major. 
(a)  In considering an application for a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission and Town Council shall consider the justification for the location of the proposed utility service and any alternative locations which may be available. 
(b)  The minimum lot size may be reduced as part of approval of the conditional use permit provided all setback and yard requirements are met and all other dimensional requirements are achieved. 
(c)  The height limitation contained in each district may be increased as part of the approval of the conditional use permit. 
(d)  Outdoor storage of materials and equipment, except during construction of the utility facility, shall be prohibited, unless specifically requested and approved as part of the conditional use permit. Outdoor storage areas shall comply with the screening provisions contained in Article V, Division 3 [of this Appendix]. 
(e)  Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be compatible with the surrounding area, so that these facilities or structures will not adversely affect nearby properties. 
(f)  Screening and buffering consistent with this ordinance shall be required, unless specifically modified as part of the approved conditional use permit. A type D buffer yard shall be provided. 
(g)  Sewer and water utility services shall be designed with a service area and capacity consistent with the purposes of the respective zoning district and the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(h)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 25, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
DIVISION 4. - OFFICE USES 

Sec. 4400 - Office uses. 
Secs. 4401-4409 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4410 - Financial institutions. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(2)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(3)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the office. 
(4)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance [Appendix] shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type D buffer yard shall be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(5)  The use of alternative paving material, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is permitted. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RR1, RR2, R-5, and OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  Lot coverage: Maximum fifty (50) percent including buildings and paved surfaces. 
(2)  Maximum two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor area. 
(3)  Maximum two (2) drive-through bays. 
(4)  The architectural character of the building shall be consistent with residential surroundings. 
(5)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(c)  Additional standards in the R-5 and OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  The retention and use of upper floors for residential purposes is encouraged, so as to continue and enhance the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(2)  A financial institution which adjoins a R-4, R-5, OTR, RR1, RR2, or PR zoning district shall have a type A buffer yard. 
(3)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. 
(4)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(5)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(6)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(d)  Additional standards in the RR1 and RR2 zoning districts: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum frontage one hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Front setback: Fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way of a local road; thirty (35) feet from a collector road with a right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet or greater; sixty (60) feet from the center line of a collector road with a right-of-way width of less than fifty (50) feet. 
(4)  Rear setback: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(5)  Side yard: Twenty (20) feet. 
(e)  Additional standards in the OTR zoning district: 
(1)  The architecture and historic character of structures in the OTR zoning district shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(f)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 26, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4411-4419 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4420 - General office. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(2)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(3)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the office. 
(4)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance [Appendix] shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type D buffer yard shall be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(5)  The use of alternative paving material, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is permitted. 
(b)  Additional standards in the R-5 and OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  The retention and use of upper floors for residential purposes is encouraged, so as to continue and enhance the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(2)  A general office which adjoins a R-4, R-5, OTR, RR1, RR2, or PR zoning district shall have a type A buffer yard behind the front line of the principal building. 
(3)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. 
(4)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(5)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(6)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(7)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(c)  Additional standards in the OTR zoning district: The architecture and historic character of structures in the OTR zoning district shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(d)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 27, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, §§ 19, 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4421-4429 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4430 - Medical office. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(2)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is encouraged. 
(3)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the office. 
(b)  Additional standards in the R-5, OTR, RM-27, and RM-48 zoning districts: 
(1)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(2)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(3)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(4)  The retention and use of upper floors for residential purposes is encouraged, so as to continue and enhance the residential character of the neighborhood, where applicable. 
(5)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(6)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance [Appendix] shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type C buffer yard shall be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(7)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  Additional standards in the R-5, OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. 
(2)  A type A buffer yard shall be provided behind the front line of the principal building in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(d)  Additional standards in the OTR zoning district: 
(1)  The architecture and historic character of structures in the OTR zoning district shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(e)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 28, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, §§ 20, 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
DIVISION 5. - COMMERCIAL USES 

Sec. 4500 - Commercial uses. 
Sec. 4501 - Adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from any religious assembly, educational facility, primary/secondary; public parks and recreational areas; public recreation assembly; day care center; public assembly; cultural services; home for adults; life care facility; or residential zoning district in existence on the date on which the adult entertainment establishment obtains its zoning permit. 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any adult store or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  All distances specified in this division shall be measured from the property line of one (1) use to the property line of the other. The distance between an adult entertainment establishment and a residentially zoned district shall be measured from the property line of the use to the nearest point of the boundary line of the residential zoning district. 
(d)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(e)  No adult entertainment establishment shall display adult media, depictions of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, sexually oriented goods or depictions of sexually oriented goods, in its window, or in a manner visible (by normal unaided vision) from the street, highway, public sidewalk, or the property of others. Window areas shall remain transparent and shall not be made opaque. 
(f)  Exterior lighting at the maximum foot candles permitted by Section 5601 shall be installed to illuminate the parking area, walkways, and all entrances to the establishment. 
(g)  The business shall not begin service to the public or any outside activity before 6:00 a.m. Hours of operation shall not extend after 2:00 a.m. 
(h)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(i)  Any video-viewing booth or arcade booth shall be constructed so that the viewing area is visible from a continuous main aisle. The viewing area shall not be obscured by any curtain, door, wall, or other enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 1340, § 3, 8-12-03; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4501.5 - Adult store. 
(a)  An adult store shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from any Religious Assembly; Educational Facility, Primary/Secondary; Public Parks and Recreational Areas; Public Recreation Assembly; Day Care Center; Public Assembly; Cultural Services; Homes for Adults; Life Care Facility; or Residential Zoning District or any other adult store; and at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any Adult Entertainment Establishment in existence on the date on which the adult store obtains its zoning permit. 
(b)  All distances specified in this division shall be measured from the property line of one (1) use to the property line of the other. The distance between an adult store and a residentially zoned district shall be measured from the property line of the use to the nearest point of the boundary line of the residential zoning district. 
(c)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(d)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the adult store. 
(e)  No adult store shall display adult media, depictions of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, sexually oriented goods or depictions of sexually oriented goods, in its window, in a manner visible (by normal unaided vision) from the street, highway, public sidewalk, or the property of others. Window areas shall remain transparent and shall not be made opaque. 
(Ord. No. 1340, § 4, 8-12-03; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4502 - Agricultural services. 
    General standards: 
(1)  Any outdoor storage area for agricultural equipment awaiting repair which is visible from a public right-of-way or an adjoining property shall be provided with a type C buffer yard. 
(2)  Minimum lot size: One (1) acre. 
(3)  Maximum lot surface coverage: Forty (40) percent. 
(4)  Off-street parking shall be provided in the rear yard of the lot. 
(5)  A minimum of one (1) parking space per five hundred (500) square feet of interior display area, and one (1) space per two thousand (2,000) square feet of outside display area shall be provided. 
Secs. 4503, 4504 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4505 - Automobile dealership. 
(a)  The exterior display or storage of new or used automobile parts is prohibited. 
(b)  Outdoor display areas in conjunction with automobile sales shall be constructed of the same materials required for off-street parking as required by Article V, Division 2. In addition, the outdoor display areas shall meet the landscaping requirements for parking facilities as required in Article V, Division 3. Automobile outdoor display areas are not required to be located behind the front line of the building. 
(c)  The storage or display of motor vehicles in the planting strip required in Article V, Division 3 or within ten (10) feet of the public road right-of-way shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Any vehicle which is inoperable or which has been damaged to fifty (50) percent of its value, as determined by the National Automobile Dealers Association "Blue Book" shall be placed in a storage yard. 
Secs. 4506-4508 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4509 - Automobile repair services. 
(a)  All vehicles stored on the premises in excess of seventy-two (72) hours shall be placed in a storage yard. 
(b)  The exterior display or storage of new or used automobile parts is prohibited. 
(c)  The storage or display of motor vehicles in the planting strip required in Article V, Division 3 or within ten (10) feet of the public road right-of-way shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Bay doors should not be oriented toward the public right-of-way. They should face the rear of the site unless facing residential zoning; in such cases, additional landscaping or screening, or alternative orientation should be considered, as appropriate, for the subject site and surroundings. 
(e)  Additional standards in the DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 29, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1415, § 15, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 4510 - Automobile rental/leasing. 
(a)  The exterior display or storage of new or used automobile parts is prohibited. 
(b)  Additional standards in the GC and MXD zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 30, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4511 - Automobile parts/supply, retail. 
(a)  The exterior display or storage of new or used automobile parts is prohibited. 
(b)  Any vehicle which is inoperable or which has been damaged to fifty (50) percent of its value, as determined by the National Automobile Dealers Association "Blue Book" shall be placed in a storage yard. 
(c)  Additional standards in the GC and MXD zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 31, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1415, § 16, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4512 - Bed and breakfast. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  The owner or owner's family shall reside at the same site occupied by the bed and breakfast establishment. 
(2)  Any building erected, enlarged or modified to accommodate a bed and breakfast shall maintain the appearance of a single-family residence. No rooms shall have direct entrance or exit to the outside of the building, except that emergency exits when required by the Fire Marshal may be provided for emergency purposes only. 
(3)  Guests may stay no more than thirty (30) consecutive nights in any 12-month period. The operator of the bed and breakfast shall maintain a log of all guests, including their name, address, license plate number, and length of stay, and shall make the log available to the Zoning Administrator upon request. 
(4)  Health Department approval for sewage disposal, water supply, and kitchen facilities shall be submitted prior to issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance. 
(5)  A bed and breakfast may be identified by a sign of no more than eight (8) square feet. This sign may be attached or free standing. The free standing sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
(6)  Use of alternative pavements such as brick pavers and porous pavement is encouraged. 
(7)  No more than twelve (12) guest sleeping rooms shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast establishment. 
(8)  No cooking shall be permitted in guest rooms. 
(b)  Additional standards in the R-5, OTR, RM-27, RM-48 Districts: 
(1)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, noise, parking, and appearance. 
(2)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  A driveway entrance meeting the standards for residential construction shall be provided. 
(4)  Required parking for guests and employees shall be provided on-site. Parking shall be located behind the front line of the building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(c)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1308, § 32, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4513 - Brewpub. 
(a)  General standards. 
(1)  The use shall conform to all restaurant, general, use and design standards as set forth in Section 4553. 
(2)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(3)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type C buffer yard shall be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(4)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the store. 
(5)  The use of tractor-trailers or similarly sized vehicles is prohibited for any type of delivery of goods produced on-site for off-site sales or consumption. 
(6)  A maximum of one (1) delivery vehicle is permitted. 
(b)  Additional standards in the DC district: 
(1)  Delivery activities for beer produced on-site for off-site sales and consumption shall be limited to non-peak traffic hours at the use site. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 13, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4514 - Business support services. 
    Standards in the GC and MXD zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 33, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1369, § 12, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4515 - Campground. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  The minimum area for a campground shall be ten (10) contiguous acres. 
(2)  Each campsite shall be set back a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from the perimeter property line of the campground. 
(3)  The maximum density shall be fourteen (14) sites per gross acre. Each campsite designed for recreational vehicles shall have a minimum space of two thousand (2,000) square feet with a minimum width of thirty (30) feet. Areas devoted solely for tent camping shall provide at least four hundred (400) square feet per campsite. 
(4)  Vacation cottages may be constructed within a campground provided that a minimum land area of four thousand (4,000) square feet is designated solely for the first dwelling unit in a cottage, with an additional two thousand (2,000) square feet of land area provided for the second dwelling unit within the cottage. A maximum of two (2) dwelling units per cottage may be constructed. The maximum floor area of a cottage shall be thirty (30) percent of the site. 
(5)  The primary access road shall be paved with at least a chip and seal surface. Paving shall extend from the public street right-of-way to the entrance station. Interior roads and access to individual sites shall consist at a minimum of an all weather gravel surface. All interior roads shall be eighteen (18) feet minimum width for two-way travel or ten (10) feet minimum width for one-way travel. No campsite shall have direct access to a public street. 
(6)  The following uses and activities shall be prohibited at a campground: 
a.  The sale, storage, use or occupancy of any manufactured home. 
b.  The sale of recreational vehicles and the storage of unoccupied units. 
(7)  Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities are permitted for the exclusive use of campground tenants. At least fifteen (15) percent of the campground area shall be developed and improved for recreational uses. In calculating the required area, common walkways and related landscaping may be included provided that such space is at least twenty (20) feet in width. At least one-half (1/2) of the required recreation area shall be for active recreation, such as swimming pools, ball fields and play lots for small children. No developed recreational areas shall be located within the required yard setbacks for the district. 
(8)  Retail sales for the convenience of campground tenants are permitted. Items are limited to food, concessions, recreational supplies, personal care items, and other items clearly supportive of campground tenants' needs. 
(9)  Guests may stay no more than thirty (30) nights in any one (1) calendar year. The operator of a campground shall maintain a log of all guests, including their name, address, license plate number, and length of stay, and shall make the log available to Town staff upon request. 
Sec. 4516 - Car wash. 
(a)  The roof shape and materials of car washes shall be constructed so that they are similar to design styles of building in the area. False windows and facade treatments shall be used so that the car wash is in character with surrounding uses. Pitched roofs are encouraged. 
(b)  The orientation of the drive-in bays shall be parallel to the public right-of-way, unless it is impracticable to do so or results in bays that face adjacent residential uses. In such cases, additional landscaping, screening, or an alternative orientation of the bays should be considered as appropriate for the subject site and surroundings. 
(c)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 34, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1415, § 17, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4517-4520 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4521 - Clinic. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  The use of alternative paving material, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is permitted. 
(2)  A clinic which adjoins an RR1, RR2, R-4, R-5, OTR, PR district shall provide a type B buffer yard in accordance with Section 5310. 
(b)  Additional standards in the R-5, OTR, R-27, R-48 zoning districts: 
(1)  The retention and use of upper floors for residential purposes is encouraged, so as to continue and enhance the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(2)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(3)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(4)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(5)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(6)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the clinic. 
(7)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(8)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance [Appendix] shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type D buffer yard shall be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(9)  The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit process. 
(10)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(c)  Additional standards in the R-5, OTR zoning districts: 
(1)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. 
(2)  A type B buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(d)  Additional standards in the OTR zoning district: The architecture and historic character of structures in the OTR zoning district shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(e)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 35, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4521.1 - Commercial indoor entertainment. 
    Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 36, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4521.2 - Commercial indoor amusement. 
    Additional standards in the DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 36, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4521.3 - Commercial indoor sports and recreation. 
    Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 36, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4521.4 - Communication services. 
    Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 36, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4522 - Construction sales and services. 
(a)  The outside storage and/or display of goods, supplies, materials, or heavy equipment must be located in the rear yard. 
(b)  Outside storage areas shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the site. 
(c)  Additional standards in the GC zoning district: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 37, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4523 - Consumer repair services. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(2)  A type A buffer yard as required in Article V, Section 5310 3 [subsection 5310(c)] shall be provided in yards adjacent to a RR1, RR2, R-4, R-5, OTR, RM-27, or RM-48 zoning district. 
(3)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is encouraged. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RM-27 and RM-48 zoning districts: 
(1)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(2)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. No more than two (2) curb cuts per street frontage shall be allowed. Factors determining the number of curb cuts permitted include number of curb cuts in the area, potential for traffic congestion and hazards, and number of travel lanes of the street serving the site. 
(4)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(5)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage shall be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(6)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance [Appendix] shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type C buffer yard shall be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(7)  The portion of the principal structure dedicated to repair related uses shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(8)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the repair shop. 
(9)  The retention and use of upper floors for residential purposes is encouraged, so as to continue and enhance the residential character of the neighborhood, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 38, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4523.1 - Dance hall. 
    Additional standards in the DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 39, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4524 - Equipment sales/rental. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  The outside storage of goods, supplies, materials, or heavy equipment must be located in the rear yard only. 
(2)  Outside storage areas shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the site. 
(b)  Additional standards in the GC zoning district: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 40, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4524.1 - Event center. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Open air dining. Event Centers shall be permitted to operate open air dining on private property, including, but not limited to the front entrance, deck, or courtyard. However, the establishment of open air dining on private property cannot have the effect of blocking pedestrian circulation and access to building entrances shall not be impaired. If wait service is not provided, outdoor trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided. No additional signage is permitted for the open air dining. The operators of open air dining shall maintain a clean, litter-free, and well-kept appearance within and immediately adjacent to the area of open air dining activity. The open air dining shall comply with all applicable Department of Health and ABC Regulations. 
(2)  Designed and designated space for location of Mobile Food Vendors is encouraged. The number of Mobile Food Vendors and the hours of operation are not limited when Mobile Food Vendors are an accessory use in conjunction with an event center event. 
(3)  For outside events larger than what may be contained within the interior capacity occupancy of the building, arrangements must be made for additional parking or off-site overflow parking. 
(Ord. No. 1845 , § 1, 12-12-17) 
Sec. 4525 - Funeral home. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  A type A buffer yard landscaped as required in Article V, Section 5310 [of this Appendix] shall be provided adjacent to a RM-27 or RM-48 zoning district. 
(2)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is encouraged. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RM-27 and RM-48 zoning districts: 
(1)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(2)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(4)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(5)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(6)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance [Appendix] shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type C buffer yard shall be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential zoning district. 
(7)  The portion of the principal structure devoted to Funeral Home use shall not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(8)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the funeral home. 
(9)  The retention and use of upper floors for residential purposes is encouraged, so as to continue and enhance the residential character of the neighborhood, where applicable. 
(10)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(c)  Additional standards in the DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1247, § 15, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1308, § 41, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4526 - Garden center. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  The outdoor storage and/or display of non-plant goods and materials is permitted only when screening is provided that meets the requirements of Article V, Division 3 [of this Appendix] for outdoor storage. 
(2)  When adjoining a residential use type, a type C buffer yard in accordance with Section 5310 shall be provided. 
(b)  Additional standards in the GC zoning district: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 42, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4527 - Gasoline station. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Applicants must demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance, scale and massing of structures. The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(2)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  There should be as few entrances to the site as possible, and these should be located in a manner to promote safety and efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
To determine the number of permitted curb cuts, the following factors shall be considered: the number of existing curb cuts in the area, the potential for increased traffic hazards and congestion, and the number of travel lanes of the street that serves the site. 
(4)  Fuel pumps and canopies over fuel pumps should be located behind the front line of the primary structure unless impractical to do so as a result of the shallow depth of a parcel, the location of existing mature trees, or other similar circumstances, or unless beneficial to surrounding properties to not do so. In such cases, additional street trees or front yard landscaping shall be considered as a condition for approval. 
(5)  Any canopy over the fuel pumps shall have the same roof shape and exterior materials as the primary structure. Pitched roofs are encouraged. 
(6)  The Zoning Administrator may require a traffic analysis to be provided by the applicant. Such analysis may include, but not be limited to, the proposed traffic flows, sight visibility for emerging vehicles, and other public safety factors. 
(7)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage will be included in the conditional use permit application. 
(8)  A use other than dispensing and selling fuel and oil shall meet parking and use and design standards for that use. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RM-27 and RM-48 zoning districts: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum frontage: Seventy-five (75) feet. 
(3)  Front setback: ;hg;Twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way of a local road. 
Thirty-five (35) feet from a collector road with a right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet or greater. 
Sixty (60) feet from the center line of a collector road with a right-of-way width of less than fifty (50) feet. 
(4)  Rear setback: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(5)  Side setback: Twenty (20) feet. 
(6)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood, including the fuel canopy. The canopy should have architectural features such as a pitched roof, shingles, and/or clapboard siding so as to blend the canopy with the residential surroundings. The standard architectural designs of regional or national businesses shall be modified to be compatible with the scale, massing, and design of the residential surroundings. The principal structure shall be oriented toward the street. 
(7)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the gasoline station. 
(8)  A type A buffer yard as required in Article V, Section 5310 shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, RM-27, or RM-48 zoning district. 
(9)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is encouraged. 
(10)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance [Appendix] shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type D buffer yard shall be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(11)  No more than four (4) fuel dispensing stations designed to serve individual vehicles shall be permitted. 
(c)  Additional standards in the DC District: No more than four (4) fuel pumps designed to serve individual vehicles shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1278, § 13, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1308, § 43, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1415, § 18, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 4528 - Golf course. 
    General standards: 
(1)  When the clubhouse, parking areas, or maintenance facilities adjoin a residential use type, a type C buffer yard shall be provided in accordance with Section 5310. 
(2)  A minimum of fifty (50) parking spaces per each nine (9) holes shall be provided. 
Sec. 4528.1 - Grocery store. 
    Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 44, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4528.2 - Hotel/motel. 
    Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: 
(1)  Parking will be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(2)  A hotel/motel cannot consist of a single ground floor of hotel/motel use with all other floors used for multi-family development. At least fifty (50) percent of the building's total square footage must be a hotel/motel use. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 44, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 1884 , § 1, 2-12-19) 
Sec. 4529 - Hospital. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Parking shall be located behind the front lot line of the building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(2)  Minimum lot size: One (1) acre. 
(3)  Minimum frontage: One hundred (100) feet. 
(4)  Rear setback: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(5)  Side setback: Twenty (20) feet. 
(6)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, noise, and appearance. 
(7)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on the surrounding residential neighborhood. No more than two (2) curb cuts shall be allowed per street frontage. Factors including the number of existing curb cuts in the area, the potential for increased traffic hazards and congestion, and the number of travel lanes of the street that serves the development shall be used to determine the number of curb cuts permitted. 
(8)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure should be oriented toward the street. 
(9)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the establishment. 
(10)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(11)  A type A buffer yard shall be provided for adjacent parcels zoned R-27 and R-48. 
(12)  Use of alternative pavements such as brick pavers and porous pavement is encouraged. If a porous type paving surface is used it will not be included in the lot coverage calculation. 
(13)  Loading and emergency entrance areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on the surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3, shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type C buffer yard may be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(14)  A traffic analysis may be required from the applicant as part of its application for a conditional use permit. Such analysis may include, but not be limited to, the proposed traffic flows, sight visibility for emerging vehicles, and other public safety factors as may be required by the Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4530 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1777, § 1, adopted January 12, 2016, repealed § 4530, which pertained to itinerant vendor and derived from Ordinance No. 1137, adopted April 22, 1997. 
Sec. 4531 - Kennel, commercial. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Animal waste shall disposed of in a manner acceptable to the Department of Health. 
(2)  Crematoria or land burial of animals in association with a commercial kennel shall be prohibited. 
(3)  The minimum area required for a commercial kennel shall be two (2) acres. 
(4)  All facilities associated directly with the commercial kennel, whether indoors or outdoors, shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
(5)  A commercial kennel adjoining a residential use type, shall have a type C buffer yard in accordance with Section 5310. 
(b)  Additional standards in the GC zoning district: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 45, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4532-4539 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4540 - Manufactured home sales. 
(a)  Outdoor display areas shall be constructed of the same materials required for off-street parking as required in Article V, Division 2. In addition, outdoor display areas shall meet the landscaping requirements for parking facilities as required in Article V, Division 3. Manufactured home outdoor display areas are not required to be located behind the front line of the principle structure. 
(b)  The storage or display of manufactured homes in the planting strip required under Article V, Division 3 [of this Appendix] or within ten (10) feet of the public road right-of-way shall be prohibited. 
(c)  The storage or display of manufactured homes which are not suitable for occupancy shall be prohibited. 
Sec. 4541 - Mini warehouse. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  The minimum front setback shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  No security fencing, security gate, or other obstruction to vehicle access shall be permitted in the required front yard or in any required transitional yard. 
(3)  No door opening for any rental unit shall be constructed facing any residentially zoned property. 
(4)  Door openings for rental units shall face the interior of the site unless impracticable. 
(5)  Accommodations for resident managers is permitted. 
(6)  The roof shape and materials shall be compatible with the design and materials of neighboring buildings. 
(7)  Views of mini-warehouses from public rights-of-way shall be buffered with vegetative material. 
(b)  Additional standards in the GC zoning district: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 46, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4542 - Neighborhood convenience store. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  No more than ten (10) percent of the floor area may be devoted to seating facilities for consumption of food prepared on the premises. 
(2)  Exterior display of merchandise for sale is allowed only on a paved walkway within three (3) feet of the building. 
(3)  The display of vehicles for sale is prohibited. 
(4)  Loading areas shall be located in such a way as to minimize the impact on the surrounding neighborhood. Screening shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type D buffer yard may be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(5)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the store. 
(6)  Use of alternative pavements such as brick pavers and porous pavement is encouraged. 
(7)  A neighborhood convenience store which adjoins RR1, RR2, R-4, R-5, OTR, or PR shall contain a type C buffer yard. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RR1, RR2, R-5, RM-27, and RM-48 Districts: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(2)  Minimum frontage: One hundred (100) feet. 
(3)  Front setback: ;hg;Twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way of a local road. 
Thirty-five (35) feet from a collector road with a right-of-way width of fifty (50) feet or greater. 
Sixty (60) feet from the center line of a collector road with a right-of-way width of less than fifty (50) feet. 
(4)  Rear Setback: Thirty-five (35) feet. 
(5)  Side setback: Twenty (20) feet. 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage: Sixty (60) percent including buildings and paved surfaces. 
(7)  Maximum floor area: Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
(8)  Vehicle entrances to the site shall be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(9)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, noise, parking, and appearance. 
(10)  Exterior lighting shall not cause glare upon adjacent property or upon a public right-of-way. 
(11)  The hours of operation may be restricted in the terms of the conditional use permit. 
(12)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage will be included in the conditional use permit application. 
(13)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(14)  The retention and use of the upper floors for residential purposes is encouraged, so as to continue and enhance the residential character of the neighborhood, where applicable. 
(15)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(c)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 47, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4543 - Parking facility. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  A type A buffer yard as required in Article V, Section 5310 [of this Appendix] shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, zoning district. 
(2)  The minimum front, side, and rear yards for parking facilities shall be ten (10) feet except for any side of the property adjacent to the GC zoning district, where the minimum setback shall be three (3) feet. 
(3)  Lot coverage by impervious surfaces shall be determined based upon the minimum landscaping and yard requirements. 
(4)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is encouraged. 
(b)  Additional standards in the R-5, OTR, RM-27 and RM-48 zoning districts: 
(1)  The parking facility shall be arranged to be compatible with the neighborhood and surrounding areas. Architectural fencing and other aesthetic features shall be installed to minimize the visual impact of the parking facility upon the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(2)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(c)  Additional standards in the R-5 and OTR zoning districts: Parking facilities shall be permitted only on property which abuts property zoned DC, "Downtown Commercial," or on property which abuts an alley which abuts property zoned DC, "Downtown Commercial." 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 4544 - Pawn shop. 
    Additional standards in the DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 48, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4545 - Personal improvement services. 
    Additional standards in the DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 48, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4546 - Personal services. 
    Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 48, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4547 - Private farmers market. 
(a)  An entity with written by-laws or regulations that govern the operation of the Private Farmers Market must exist or be established; a copy of these by-laws or regulations must be provided to the Administrator. 
(b)  Any restrictions on the type of producers or the location where agricultural products or handcrafted products are to be grown, raised or produced shall be included in the by-laws or regulations of the market. 
(c)  One Private Farmers Market is allowed on a lot or parcel. 
(d)  Written permission is required from property owner(s) upon which the market is located. 
(e)  A Private Farmers Market must be at least one-half (1/2) mile from any other Public or Private Farmers Market, regardless of days of operation. 
(f)  A Private Farmers Market must have a minimum of five (5) vendors present as averaged over the season the market is in operation. 
(g)  Market size is limited to no more than twenty (20) vendors on-site at any one time. 
(h)  Special events at a Private Farmers Market are allowed, subject to obtaining any required event permits. The number and type of special events must be specified in the market plan and include provisions to address public safety. 
(i)  All vendors at the market must display the name(s) of the producer(s) and the location(s) where goods were grown, raised or produced. 
(j)  The market vendors must comply with all applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
(k)  Allowed signage to advertise the market includes a temporary banner sign of no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in area that can be displayed on market days and the day before market days. The location of the banner and how the banner will be displayed shall be shown in the Market Plan. The banner must be on the parcel where the market is conducted. The banner for the Private Farmers Market shall not be included as temporary signage allowed by the commercial uses on the same parcel. 
(l)  Storage of materials for the Private Farmers Market is allowed and may be in a storage facility that is within a completely enclosed building in the commercial center or in a temporary facility, such as a trailer, located in the parking lot and behind the front building line. The storage facility must be shown on the Market Plan and locked when not in use. If the storage facility is located in the parking lot, it may occupy no more than two (2) parking spaces. Any storage facility must meet district setbacks. 
(m)  Market facilities are designed to be temporary in nature and use the existing parking and infrastructure of the site. Any permanent open air structures or other permanent facilities require a Special Exception. 
(n)  Market materials such as tents, traffic cones, or other equipment shall be removed at the conclusion of the market day. 
(o)  A Market Plan shall be submitted to the Administrator for review and approval. The plan shall be updated in March of each calendar year. The Market Plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Written by-laws or other operational regulations of the proposed market. 
(2)  Written permission from the property owner(s). 
(3)  The name and contact information for the Private Farmers Market contact person. 
(4)  Documentation that the market has a website that contains information on location and hours of operation of the market and includes the by-laws or regulations of the entity operating the market. 
(5)  The proposed layout of the Private Farmers Market, including booth locations, signage, any storage, vendor parking, access for vendors and patrons, and adequate safety measures to separate market patrons from vehicular traffic. Any parking intended to specifically serve the Private Farmers Market on market days must be shown on the Market Plan. 
(6)  An assessment of the existing and required parking for the on-site commercial uses and the number of parking spaces unavailable during market operations. Private Farmers Markets may occupy required parking but shall not have such an impact as to create traffic safety or circulation problems or negatively impact the parking for existing commercial uses on the property. 
(7)  Hours and days of operation. These may be modified as needed with a two week written notice to the Administrator. 
(p)  Any exception to these standards shall be processed as a special exception request pursuant to zoning ordinance section 1112 and the following criteria shall be considered: 
(1)  Impact of special exception request on existing uses on the site; 
(2)  Compatibility with uses on adjacent parcels; and 
(3)  Traffic impacts and public safety. 
( Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 5-13-14 ) 
Sec. 4548 - Public farmers market. 
(a)  A Public Farmers Market shall only operate on a site designed for such use by the Town of Blacksburg. A Public Farmers Market location must be suitable to accommodate the impacts of the use and serve as a community gathering place in addition to providing access to local foods. 
(b)  A Public Farmers Market may only operate under a valid lease or license agreement with the Town of Blacksburg. 
(c)  An entity must exist or be established with written by-laws or regulations that govern the operations of the Public Farmers Market; a copy of these by-laws or regulations of the organization must be submitted to the Administrator. 
(d)  Any restrictions on the type of producers or the location where agricultural products or handcrafted products are to be grown, raised or produced shall be included in the by-laws or regulations of the market. 
(e)  The market must have a website that contains information on location, hours of operation of the market and include the by-laws or regulations of the organizing entity for the market. 
(f)  A market contact person must be identified and updated in March of each calendar year. 
(g)  All vendors at the market must display the name(s) of the producer and the location(s) where goods were grown, raised or produced. 
(h)  The market vendors must comply with all applicable local, state and federal regulations. 
(i)  The Public Farmers Market must be at least one-half (1/2) mile from any other Public or Private Farmers Market, regardless of days of operation. 
(j)  Storage for the market shall be as established in the lease or license agreement. 
(k)  Signage for the market shall be as established in the lease or license agreement. 
(l)  Special events and live music are allowed, subject to the provisions of the lease or license agreement and obtaining any required event permits. 
(m)  Any exception to these standards shall be processed as a special exception request pursuant to zoning ordinance section 1112 and the following criteria shall be considered: 
(1)  Impact of special exception request on existing uses on the site; 
(2)  Compatibility with uses on adjacent parcels; and 
(3)  Traffic impacts and public safety. 
( Ord. No. 1722, § 1, 5-13-14 ) 
Secs. 4549-4551 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4552 - Restaurant, drive-in. 
(a)  General standards: A traffic analysis may be required as part of the conditional use permit application, including but not limited to proposed traffic flow, sight visibility for emerging vehicles, roadway capacity for turning movements, and other public safety factors. 
(b)  Additional standards in the GC and MXD zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 49, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4552.1 - Restaurant, fast food. 
(a)  Open air dining: Restaurants shall be permitted to have open air dining on private property contiguous to the restaurant, including areas but not limited to the front entrance, deck, or courtyard. However, the establishment of the open air dining on private property cannot have the effect of blocking pedestrian circulation and access to the restaurant and adjacent business entrances. The following standards shall apply to open air dining areas: 
(1)  Encroachment onto public property or into the public right-of-way requires a franchise agreement approved by Town Council. Using the public right-of-way, such as a sidewalk, as a means to access private property to provide wait service is allowed. 
(2)  Fencing is allowed to define the area occupied by the open air dining. 
(3)  Extended awnings, canopies, or umbrellas are permitted. 
(4)  If wait service is not provided, outdoor trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided. 
(5)  No additional signage is permitted for the open air dining. 
(6)  The operators of open air dining shall maintain a clean, litter-free, and well-kept appearance within and immediately adjacent to the area of the open air dining activity. 
(7)  The open air dining shall comply with all applicable Department of Health and ABC regulations. 
(b)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 50, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1668, § 1, 4-9-13; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4553 - Restaurant, general. 
(a)  Open air dining. Restaurants shall be permitted to operate open air dining on private property, including areas but not limited to the front entrance, deck, or courtyard. However, the establishment of open air dining on private property cannot have the effect of blocking pedestrian circulation and access to store entrances shall not be impaired. The following standards shall apply to open air dining areas: 
(1)  Encroachment onto public property and into the public right-of-way requires a franchise agreement. Using the public right-of-way, such as a sidewalk, as a means to access private property to provide wait service is allowed. 
(2)  Fencing is allowed to define the area occupied by the open air dining. 
(3)  Extended awnings, canopies, or umbrellas are permitted. 
(4)  If wait service is not provided, outdoor trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided. 
(5)  No additional signage is permitted for the open air dining. 
(6)  The operators of open air dining shall maintain a clean, litter-free, and well-kept appearance within and immediately adjacent to the area of open air dining activity. 
(b)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 51, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1668, § 1, 4-9-13; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4554 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4555 - Restaurant, small. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  The use of alternative paving material, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is permitted. 
(2)  Open air dining. Restaurants shall be permitted to have open air dining on private property contiguous to the restaurant, including areas but not limited to the front entrance, deck, or courtyard. However, the establishment of open air dining on private property cannot have the effect of blocking pedestrian circulation and access to the restaurant and adjacent business entrances. The following standards shall apply to open air dining areas: 
(i)  Encroachment onto public property or into the public right-of-way requires a franchise agreement. Using the public right-of-way, such as a sidewalk, as a means to access private property to provide wait service is allowed. 
(ii)  Fencing is allowed to define the area occupied by the open air dining. 
(iii)  Extended awnings, canopies, or umbrellas are permitted for the open air dining. 
(iv)  If wait service is not provided, outdoor trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided. 
(v)  No additional signage is permitted for the open air dining. 
(vi)  The operators of open air dining shall maintain a clean, litter-free, and well-kept appearance within and immediately adjacent to the area of the open air dining activity. 
(vii)  The open air dining shall comply with all applicable Department of Health and ABC regulations. 
(b)  Additional standards in the OTR, RM-27, RM-48 zoning districts: 
(1)  Minimum side setback for new structures shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(2)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(3)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the restaurant. 
(4)  The retention and use of upper floors for residential purposes is encouraged, so as to continue and enhance the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(5)  The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(6)  Maximum seating shall not exceed forty-eight (48) persons. 
(7)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(8)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(9)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(10)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(11)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance [Appendix} shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type C buffer yard shall be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(12)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(c)  Additional standards in the OTR zoning district: 
(1)  The architecture and historic character of structures in the OTR zoning district shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(2)  The restaurant should have a fine dining or cafe atmosphere and character. Take out or delivery services shall not be permitted. 
(3)  Outdoor seating may be permitted, if expressly approved in the conditional use permit. Outdoor seating shall be screened in order to substantially reduce noise and visual impacts on adjoining residential properties. 
(4)  Maximum seating shall not exceed twenty-eight (28) persons. 
(5)  Alcohol shall only be served at table service accompanying meals. 
(6)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. 
(7)  A type B buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, zoning district. 
(d)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 52, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1668, § 1, 4-9-13; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4556-4558 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4559 - Retail sales. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  A type A buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a RM-27 or RM-48 zoning district. 
(2)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is encouraged. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RM-27 and RM-48 zoning districts: 
(1)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(2)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the store. 
(3)  The retention and use of upper floors for residential purposes is encouraged, so as to continue and enhance the residential character of the neighborhood, where applicable. 
(4)  The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(5)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(6)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(7)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. The standard architectural designs of regional or national businesses shall be modified in such a way so as to be compatible with the scale, massing, and design of the residential surroundings. 
(8)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(9)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance [Appendix] shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type C buffer yard shall be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(10)  The portion of the structure dedicated to retail sales shall not exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet. 
(11)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(c)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1247, § 16, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1308, § 53, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4560 - Retail sales, large format. 
    General standards: 
(a)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, buffering and appearance. 
(b)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement, pervious temporary overflow parking areas, and/or other low impact development techniques for stormwater management are encouraged, and may be conditions of approval. 
(c)  The street elevation of each large format retail sales structure shall have at least one (1) major street-oriented primary entrance and contain the principal windows of the store. 
(d)  The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(e)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(f)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any adjacent neighborhood. 
(g)  The scale, massing, and building design shall be compatible with surrounding developments. The structure and site shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. The standard architectural designs of regional or national businesses shall be modified in such a way so as to be compatible with the scale, massing, articulation and design of the surroundings. Architectural detailing shall be incorporated into all façade so as to avoid a blank or monotonous appearance on any façade. Architectural detailing should include the following: 
(1)  Entrances; 
(2)  To promote pedestrian interest and activity, and to enhance security and safety by permitting visibility into and out of buildings, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the ground floor façade containing the primary entrance and any façade facing a street should be transparent from the street through the provision of glass; 
(3)  Variations in roof line; 
(4)  Variations in building materials; and 
(5)  Variations in color. 
(h)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage shall be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(i)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. 
(j)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. Conditions including increased landscaping and enhanced pedestrian paths may be applied in granting such exception or in approving the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1450, § 1, 5-29-07; Ord. No. 1509, § 1, 2-10-09; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4561 - Specialty shop. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is encouraged. 
(2)  A type B buffer yard as required in Article V, Section 5310 [of this Appendix] shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, zoning district. 
(b)  Additional standards in the OTR zoning district: 
(1)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(2)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the studio. 
(3)  The retention and use of upper floors for residential purposes is encouraged, so as to continue and enhance the residential character of the neighborhood, where applicable. 
(4)  The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(5)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(6)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(7)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(8)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(9)  For new structures, the side yard setback shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(10)  The architecture and historic character of structures in the OTR zoning district shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(11)  Loading areas shall be sited in such a way so as to minimize the impact on any surrounding neighborhood. Sufficient screening meeting the standards of Article V, Division 3 of this ordinance [Appendix] shall be provided to screen and diffuse noise impacts on adjacent residences. A type C buffer yard shall be required when a loading area is located adjacent to a residential use. 
(12)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(c)  Additional standards in the DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 54, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4562, 4563 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4564 - Studio, fine arts. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  The use of alternative pavements, such as brick pavers or porous pavement is encouraged. 
(b)  Additional standards in the OTR, RR1, RM-27, and RM-48 zoning districts. 
(1)  Applicants must clearly demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(2)  The street elevation of the principal structure shall have at least one (1) street-oriented entrance, and contain the principal windows of the studio. 
(3)  The retention and use of upper floors for residential purposes is encouraged, so as to continue and enhance the residential character of the neighborhood, where applicable. 
(4)  The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(5)  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
(6)  Entrances to the site should be minimized and placed in such a way as to maximize safety, maximize efficient traffic circulation, and minimize the impact on any surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(7)  The scale, massing, and building design should be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. The structure shall be street-oriented with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(8)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(9)  For new structures, the side yard setback shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(10)  For existing structures, no exterior changes may be made that are nonresidential in character. 
(11)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(c)  Additional standards in the OTR zoning district: 
(1)  The architecture and historic character of structures in the OTR zoning district shall be retained. The retention and use of existing structures that contribute to the character of the neighborhood shall be a consideration in the granting of a conditional use permit. 
(2)  A type A buffer yard shall be provided in yards adjacent to a R-4, R-5, OTR, zoning district. 
(d)  Additional standards in the MXD, DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 55, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4565 - Veterinary hospital/clinic. 
    Additional standards in the DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 56, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 27, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
DIVISION 6. - INDUSTRIAL USES 

Sec. 4600 - Industrial uses-Use and design standards. 
Secs. 4601-4604 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4605 - Custom manufacturing. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  All activities comprising the manufacturing process, other than loading and unloading, shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
(2)  No exterior odor, dust, noise, or other objectionable impacts shall be produced as a result of the use. 
(3)  The outside storage of goods, supplies, or materials must be placed in the rear yard. Outside storage areas shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the total area of the site. 
(4)  Where the site is adjacent to a residential district, hours of operation may be restricted. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RR1 and RR2 zoning districts: 
(1)  A custom manufacturing establishment shall meet all the requirements for a principle structure. 
(2)  Maximum square footage for a custom manufacturing establishment: Three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(3)  When adjoining a residential use type on an adjoining lot, a type C buffer yard shall be provided. 
(4)  The site shall front directly on and have direct access to a publicly owned and maintained street. 
(5)  The custom manufacturing establishment shall be associated with a single-family dwelling. 
(6)  Minimum lot size: Three (3) acres. 
(c)  Standards in the GC zoning district: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 57, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4606 - Laboratory. 
(a)  Standards in the DC, GC and Office zoning districts: 
(1)  No exterior odor, dust, noise, or other objectionable impacts shall be produced as a result of the use; 
(2)  Where appropriate to protect adjacent uses, hours of operation may be restricted. 
(b)  Additional standards in the DC and GC zoning districts: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 58, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1416, § 4, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4607 - Research and development. 
(a)  Standards in the DC, GC and Office zoning districts: 
(1)  No exterior odor, dust, noise, or other objectionable impacts shall be produced as a result of the use; 
(2)  Where appropriate to protect adjacent uses, hours of operation may be restricted. 
(b)  In the DC and GC zoning districts, parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1416, § 5, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4608-4625 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4626 - Transportation terminal. 
(a)  General standards. 
(1)  Where the site is adjacent to a residential district, hours of operation may be restricted. 
(2)  All storage, other than vehicles, trailers, and refuse, shall be indoors. 
(b)  Standards in the GC zoning district: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 59, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
DIVISION 7. - MISCELLANEOUS USES 

Secs. 4700-4702 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4703 - Accessory uses and structures. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  Accessory structures shall be permitted in association with a principal structure, provided that the area of the accessory structure shall be twenty-five (25) percent or less of the gross floor area of the principal structure. This standard shall not apply to structures devoted to agricultural uses. 
(2)  Accessory structures shall be separate structures, located at least five (5) feet from all other structures on the lot. 
(b)  Additional standards in the RR1, RR2, R-4, R-5, OTR, RM-27, RM-48, and PR districts: 
(1)  An accessory structure shall be located behind the front building line of the principal structure. This provision shall not apply to agricultural structures devoted to an agricultural use, located within the RR1 or RR2 zoning district. 
(2)  The setback requirements of the underlying zoning district shall be met. However, if the accessory structure is not located in a yard adjacent to a public right-of-way, and is twelve (12) feet or less in height and is two hundred (200) square feet or less of gross floor area, the minimum setbacks shall be: 
a.  Side yard: Five (5) feet. 
b.  Rear yard: Five (5) feet. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
(3)  Accessory structures greater than two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area or taller than twelve (12) feet in height shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district. 
(c)  Additional standards in the DC, GC, PC, RD, IN, MXD, and O districts: 
(1)  Accessory structures shall be allowed only on the same lot as the principal use or structure, or adjacent lot under common ownership, provided that access is from the lot on which the principal use or structure is located. 
(2)  Setbacks for accessory structures shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zoning district. 
(3)  Accessory structures shall have the same roof pitch and exterior materials as the primary structure. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 28, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1415, § 19, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07) 
Secs. 4704-4718 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4719 - Amateur radio towers. 
    General standards: 
(1)  Maximum height: Seventy-five (75) feet. 
(2)  The set-back requirement of the zoning district must be met. 
a.  Tower guys and accessory structures shall meet the minimum setback requirements. 
b.  Setback from all principle buildings or structures on adjacent lots shall be a distance equal to the height of the tower. 
(3)  Towers shall be located in the rear yard only. 
(4)  Towers shall be of a natural metal color. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
Sec. 4720 - Broadcasting or communication tower. 
(a)  The standards of this section apply whenever a conditional use permit is sought for a broadcasting or communications tower, as this use is defined by Section 2103 of this chapter [Appendix] [Appendix]. Any wireless communication antenna which meets the definition of a "utility service, minor," is not subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  General standards: 
(1)  The following sites shall be considered by applicants as the preferred order of location of proposed broadcasting or communication facilities: 
a.  Existing broadcasting or communication towers. 
b.  Property zoned industrial, research and development, or university. 
c.  Public structures, such as water towers, utility structures, fire stations, bridges, and other public buildings within all zoning districts not utilized primarily for residential uses. 
d.  Property zoned general commercial. 
e.  Property zoned Downtown commercial. 
f.  Property zoned primarily for residential uses. 
(2)  No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of Town Council that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
a.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced modified, or replaced to accommodate the planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost. 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers and structures, or the existing antenna would interfere with applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are deemed unreasonable. 
f.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unreasonable. 
(3)  The maximum height of any Broadcasting and Communication Facility shall be made a condition of the conditional use permit. 
(4)  Broadcasting or communication towers shall conform with each of the following minimum setback requirements: 
a.  Towers shall have a minimum front, side, and rear yard setback equal to the height of the tower. 
b.  Towers guys and accessory structures shall satisfy the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
c.  Towers shall not be located between the principal structure and a public street. 
d.  For any lot which abuts a lot zoned RR1, R-4, or R-5, the maximum height of any tower, including antennas and attachments, shall not exceed one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of distance between the tower and such property line. 
e.  A tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public street varied, at the sole discretion of the Town Council, to allow the integration of a tower into an existing or proposed structure such as a church steeple, light pole, utility pole, or similar structure. 
(5)  More than one (1) tower may be permitted provided all setback requirements have been met. 
(6)  All broadcasting or communication facilities shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in other respects, to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least two (2) additional users, if the tower is over one hundred (100) feet in height, or for at least one (1) additional user if the tower is over sixty (60) feet in height. Wireless telecommunication providers shall respond to co-location requests within ninety (90) days. 
(7)  Proposed or modified towers and antennas shall meet the following design requirements: 
a.  Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration. 
b.  Broadcasting or communication towers shall be of a monopole design unless the Town Council determines that an alternative design would better blend in to the surrounding environment. 
(8)  Towers shall be illuminated as required by the Federal Communications Commission, (FCC) but no lighting shall be incorporated if not required by the FCC, other than essential security lighting. Site lighting shall not be directed toward adjacent properties. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be attached to the tower. 
(9)  Towers shall be located in an area where they are unobtrusive and do not substantially detract from aesthetics or neighborhood character, due to either location, to the nature of surrounding uses, or to lack of visibility caused by natural growth or other factors. 
(10)  A type D buffer yard shall be provided surrounding the facility. The conditional use permit application shall include a landscape plan showing the locations, species, and size at planting for the landscaping proposed. 
(11)  Signage on site shall be limited to no trespassing or safety signs to be positioned on the fence surrounding the facility. The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited. 
(12)  No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety communications. Before the introduction of new service or changes in existing service, telecommunications providers shall notify the Town at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of such changes and allow the Town to monitor interference levels during the testing process. 
(13)  There shall be no outdoor storage associated with the facility. 
(14)  All towers and associated facilities shall be removed within six (6) months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the Zoning Administrator. In the event that a tower is not removed within six (6) months of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the Town and the costs of removal assessed against the owner and property. 
(c)  Additional standards in the RR1, R-4, R-5, RM-27, RM-48, and PR Zoning Districts: 
(1)  Broadcasting or Communication Towers shall be allowed only in the following locations: 
a.  Church sites, when camouflaged as steeples or bell towers. 
b.  Park sites, when compatible with the nature of the park. 
c.  Government, school, utility, and institutional sites. 
d.  Other similar site or structure. 
(d)  Additional standards in the RR1, R-4, and R-5 zoning districts: 
(1)  Maximum height, including tower, antennas, and other attachments: Thirty-five (35) feet except when included in a church steeple, bell tower, water tower, light pole, or other similar architecturally compatible structure. 
(e)  Additional standards in the GC zoning district: Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(Ord. No. 1170, adopted 11-11-97; Ord. No. 1247, § 17, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1308, § 60, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 21, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 4721. - Portable storage containers. 
(a)  General Standards for Portable Storage Containers ("containers"). 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to containers located on and necessary for an approved construction project. 
(2)  The temporary placement of any container on any lot shall be permitted only upon issuance of a zoning permit, except for a container in an Industrial zoning district. 
(3)  The zoning permit shall be displayed on the outside of the container. 
(4)  Containers shall be permitted only for temporary storage for the lot on which the container is located. 
(5)  Containers shall be permitted only upon the same lot as the principal structure it is accessory to. Containers are prohibited on any lot without a principal structure. 
(6)  Containers shall comply with all district yard setbacks and are prohibited in buffer areas. 
(7)  Containers shall not be connected to any utilities. 
(8)  A container shall be located behind the front building line, only in an approved paved area, and shall not block vehicle entrances, visibility triangles, drive aisles, required parking, or fire lanes. 
(9)  Vertical stacking of containers is prohibited. 
(10)  Signs on containers shall be limited to no more than two (2) sign areas having a maximum four (4) square feet per sign. Such signs may only identify the container supplier and telephone number. 
(b)  Additional standards for portable storage containers accessory to agricultural, detached single-family, attached single-family, and two-family dwelling uses: 
(1)  A single container shall be permitted per lot for a maximum 14-day period, and for no more than two (2) times per year. 
(2)  A container may not exceed sixteen (16) feet in length, eight (8) feet in width and eight and one-half (81/2) feet in height when accessory to detached single-family use (unless agricultural in use). 
(c)  Portable storage containers accessory to multifamily uses: A single container shall be permitted per fifty (50) dwelling units per lot, each for a maximum 14-day period, and for no more than two (2) times per year. 
(d)  Additional standards for containers accessory to industrial uses: No more than three (3) containers shall be permitted simultaneously per lot and each for a maximum 14-day period. 
(e)  Additional standards for containers accessory to other uses not identified above: A single container shall be permitted per lot for a maximum 14-day period, and for no more than two (2) times per year. 
(f)  For time periods exceeding the limits stated in [subsections] (b), (c), (d) and (e), containers shall be located in a screened storage yard, behind the front building line and meet all requirements for screened storage and other applicable Zoning Code requirements. 
(g)  The penalties and procedure for enforcement of violations of this section are provided in Article I, Division II of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 20, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 4722. - Outpatient substance abuse treatment center. 
(a)  General standards: 
(1)  An outpatient substance abuse center that adjoins an RR1, RR2, R-4, R-5, OTR, PR, RM-27, and RM-48 district shall provide a type B buffer yard in accordance with Section 5310. 
(2)  Applicants must demonstrate that the use will be compatible with the neighborhood, particularly with regard to traffic circulation, parking, and appearance. 
(3)  The structure shall be street oriented, with pedestrian entrances from the street. 
(4)  The location, dimensions, and design concept of any proposed signage should be provided at the time of the conditional use permit application. 
(5)  The hours of operation may be restricted through the conditional use permit process. 
(6)  Parking shall be located behind the front line of the principal building. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement as authorized by Section 1112. 
(7)  Lighting shall enhance security around the exterior of the building and on the site in general. Exterior lighting at the maximum footcandles permitted by Section 5601 shall be installed to illuminate the parking area, outside storage and refuse containers, walkways, and all entrances to the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 21, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 4723-4799 - [Reserved]. 
DIVISION 8. - TEMPORARY USES 

Sec. 4800 - Itinerant vendor. 
(a)  Application Requirements. The following is required as part of a Temporary Use Permit application for an Itinerant Vendor: 
(1)  A town business license (or a statement from the Finance Department that no town business license is required). 
(2)  Written permission from the owner(s) of the private properties upon which the permit holder will operate. 
(3)  A general sketch to be approved by the Zoning Administrator for each proposed location, illustrating access to the site, all parking areas, routes for ingress and egress, placement of the Itinerant Vendor, distance from lot lines, garbage receptacles and any other feature associated with the Itinerant Vendor. 
(b)  General standards: 
(1)  No signage shall be permitted except temporary signs pursuant to Article V, Division 5. 
(2)  No buffer yard, screening, landscaping, or site plan is required. 
(3)  An Itinerant Vendor shall not locate within fifty (50) feet of any RR-1, RR-2, R-4, R-5, OTR, or PR (non-commercially designated parcels) Zoning District. 
(4)  An Itinerant Vendor shall be positioned on improved, designated parking spaces and shall not block (i) the main entry drive aisle or impact circulation overall, (ii) other access to loading areas, or (iii) emergency access and fire lanes. The Itinerant Vendor must also be positioned at least fifteen (15) feet away from fire hydrants, any fire department connection (FDC), driveway entrances, alleys and handicapped parking spaces. 
( Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 1-12-16 ) 
Sec. 4801 - Mobile food vendor. 
(a)  Application Requirements. The following is required as part of a Temporary Use Permit application for a Mobile Food Vendor: 
(1)  A town business license (or a statement from the Finance Department that no town business license is required). 
(2)  Approval from the Virginia Health Department (as applicable) stating that the Mobile Food Vendor meets all applicable standards prior to operation. A valid health permit must be maintained for the duration of the Temporary Use Permit. 
(3)  Written permission from the owner(s) of the private properties upon which the permit holder will operate. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  A Mobile Food Vendor must be located on private property. 
(2)  A Mobile Food Vendor shall locate a maximum of two (2) days per calendar week at any one (1) location within the town. For the purposes of this standard, a calendar week shall start on a Sunday and end on a Saturday. 
(3)  A Mobile Food Vendor and all materials associated with the business shall be removed from the location by 9:30 p.m. each day. 
(4)  No Mobile Food Vendor shall be located so as to obstruct a public sidewalk or the public right-of-way. 
(5)  Mobile Food Vendors shall not locate within fifty (50) feet of any RR-1, RR-2, R-4, R-5, OTR, or PR (non-commercially designated parcels) Zoning District. 
(6)  A Mobile Food Vendor selling prepared food shall not locate within one hundred (100) feet of an established restaurant during the restaurant's operating hours (determined by measuring from the edge of the Mobile Food Vendor to the foundation of the restaurant) unless permission of the restaurant owner is provided. 
(7)  A Mobile Food Vendor shall be positioned on improved, designated parking spaces and shall not block (i) the main entry drive aisle or impact circulation overall, (ii) other access to loading areas, or (iii) emergency access and fire lanes. The Mobile Food Vendor must also be positioned at least fifteen (15) feet away from fire hydrants, any fire department connection (FDC), driveway entrances, alleys and handicapped parking spaces. 
(c)  Hours of operation. Mobile Food Vendors are allowed to operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. No Mobile Food Vendor shall operate past 9:00 p.m. 
(d)  Noise/Lighting. 
(1)  No amplified music shall be allowed. This includes music played inside the vehicle that is audible outside of the vehicle. 
(2)  The operation of the vehicle or use of a generator should not be loud enough to be plainly audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet away. Excessive complaints about vehicle or generator noise will be grounds for the Administrator to require that the Mobile Food Vendor change locations on the site or move to another property. 
(3)  All portable or temporary lighting shall meet Town lighting requirements and may remain on until 9:30 p.m. to allow for the safety of the patrons and employees and to allow for the site to be cleaned properly. 
(e)  Dining Areas. One ten (10) × ten (10) area is allowed next to the Mobile Food Vendor. All activities must be wholly contained within this area, which may be covered or uncovered, with tables and chairs for dining or for a table with condiments for patrons. A generator may be placed outside of this area as long as its placement and operation conforms with all applicable use and design standards. 
(f)  Number of food trucks permitted. No more than three (3) Mobile Food Vendors may operate from the same lot at the same time. Use of the lot must at all times be in accordance with all other Town regulations. 
(g)  Signage. All signage shall be limited to the Mobile Food Vendor itself. Only the food products for sale, the name of the business and a price list shall be listed. Alternative signage not affixed to the Mobile Food Vendor is allowed when related to daily menu information only. This signage shall be located within five (5) feet of the Mobile food vendor and not exceed eight (8) square feet in size. 
(h)  Trash. A Mobile Food Vendor shall provide trash and recycling receptacles and employees shall properly recycle containers and dispose of all trash, refuse and compost that is generated by the patrons. 
(i)  Other. 
(1)  The sale of anything other than food and non-alcoholic beverages (and items incidental to the product and its consumption) is prohibited. 
(2)  Mobile Food Vendors are allowed at public or private events as follows: 
(i)  In the zoning districts listed in § 1284(b); 
(ii)  At events approved through Town Code §§ 15-101 and 21-612; 
(iii)  At events conducted by the Town of Blacksburg; and 
(iv)  At events conducted by Montgomery County public schools on school property. 
(3)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to Mobile Food Vendors at catered events (events where the food is not sold through individual sales but provided to a group pursuant to a catering contract with a single payer). 
(4)  No liquid wastes shall be discharged from the Mobile Food Vendor. 
( Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 1-12-16 ) 
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS 

Sec. 5100 - Developments and uses requiring a site development plan. 
    A site development plan must be approved by the Administrator prior to the commencement of the following uses and developments: 
(a)  Any use or development in all zoning districts, including conditional uses, except for individually developed single-family detached dwelling units and individually developed two-family dwellings. (Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
(b)  Any change in a previously approved site development plan. 
(c)  The conversion of an existing residential use to a commercial, industrial or higher density residential use. 
(d)  All public or semipublic buildings. 
(e)  All other uses involving a structure requiring review by the Planning Commission under Code of Virginia § 15.2-2232. 
(f)  Development of lot or land without access to or abutting on a public right-of-way. 
(g)  Any addition of four hundred (400) square feet or more to an existing development and any addition to an existing development which implicates other site development plan requirements. 
(h)  Modification to an existing site where other site development plan requirements are implicated. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 18, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 5101 - Exceptions. 
    A site development plan shall not be required for a building addition which is under four hundred (400) square feet in size and which does not implicate any other site development plan requirement, and for any modification to an existing site where no other site development plan requirements are implicated. A site development plan is not required for the development of an accessory structure in the RR1, RR2, R-4, R-5 and OTR zoning districts. 
Secs. 5102-5109 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5110 - Site plan review procedure. 
(a)  Site development plans required by the Town shall be prepared by a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor who is registered by the Commonwealth of Virginia and is conducting a practice in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400 et seq., as amended. More stringent requirements may be established by the Town Code or the Code of Virginia. This requirement may be waived by the Administrator if the type, scale and/or location of the proposed development does not necessitate such plans. 
(b)  Five (5) clearly legible blue or black line copies of a site development plan shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  The Administrator shall be responsible for the receipt, review, processing and approval of site development plans. 
(d)  The Administrator may waive the requirement to show on the site development plan specific items as required in Section 5130 if, in his or her opinion, and based on recognized planning or engineering principles and in an effort to achieve the goals of this chapter [Appendix], they are unnecessary to determine compliance with appropriate codes and ordinances. Such waiver shall not be construed to authorize the reduction or waiver of any standard or required improvement. 
(e)  The Administrator may request opinions or decisions from other Town departments, divisions, agencies or authorities of the Commonwealth of Virginia, or from other persons as may be retained. 
(f)  Approval or disapproval of a site development plan by the Administrator shall occur within sixty (60) days of filing of complete applications in the office of the Administrator, unless extenuating circumstances exist, in which case the time may be extended by the Administrator. The reasons for any disapproval shall identify deficiencies in the plan by reference to specific duly adopted ordinances, regulations, or policies and shall identify modifications or corrections as will permit approval of the site development plan. Specific reasons for disapproval shall be contained either in a separate document or on the plan itself. The Administrator shall act on any proposed site development plan that has been previously disapproved within forty-five (45) days after the plan has been modified, corrected and resubmitted for approval. 
(g)  To attain approval of any site development plan and prior to the issuance of any building or zoning permit, the developer shall provide the Administrator with a reproducible mylar copy of any plan or plans requested. 
(h)  Prior to final approval by the Town, site development plans shall be signed by the owner or developer of the parcel(s) proposed for development. The signature shall certify that the owner/developer is aware of the site design requirements imposed by the site development plan and other applicable Town codes, and shall further certify that the owner/developer agrees to comply with these requirements, unless modified in accordance with local law. 
(i)  No building or zoning permit shall be issued by any Town official for any building, structure or use depicted on a required site development plan, until such time as the plan is approved by the Town. 
(j)  (1) Prior to approval of any site plan, at the Administrator's option there shall be executed by the owner or applicant an agreement to construct required physical improvements located within public rights-of-way or easements or connected to any public facility; and the applicant shall execute and deliver to the Town security approved by the Administrator in the amount of the estimated cost of the required physical improvements as determined by Administrator. The agreement and the security shall provide for completion of all work within a time specified to be determined by the Administrator or before occupancy is allowed in any structure, whichever shall occur first. 
(2)  In addition, the applicant shall execute and deliver to the Town security approved by the Administrator in the amount of the estimated cost of required erosion and sediment control measures as determined by the Administrator. 
(k)  The approval of a site development plan or the installation of the improvements as required in this chapter [Appendix] shall not obligate the Town to accept improvements for maintenance, repair, or operation. Acceptance shall be subject to local or state regulations where applicable, concerning the acceptance of each type of improvement. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 12-11-07) 
Secs. 5111-5119 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5120 - Minimum standards and improvements required. 
(a)  Any improvement required by this ordinance, or any other ordinance of the Town shall be installed at the cost of the developer unless other written agreements have been reached between the developer, the Town, the Virginia Department of Transportation, and/or any other governmental agency. Where cost-sharing or reimbursement agreements between the Town and applicant are entered into they shall be recognized by formal written agreement prior to site development approval. 
(b)  All proposed construction and site improvements shall conform to the provisions of this chapter [Appendix] (the Zoning Ordinance) and Town Code. Further, streets, utilities, stormwater management, and sidewalks shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance, Water System Specifications, and Sewer System Specifications. Erosion and sedimentation provisions shall comply with Chapter 10, Town Code. 
(c)  The arrangement of streets on the site shall make provision for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas and the incorporation of all mapped rights-of-way within the property. This function shall be governed by the standards prescribed therefor in the Subdivision Ordinance. 
(d)  (1)  Sidewalks meeting the design standards of the Subdivision Ordinance shall be provided on public or private land along all parts of a site abutting a developed public street, where such sidewalks do not exist as of the date of the application for site plan approval. The provision of these sidewalks will advance the goal of the Blacksburg comprehensive plan of development of "a network of walkways in the Town to increase the safety and convenience of pedestrian travel." The Town Council finds that the need for such sidewalks in this Town is substantially generated by the development. 
(2)  Based on the following conditions, the Zoning Administrator may lessen or eliminate the requirements of this subsection based on the following: 
(i)  Whether there is no existing sidewalk network in the area serving both short distance travel and longer distance travel; 
(ii)  Whether there are no existing transit stops, educational facilities, bikeways (or other walkways), or public parks within a quarter-mile distance, as measured along publicly dedicated streets, from the closest point of the development to the closest point of the nearest facility as listed above; and 
(iii)  Whether existing natural constraints of the property and/or adjacent right-of-way, such as topography, significantly limit or prohibit the feasibility of constructing a Town-standard sidewalk. 
(e)  Adequate easements shall be provided for drainage and all utilities. Minimum easement width shall be fifteen (15) feet unless specifically reduced by the Administrator, based on need or the physical characteristics of the site. Where easements do not follow the established lot lines, the nearest edge of any easement shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from any building. 
(f)  The site development plan for each phase of a multi-phased development shall demonstrate compliance with the Zoning Ordinance for each phase. 
(g)  The applicant shall identify the 100-year floodplain limits for tributaries draining one hundred (100) acres or more. Natural stream valleys within this floodplain shall remain in their natural state in all districts except in Downtown Commercial and General Commercial. In Downtown Commercial and General Commercial districts, the floodplain may be piped, channeled, or otherwise altered, so long as the applicant shows that the resulting 100-year flood elevation will not flood the proposed or existing buildings on site or adjacent sites or existing buildings that currently do not flood. In cases where existing adjacent buildings do currently flood, the changes to the floodplain shall not exacerbate or increase the flooding of existing buildings. Parking structures are not considered habitable spaces and may be designed to flood no more than one (1) foot in depth. All storm drainage improvements shall be designed to carry the ten-year storm. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 29, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 61, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Secs. 5121-5129 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5130 - Information required. 
    Every site development plan shall contain the following information. The information contained under the heading, "optional" may be required by the Administrator as appropriate based upon the planning and engineering issues posed by the project, in order to achieve the goals of this chapter [Appendix] [Appendix] and of the Town Code. 
(a)  General information: 
Mandatory: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner and developer. 
(2)  Original date and revision dates. 
(3)  Scale of the drawing and number of sheets. The scale of the plan shall be at a scale between one (1) inch equals ten (10) feet and one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet. The site plan may be prepared on one (1) or more sheets. If preparation is on more than one (1) sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. 
(4)  Name and address of person or firm preparing the plan. 
(5)  Number of floors, floor area, height and location of each building. 
(6)  Proposed general use of each building. 
(7)  The number, size and type of dwelling units. 
(8)  Zoning district and current use of the parcel and each surrounding parcel. 
(9)  Address and tax parcel number of the site. 
(10)  Owners names for each adjoining parcel. 
(11)  Building location. 
(12)  Boundary and dimensions of the site. 
(13)  Location of the tract or parcel by vicinity map at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet and landmarks sufficient to properly identify the location of the property. 
(14)  Sheets shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches in size, nor be less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches. 
(15)  All proffers, conditional use permit conditions, exceptions, or Board of Zoning Appeals actions applicable to the site. (Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
(16)  Proposed phasing and compliance computations for landscaping, parking, open space, and other as necessary for each phase. 
(17)  Signature block and approval statement for owner or developer. 
(18)  A north arrow referencing true, record, or grid north (Datum of 1983). 
(19)  Front elevations and street elevations shall be shown on all commercial, industrial and multi-unit residential developments, regardless of height. (Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
Optional: 
(1)  A certificate signed by the engineer or surveyor setting forth the source and title of the owner of the tract and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. 
(2)  A minimum of two (2) datum references for elevations used on plans and profiles correlated to U.S. Geological Survey datum where practicable. 
(3)  A boundary survey of the tract or site plan limit. 
(b)  Erosion and Sedimentation Control: 
Mandatory: 
(1)  Limits of construction and computed area within limits of construction. 
(2)  Provisions and schedules for the adequate control of erosion and sedimentation indicating proposed temporary and permanent control practices and measures which shall be implemented during all phases of clearing, grading and construction in compliance with Chapter 8, Town Code. 
Optional: 
(1)  Existing topography accurately shown with a maximum of two-foot contour intervals at a scale of not less than fifty (50) feet to an inch. 
(2)  Proposed finished grading by contour. 
(c)  Lighting: 
Mandatory: For any exterior lighting to be installed, a lighting plan showing the height of the lighting fixture, the type of lighting fixture; and the means and sequence of implementation, which shall be carried out. 
(d)  Multi-unit Residential: 
Mandatory: 
(1)  Location, area, and type of open space and specific recreational activity area. 
(2)  Improvements necessary for any specific recreational activity. 
(3)  The number, size and type of dwelling units, number of bedrooms, and typical floor plan. 
(e)  Parking: 
Mandatory: 
(1)  All off-street parking and parking bays, loading spaces, and walkways indicating type of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles and a specific schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided and the number required in accordance with Article V, Division 2, Zoning Ordinance, Town Code. 
(2)  Any access easements existing or proposed, with deed book and page number of recordation. 
(f)  Screening, Landscaping, and Buffer Yards: 
Mandatory: 
(1)  Location, type, size and height of all fencing, and screening, where required under the provisions of Article V, Division 3, Zoning Ordinance, Town Code. 
(2)  Location of required buffer yards. 
(3)  Location, type, height, and detail of any proposed retaining walls. 
(4)  A landscape planting chart showing the planting schedule, minimum size at planting, total canopy percentage, species, and total canopy coverage for the site. 
(5)  The outline of existing groupings of trees. Physically outstanding or specimen trees within the groups shall be shown if they are to be removed. 
(6)  All individual trees with a caliper of five (5) inches or more at a height of two (2) feet above the ground or ornamental trees over twelve (12) feet shall be shown on the plan and labeled as to whether they will be saved or removed. 
(7)  Where applicable, parking lot landscaping. 
(8)  A landscape design plan, based upon accepted professional design layouts and principles. 
(g)  Stormwater Management: 
Mandatory: 
(1)  Provision for the adequate disposition of natural and stormwater in accordance with design criteria and construction standards of the state or the Town in effect at the time the site plan is submitted indicating location, sizes, types, and grades of ditches, catch basins and pipes, and connections to existing drainage systems. All stormwater management plans shall comply with Appendix B, Subdivision Ordinance, Town Code. 
(2)  A detailed stormwater management plan and calculations meeting the standards of Chapter 8, Town Code. 
(3)  Location of existing and proposed drainage easements with width noted, and deed book and page number of recordation of existing easements. 
(4)  The location of all or any springs within the site and indicate proposed method of treatment. 
(5)  Delineation of 100-year floodplain. 
(h)  Streets: 
Mandatory: 
(1)  Existing and proposed streets including street rights-of-way, their names, width, width of surface or distance between curb faces and relation to center line, and street names and route numbers, if applicable, of all adjoining streets. 
(2)  Location, type and size of ingress and egress to the site. 
(3)  When proposed streets intersect with or adjoin existing streets or travel ways, both edges of existing pavement surface or curb and gutter must be indicated for a minimum of one hundred (100) feet or the length of connection, whichever is the greater distance. 
(4)  Sight distance evaluation, horizontal and vertical at all proposed street intersections and entrances. 
(5)  Pavement cross-section proposed. 
Optional: 
(1)  Center lines. 
(2)  Connection to proposed Town and Virginia Department of Transportation construction. 
(i)  Utilities: 
Mandatory: 
(1)  Existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities indicating all pipe sizes, types and grades and where connection is to be made to an existing or proposed water and sewer system. 
(2)  Existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way, with deed book and page number of recordation, of all utilities shall be clearly defined for the purpose intended, and whether they are to be publicly or privately maintained. 
(3)  All existing and proposed fire hydrant locations on-site, or distance and location of nearest hydrant off-site. 
Optional: 
Electric and other public utility plans. 
(j)  Open Space: Site development plans shall delineate, compute and show, where required, suitable area for parks, schools, open space, and other public or private recreation use. 
(k)  Signage: Location of existing and proposed freestanding signs on the lot. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 19, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 5131 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5132 - Administrator's comments-Term of validity. 
    The Administrator's comments or commitments on a proposed site development plan that did not achieve approval shall maintain efficacy for six (6) months from the date the comments are rendered. After this period, these comments or commitments shall be void. 
Sec. 5133 - Approved final site plan-Term of validity. 
    An approved final site plan shall be valid for five (5) years from the date of approval or for such longer period as the Administrator may at the time of approval determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed development. The Administrator upon written request of the applicant for site plan approval made prior to the expiration of the period of validity, and upon extension of all security arrangements, may grant one (1) or more extensions of such approval for additional periods as the Administrator may, at the time of extension, determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and the phasing of the proposed development, and the laws, ordinances, and regulations in effect at the time of the request for an extension. For so long as the final site plan remains valid under this subsection, no change or amendment to any local ordinance, map, resolution, rule, regulation, policy or plan adopted subsequent to the date of approval of the final site plan shall adversely affect the right of the applicant or his or her successor in interest to commence and complete an approved development in accordance with the lawful terms of the recorded final site plan, unless the change or amendment is required to comply with state law or there has been a mistake, fraud or change in circumstances substantially affecting the public health, safety or welfare. 
Sec. 5134 - Inspections. 
    Town agencies responsible for the supervision and enforcement of this chapter [Appendix] shall periodically inspect the site during the period of construction to ascertain compliance with this chapter [Appendix]. 
Sec. 5135 - Revisions. 
(a)  No change, revision or erasure shall be made on any pending or final site development plan or any accompanying data sheet where approval has been endorsed on the plat or sheets unless authorization for such changes is granted in writing by the Administrator. 
(b)  Any site development plan may be revised; provided, that the request for revision shall be filed and processed in the same manner as the original site plan. 
Sec. 5136 - Record drawings required. 
    If the Administrator deems it necessary, based on physical considerations of the site or changes during the construction, upon the completion of all required improvements shown on the approved site development plan, the developer shall submit to the Administrator for the governing body two blue line copies for review of the completed as-built site plan or building location plat. The Administrator, based on physical considerations of the site or changes during the construction, may require this plan or plat to be certified by an engineer, architect, or surveyor. Upon the Administrator's approval of this plan or plat, the developer shall submit within thirty days after approval to the Administrator a reproducible mylar copy of this document. 
DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING, STACKING AND LOADING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1598, adopted Feb. 8, 2011, states: "That this ordinance shall be effective upon its adoption, subject to the following limited transitional provisions: 
(a) Any land development application with a first submission date for plan review that was prior to the adoption of Ordinance 1598 shall be reviewed under the Zoning Ordinance provisions in effect at the time of application. 
(b) During the first 30 calendar days after the adoption of Ordinance 1598 (from February 9, 2011 to March 10, 2011), persons submitting land development applications may elect to have the application reviewed under either (i) the provisions of Ordinance 1598 or (ii) the Zoning Ordinance provisions in Section 2103 and Sections 5200-5242 governing parking that were in effect prior to the adoption of Ordinance 1598. At the time of submission, applicants must affirmatively indicate that the requested review be conducted under the prior regulations, and the review cannot mix portions of the previous regulations with the new provisions of Ordinance 1598. 
(c) These transitional provisions shall be void 30 calendar days after the adoption of this Ordinance (on or after March 11, 2011), and all land development applications submitted on or after March 11, 2011 shall be subject to the provisions of Ordinance 1598." 

Sec. 5200 - Purpose. 
    These regulations are intended to provide off-street parking, stacking and loading areas that are appropriate for each use and are more sustainable for the Town as a whole. These regulations are intended to support transportation in a functionally and aesthetically satisfactory manner and to minimize external effects on adjacent land uses. To further an efficient, sustainable transportation system, these regulations are intended to achieve the following goals: 
  support a variety of modes of transportation; 
  provide for connectivity between uses; 
  promote connectivity and transitions between modes of transportation; 
  ensure pedestrian friendly site design; 
  prevent excess parking; 
  reduce impervious surfaces; 
  reduce stormwater runoff and heat island effects; and 
  encourage alternative parking surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 5201 - General regulations for parking. 
(a)  In all districts, off-street parking shall be in a driveway or surfaced parking area. New gravel off-street parking areas shall only be allowed as permitted in Section 5206(c) and (d). 
(b)  No recreational vehicle shall be used for living or business purposes, or connected to utility services, except for maintenance purposes or as otherwise provided for in this ordinance. 
(c)  Except in the Downtown Commercial Zoning District, off-street parking shall be provided for the following: 
(1)  Any new building constructed; 
(2)  New uses or conversions of existing buildings for developments that require a site development plan as set forth in article V, division 1 of this ordinance; and 
(3)  For enlargements of existing structures. 
(d)  For enlargements of existing structures or uses with parking which does not conform to these regulations, required parking shall be provided for the enlargement in accordance with these regulations unless a mass or alternative transportation plan has been approved pursuant to section 5211. 
(e)  Pedestrian walkways through parking areas are required in order to guide pedestrians to a safe and convenient path from a parking area to a building or to a drive aisle crossing. Walkways are required at the edges of parking areas when needed to connect the parking area to the proposed use. Where landscape islands are placed such that the landscape islands are a barrier to a direct path of travel to a building, breaks in the landscape islands with crosswalks are required at a maximum separation of one hundred (100) feet for pedestrian access. 
(f)  A marked crosswalk shall be provided across any surface parking area drive aisle that separates the principal building entrance from a parking area unless the marking of the crosswalk is deemed to be inconsistent with the objectives of this division by the Administrator because of the configuration of the site development, topography, or other specific conditions. Additional marked crosswalks may be required as deemed necessary by the Administrator based on the number of drive aisles, multiple public entrances to the building, or other safety concerns. 
(g)  Site plans for parking structures shall show pedestrian walkways from the parking structure to the uses to be served and to the sidewalks on the public right-of-way. These walkways may be required to be striped or signed as determined by the Administrator. 
(h)  A landscaped island or other physical barrier shall separate parking areas within a site from any entrance or exit to the parking area. Adequate street sight distance at any entrance or intersection shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 30, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 5202 - Permitted locations. 
(a)  Off-street parking spaces that are located on the ground and open to the sky may be located in any required yard unless otherwise required for screening, buffering, landscaping, or unless prohibited by other provisions in this chapter or the Town Code. A parking space for an automobile shall have dimensions as specified in the chart and diagram below, unless an exception is granted by the Administrator due to the shallow depth of a parcel, the location of existing trees, or other similar circumstances. 
(b)  Parking structures and carports shall be subject to the minimum yard and setback requirements applicable in the zoning district in which the structure is located. 
(c)  All parking spaces required by this ordinance or otherwise provided shall be located so that maneuvering in or backing into a public street shall not be required for ingress or egress from such spaces. Entrances to off-street parking areas for a single-unit dwelling, or a subdivided two-family dwelling, with individual lot frontage located on a local street shall be exempt from this requirement unless determined to be unsafe by the Administrator due to the volume of traffic, number of entrances, impact on sight distances or other impacts. 
(d)  The required setback for all parking areas whether surface parking or a parking structure shall be three (3) feet, unless the parking area is immediately adjacent to a public right-of-way. If the parking area is immediately adjacent to a public right-of-way, see section 5427(f). 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1415, § 22, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 5203 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5204 - Driveways. 
(a)  All driveways shall be no less than three (3) feet from a lot line; however, driveways may be adjacent to the lot line if a common driveway is provided for two (2) adjoining lots. 
(b)  Vehicular access to public rights-of-way shall be governed by the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance, Town Code Appendix B. 
(c)  All entrances constructed from a new or existing street shall be constructed in accordance with the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance, Town Code Appendix B. 
(d)  The minimum driveway width for developments requiring a site development plan shall be twenty (20) feet for two-way directional use and fourteen (14) feet for one-way directional use. 
(e)  The pavement of vehicular drive aisles, driveways or alleys designed to permit vehicular travel on the site and to and from adjacent property and parking areas shall be as prescribed by the Subdivision Ordinance. 
(f)  All driveways shall have a maximum grade of twelve (12) percent. 
(g)  All driveways and drive aisles shall not be longer than nine hundred (900) feet, unless a second means of access is provided to a publicly maintained street. 
(Ord. No. 1184, 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 5205 - Parking space dimensions. 
(a)  A parking space for an automobile shall have dimensions as specified in the charts and diagrams below: 
A B C D E Parking Space 

Angle in degrees Parking Space Width Parking Space Length Aisle Width Curb Length per Space One-Way Traffic Two-Way Traffic Standard Car parallel 0 9'-0" 23'-0" 12'-0" 20'-0' 23'-0" 30 9'-0" 16'-10" 9'-0" 20'-0' 18'-0" 45 9'-0" 19'-0" 11'-0" 20'-0' 12'-9" * D Aisle width may be reduced to 20'-0" for single tier of parking 60 9'-0" 19'-6" 17'-0" 20'-0' 10'-5" perpendicular 90 9'-0" 18'-0" 20'-0" *24'-0" 9'-0" Compact Car parallel 0 8'-0" 22'-0" 12'-0" 20'-0' 22'-0" 30 8'-0" 16'-0" 9'-0" 20'-0' 16'-0" 45 8'-0" 18'-5" 11'-0" 20'-0' 11'-4" * D Aisle width may be reduced to 20'-0" for single tier of parking 60 8'-0" 17'-0" 17'-0" 20'-0' 9'-3" perpendicular 90 8'-0" 16'-0" 20'-0" *24'-0" 8'-0"  

(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 5206 - Construction Standards. 
(a)  Unless otherwise stated, all parking spaces must be striped or otherwise permanently marked to designate the space. 
(b)  Parking bays areas, driveways and interior drive aisles shall be constructed with asphalt or concrete. Alternative surfaces may be used if approved by the Administrator. Surface treatment, gravel, or other material shall not be used, unless the appurtenant street is unpaved or as approved by the Administrator. In reviewing options for parking surfaces other than asphalt or concrete, the Administrator shall consider the intensity of use, frequency of use, size of parking bays, length of travel lanes and the interface of entrances and exits with the public right-of-way. Parking bays or travel lanes constructed of an approved pervious pavement material may be excluded from lot coverage calculations provided product information on performance is submitted that demonstrates the surface remains pervious in the long term and a maintenance plan is approved by the Town. This information may be provided as part of a stormwater management and maintenance plan if such a plan is required. In parking areas containing over ten (10) spaces, additional landscaping standards (section 5427), as set out in this chapter, shall apply. 
(c)  Off-street parking areas including drive aisles and driveways may, upon approval of the Administrator, be exempt from provision (b) above if such areas are for a temporary purpose. However, such areas shall be graveled, or have other approved surface treatment, and maintained in accordance with standards approved by the Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Secs. 5207-5209 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5210 - General criteria for determining parking. 
(a)  When a building includes a combination of uses as set forth in this Division the required parking will be the sum of the required parking for each use. 
(b)  Where the parking requirement for a particular use is not defined in this Division, and where no similar use is listed, the Administrator shall determine the number of spaces to be provided based on requirements for similar uses, location of the proposed use, expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed use, and appropriate traffic engineering and planning criteria and information. 
(c)  All references to square feet (sq. ft.) in the parking requirements below shall mean the square feet of gross floor area, unless specifically stated otherwise. 
(d)  All references to maximum occupancy shall mean the maximum occupancy as determined pursuant to the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(e)  Where a fractional space results during calculation of required parking, the determination of whether to round the required number of parking spaces up or down to the next whole number shall be at the discretion of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 5211 - Mass or alternate transportation plans. 
(a)  The minimum number of parking spaces may be reduced upon the approval of a mass or alternate transportation plan, which details arrangements for the mass or alternate transit of potential visitors to the site, including residents, employees and customers. Such plans shall be subject to the review and approval of the Administrator and Transit Director, prior to the reduction of the number of required parking spaces. 
(b)  Each lot for which the minimum number of parking spaces has been reduced shall show a reserve area sufficient in size to accommodate the number of parking spaces which were not required to be constructed. In addition, the developer shall post a letter of credit or other security for a period of two (2) years in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of construction of the parking spaces not required. 
(c)  Every approved mass or alternate transportation plan shall be reviewed by the Administrator and Transit Director every two (2) years. The purpose of the review is to ascertain whether the plan has the effect of significantly reducing the automobile traffic to and from the site, and whether the reduced number of parking spaces is sufficient to accommodate the automobile traffic to the site. The Administrator and the Transit Director shall make a determination to this effect. This determination may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(d)  In the event that the Administrator and Transit Director determine that an approved mass or alternate transportation plan has not had the effect of significantly reducing automobile traffic to a site, and that the reduced number of parking spaces is not sufficient to accommodate the automobile traffic to a site, the owner shall construct the number of parking spaces necessary to meet the minimum required under this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 5212 - Parking for persons with disabilities. 
    The number of parking spaces reserved for the disabled shall comply with the federal regulations promulgated pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1598, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2011, amended App. A, § 5212 title to read as herein set out. Former App. A, § 5212 title pertained to spaces for disabled parking. 
Sec. 5213 - Minimum parking for bicycles. 
(a)  For developments that require a site development plan as set forth in article V, division 1 of this ordinance, facilities for the off-street parking of bicycles shall be provided as follows: 
Use Type Required Number of Bicycle Spaces Residential units (except single-family detached or duplexes) Twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of bedrooms Commercial retail Five (5) spaces or one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor space devoted to retail sales for first fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and one (1) space for each additional five thousand (5,000) square feet, whichever number is greater For civic, office or any other use not listed above Minimum of five (5) bicycle spaces  
(b)  Required bicycle stands must be permanently anchored. 
(c)  Required bicycle stands must be of inverted U construction and adequately spaced to accommodate multiple bicycles. Other types of construction are allowed as approved by the Administrator provided they meet the intent to allow the secure attachment of multiple bicycles. Ribbon style bicycle racks are not allowed. Required bicycle stands must be located in a safe, accessible area near a public entrance. 
(d)  In any case, the Administrator may waive or reduce the bicycle space requirement if the proposed use is in a location not easily accessible to a bicyclist or of a nature such that it is not conducive to bicycling. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 5214 - Minimum parking for motorcycles and scooters. 
(a)  For developments that require a site development plan as set forth in article V, division 1 of this ordinance, parking of motorcycles and scooters shall be provided as follows: 
Use Type Required Number of Motorcycle/Scooter Spaces for Parking Areas of Greater Than Twenty (20) Spaces Civic, office, commercial less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area. Two (2) spaces Civic, office, commercial ten thousand (10,000) square feet to less than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor area. Four (4) spaces Civic, office, commercial fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or greater of gross floor area Eight (8) spaces  
(b)  Motorcycle and scooter spaces are not required for parking areas with twenty (20) or fewer required parking spaces. 
(c)  Motorcycle and scooter spaces are included in the required minimum parking calculations. 
(d)  Every two (2) motorcycle and scooter spaces count as one (1) parking space in parking calculations. 
(e)  Motorcycle and scooter spaces shall be a minimum of four and one-half (41/2) feet in width by eight (8) feet in length. 
(f)  These spaces must be located on the closest drive aisle to the primary entrance. 
(g)  In developments of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or greater, these spaces must be dispersed on the site. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 5215 - Compact parking spaces. 
(a)  Compact parking spaces are encouraged. 
(b)  Compact parking spaces may comprise up to thirty (30) percent of any parking area. 
(c)  Compact parking spaces shall be signed or marked as compact spaces. 
(d)  Compact parking spaces are encouraged to be located with access to the drive aisles closest to the primary entrance(s). 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Secs. 5216-5219 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5220 - Minimum parking required and maximum parking allowed. 
(a)  A minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided, except in the Downtown Commercial Zoning District, in accordance with the following schedule. The parking space requirements for a use not specifically named herein shall be the same as required for a listed use similar in nature. References to square footage of floor area below refer to gross floor area. There is no minimum number of parking spaces required for allowed uses in the Downtown Commercial District. For uses approved by the granting of a conditional use permit, the provisions contained in section 5220 (b) or (c) must be requested as part of the conditional use permit application. 
USE TYPE MINIMUM PARKING 

REQUIRED MAXIMUM PARKING 

ALLOWED (a) Agricultural and Forestry Use Types Agriculture No requirement No requirement Stable, private No requirement No requirement Stable, commercial 1 space per employee on largest shift, plus 1 space for every 4 animals stabled See section 5220(b) Wayside Stand 1 space per 100 square feet, 3 spaces minimum See section 5220(b) (b) Residential Use Types *Review of minimums and maximums for residential use types will be determined in a future Zoning Ordinance Amendment. Special housing See section 4209(B)(1)(b) * No maximum Home occupation See section 4211(B)(8) * No maximum Kennel, private No requirements * No maximum Manufactured home 2 spaces per dwelling unit * No maximum Manufactured home park 2 spaces per dwelling unit No maximum Multifamily dwelling 1.1 spaces per bedroom No maximum Single-family attached 2 spaces per dwelling unit No maximum Single-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit No maximum Townhouse 1.1 spaces per bedroom No maximum Two-family dwelling 1 space per bedroom No maximum (c) Civic Use Types Administrative services 1 space per 400 square feet, plus 1 space per vehicle at facility See section 5220(b) Cemetery See schedule B See schedule B Clubs 1 space per 3 persons based on maximum occupancy See section 5220(b) Community recreation See schedule B See schedule B Cultural services 1 space per 400 square feet See section 5220(b) Day care center 1 space per employee on largest shift, plus 1 space per 10 children, plus 1 space for each vehicle associated with facility See section 5220(b) Educational facilities, college/university See schedule B See schedule B Educational facilities, secondary See schedule B, but no less than 1 space per employee on largest shift, plus 1 space per each 4 students in 11th and 12th grades See section 5220(b) Educational facilities, primary See schedule B, but no less than 1 space per employee on largest shift, 1 space for each vehicle associated with the facility and 1 space per 20 students See section 5220(b) Family day care home 1 space per nonresident employee plus 2 spaces for resident employees See section 5220(b) Guidance services 1 space per 250 square feet See section 5220(b) Halfway house 1 space per 2 persons of residential capacity See section 5220(b) Home for adults 1 space per 3 residents, plus 1 space for each employee on largest shift See section 5220(b) Life care facility See schedule B See schedule B Nursing home 1 space per 4 residents, plus 1 space for each employee on largest shift See section 5220(b) Post office See schedule A See schedule A Public assembly 1 space per 4 seats See section 5220(b) Public maintenance and service facilities See scheduleA See schedule A Public parks and recreational areas See schedule B See schedule B Religious assembly 1 space per 4 person at maximum occupancy in principal place of worship See section 5220(b) Safety services 3 spaces per vehicles based at facility See section 5220(b) Shelter See schedule B See schedule B Utility services, minor No requirements No requirement Utility services, major See schedule B See schedule B (d) Office Use Types Financial institutions 3.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet See section 5220(b) General Office 1 space per 300 square feet See section 5220(b) Medical office (not including veterinary offices) 1 space per 200 square feet See section 5220(b) (e) Commercial Use Types Adult entertainment establishment See schedule B See schedule B Adult store 1 space per 250 square feet See section 5220(b) Agricultural services See schedule A See schedule A Antique shops 1 space per 250 square feet See section 5220(b) Automobile dealership See schedule A; spaces for cars for sale need not be striped. See schedule A Automobile repair services 1 space per 400 square feet of office space, plus 3 spaces per service bay, plus 1 space per service vehicle. Spaces for cars to be repaired need not be striped. See section 5220(b) Automobile rental/leasing See schedule A See schedule A Automobile parts/supply, retail See schedule A See schedule A Bed and breakfast 1 space per guest accommodation, plus 2 spaces per permanent residence; spaces for a bed and breakfast do not need to be striped. See section 5220(b) Boarding house 1 space per guest accommodation, plus 2 spaces per permanent residence See section 5220(b) Brewpub One space per 50 square feet of seating area; one space per 400 square feet of space not devoted to seating or waiting, plus one space per delivery vehicle See section 5220(b) Business support See schedule B See schedule B Business or trade schools See schedule B See schedule B Campgrounds 1 space at each campsite, plus spaces required for other uses See section 5220(b) Car wash 1 space per bay plus 1 space per employee on largest shift for full service 
  
1 space per 2 bays for self serve car wash See section 5220(b) Clinic 1 space per 250 square feet See section 5220(b) Commercial indoor amusement 1 space per 3 persons based on maximum occupancy See section 5220(b) Commercial indoor entertainment 1 space per 4 seats or similar accommodations, plus 1 space per 2 employees on largest shift See section 5220(b) Commercial indoor sports and recreation Bowling alley 3 spaces per alley, plus 1 space per employee on largest shift See section 5220(b) Swimming pool 1 space per 100 square feet of water surface See section 5220(b) Tennis and other racquet court See schedule B See section 5220(b) Games Other indoor sports 1 space per 3 persons based on maximum occupancy load, plus 1 space per employee on largest shift See section 5220(b) Commercial outdoor entertainment 1 space per 3 persons based on maximum occupancy load, plus 1 space per employee on largest shift See section 5220(b) Commercial outdoor sports and recreation Driving range See schedule B See schedule B Event center 1 parking space per 4 seats or 1 per 4 persons based on maximum occupancy, whichever is greater See section 5220(b) Golf course See schedule B See schedule B Miniature golf See schedule B See schedule B Swimming pool See schedule B See schedule B Tennis and other racquet court games See schedule B See schedule B Other outdoor sports 1 space per 3 persons based on maximum occupancy load, plus 1 space per employee on largest shift See section 5220(b) Communications services 1 space per 400 square feet, plus 1 space per company vehicle stored on site See section 5220(b) Construction sales and services See schedule A See section 5220(b) Consumer repair services 1 space per 400 square feet, plus 1 space per service vehicle stored on site See section 5220(b) Neighborhood convenience store 1 space per 200 square feet with gas pumps. See also gasoline station See section 5220(b) Dance hall 1 space per 3 persons based on maximum occupancy load, plus 1 space per employee on largest shift See section 5220(b) Equipment sales and rental See schedule A See schedule A Funeral home 1 space per 4 persons maximum capacity in main chapel, plus 1 space per 2 employees on largest shift, plus 1 space per company vehicle See section 5220(b) Garden center See schedule A See schedule A Gasoline station 1 space per employee on largest shift See section 5220(b) Grocery store See retail sales See section 5220(b) Hospital 1 space per bed, plus 1 space per employee on largest shift including doctors See use and design standards Hotel/motel/motor lodge 1 space per guest room plus 1 space per 10 guest rooms, plus spaces as required for other uses See section 5220(b) Kennel, commercial 1 space per 500 square feet See section 5220(b) Itinerant vendor 1 space per 50 square feet See section 5220(b) Laundry 1 space per 300 square feet See section 5220(b) Manufactured home sales See schedule B See schedule B Mini-warehouse 1 space per 250 square feet of office space and 2 spaces per on-site caretaker residence See section 5220(b) Pawn shop 1 space per 300 square feet See section 5220(b) Personal improvement services See schedule B See schedule B Personal services 1 space per 300 square feet See section 5220(b) Recreational vehicle sales and service See schedule A See schedule A Restaurant, general and restaurant, small 1 space per 50 square feet of seating area and 1 space per 400 square feet of floor space not devoted to seating See section 5220(b) Restaurant, drive-in or fast food With Seats 1 space per 40 square feet of seating or serving area; 1 space per 400 square feet of space not devoted to seating or serving; see also section 5230 for stacking spaces See section 5220(b) Without seats 1 space per 60 square feet, plus required stacking space See section 5220(b) Retail Sales Furniture, carpet and appliances 1 space per 1,000 square feet See section 5220(b) All others Less than 10,000 square feet = 1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area See section 5220(b) 10,000 square feet to less than 50,000 square feet = 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area See section 5220(b) 50,000 square feet or greater = 1 space per 350 square feet of gross floor area See section 5220(b) Studio, fine arts See schedule B See schedule B Surplus sales 1 space per 100 square feet of sales area accessible to the public See section 5220(b) Veterinary hospital/clinic 2 spaces per examination or treatment room, plus 1 space per employee on largest shift including veterinarians See section 5220(b) (f) Industrial Use Types Construction yards See schedule A See schedule A Custom manufacturing See schedule A See schedule A Industry, light See schedule A See schedule A Industry, medium See schedule A See schedule A Industry, heavy See schedule A See schedule A Laboratory, research See schedule A See schedule A Laboratory, support See schedule A See schedule A Landfill, rubble See schedule A See schedule A Railroad facilities See schedule B See schedule B Recycling centers/stations See required stacking spaces See section 5220(b) Resource extraction 1 space per employee on largest shift See section 5220(b) Scrap and salvage services See schedule A See schedule A Transfer station See schedule B See schedule B Transportation terminal See schedule B See schedule B Truck terminal See schedule B See schedule B Warehousing and distribution See schedule A See schedule A (g) Miscellaneous Use Types Aviation facilities See schedule B See schedule B Broadcasting and communication tower 1 space per tower 4 spaces regardless of the number of towers Outdoor gathering See schedule B See schedule B Shooting range, outdoor See schedule B See schedule B  
Schedule A 
    The schedule sets forth minimum and maximum parking requirements for uses with a combination of functions or operating characteristics. 
Function of Element Minimum Requirement Maximum based on combined uses Office, research and development or administrative activity 1 space per 400 square feet See section 5220(b) Indoor display or service area 1 space per 500 square feet See section 5220(b) Indoor sales 1 space per 250 square feet See section 5220(b) Motor vehicle service bays 3 spaces per service bay See section 5220(b) Outdoor sales, display or service area 1 space per 2,000 square feet See section 5220(b) General equipment servicing or manufacturing 1 space per 800 square feet See section 5220(b) Indoor storage or warehousing 1 space per 2,000 square feet See section 5220(b) Outdoor storage or warehousing 1 space per 5,000 square feet See section 5220(b)  
Schedule B 
    Specific requirements for the minimum parking required shall be determined by the Administrator based on requirements for similar uses, location of proposed use, number of employees on largest shift, expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed use, and appropriate traffic engineering and planning criteria and information. The maximum number of spaces shall be as shown in section 5220(b). Determination of the minimum requirements in schedule B may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(b)  Parking maximums shall be based on the size of the parking area with the number of parking spaces as calculated using the standards for minimum required parking in section (a). The following parking maximums shall apply: 
Size of Parking Area Maximum Parking Allowed Less than or equal to 20 parking spaces 125 percent of Required Minimum Greater than 20 parking spaces and less than or equal to 50 parking spaces 110 percent of Required Minimum Greater than 50 parking spaces 105 percent of Required Minimum  
(c)  Decreasing off-street automobile parking below the required minimum for non-residential uses. The applicant shall submit an application explaining the reduction requested. The request must be based on need and not on such factors as a desire to place a larger building on the site without sufficient supporting parking. All submittals shall include an assessment of the potential impacts on any surrounding residential areas. Multiple reductions may be requested, can be applied cumulatively and include the following: 
i.  Reduction of parking through the application for a Mass or Alternative Transportation Plan in accordance with section 5211 or Shared Parking Arrangement in accordance with section 5222. 
ii.  Submission of data and analysis justifying the proposed decrease. The submittal shall include actual field data from similar project sites, including data on the number of parking spaces provided, square footage of uses, operational characteristics of the uses, and parking utilization that demonstrates that less parking than the required minimum parking is used on a regular basis. Information from only the proposed location is insufficient. The data and analysis shall be prepared by a professional engineer, architect or landscape architect with experience in site design. The data and analysis is subject to review and approval by the Administrator. 
iii.  Reduction in required spaces based on the availability of transit service. When transit service is available within a one-quarter (1/4) mile of the site, measured as a pedestrian would walk to the transit stop, and the transit service provides thirty (30) minute peak hour service on a regular schedule then a fifteen (15) percent reduction would be permitted. 
(d)  Increasing off-street automobile parking above the allowed maximum for nonresidential uses: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit an application explaining the increase requested. The increase requested must be based on need and not on factors such as a desire to have vacant parking spaces visible for marketing purposes. The Applicant shall submit data and analysis justifying the need for the proposed increase. The submittal shall include actual field data from similar project sites, including data on the number of parking spaces provided, square footage of uses, operational characteristics of the uses, and parking utilization that demonstrate the need for increased parking on a regular basis. Information from only the proposed location is insufficient. The data and analysis shall be prepared by a professional engineer, architect or landscape architect with experience in site design. The data and analysis is subject to review and approval by the Administrator. 
(2)  If the additional spaces are approved by the Administrator, the spaces may be located on-site or off-site pursuant to section 5221. In all cases, one (1) of the requirement below must be met. 
i.  The additional surface parking area shall have thirty (30) percent canopy coverage; or 
ii.  The additional surface parking shall be pervious parking material. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 1845 , § 1, 12-12-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1598, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2011, amended § 5220 title to read as herein set out. Former § 5220 title pertained to maximum parking required. 
Sec. 5221 - Off-site parking permitted, conditions. 
    Off-street parking spaces may be located on the same lot as the structure or use or off-site, under all of the following conditions: 
(1)  Off-site spaces shall be within one thousand (1,000) feet walking distance use, as measured from the parking area entrance along pedestrian walkways, of the primary entrance to the building or use. If the pedestrian access is to cross an arterial street, appropriate safety measures must be present to help the pedestrian cross the street. In any event, safe and convenient pedestrian access should be provided from the structure or use to the parking area. 
(2)  Contiguous parking areas providing off-street parking for more than one (1) use shall provide sufficient spaces to comply with the parking requirements for all usages. 
(3)  The off-site area may be located in a different zoning district than the structure or use it serves if a parking area is permitted by right or by conditional use permit in the different zoning district. 
(4)  The area used for off-site parking must be owned by or leased for at least a twenty (20) year term or through a permanent easement by the owner of the use being served. If the term of the use is limited by a conditional use permit, then the term of the lease agreement may be limited accordingly. At the expiration of the term of a lease, the owner must replace the off-site parking or end the use which required the parking. Town Council may grant a special exception to this requirement under the following criteria: (i) An alternative means of compliance consistent with the intent of this requirement can be shown; or (ii) a lesser lease term is appropriate to the circumstances of the use. 
(5)  No changes shall be made to the off-site parking area which would reduce the parking provided for the use, unless other arrangements to provide parking are made by the owner of the use. 
(6)  All required handicapped parking spaces for a use must be located on-site. 
(7)  All required loading spaces must be located on-site. 
(8)  An existing nonconforming parking lot to be used under this section as off-site parking must be landscaped, paved and striped according to the standards of this Division and the Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 34, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09; Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Sec. 5222 - Shared parking arrangements. 
    Two (2) or more uses may share parking without providing the minimum number of on-site required spaces for each use, under all the following conditions: 
(1)  The minimum required number of parking spaces for the combined uses may be reduced by twenty (20) percent for shared parking when hours of operation overlap. Residential uses, except special housing, shall not be allowed to share parking facilities. 
(2)  Off-site spaces shall be within one thousand (1,000) feet walking distance of a building entrance or use as measured from the parking area entrance along pedestrian walkways. If the pedestrian walkway access is to cross an arterial street, appropriate safety measures must be present to help the pedestrian cross the street. In any event, safe and convenient pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or path, must exist or be provided from the structure or use to the parking area. 
(3)  When the hours of operation do not overlap, the parking area to be shared must contain at least the minimum required spaces of the largest individual use sharing the lot and shall be developed to the extent of at least being paved and striped according to the standards of this chapter. 
(4)  The parking area to be shared must be owned by the owner of one (1) of the uses or leased for at least a 20-year term or through a permanent easement by the owner of the uses being served. 
(5)  No changes shall be made to the shared parking area which would reduce the parking provided for the uses, unless the owner of one (1) of the uses makes other arrangements to provide parking. No such changes shall be made without Administrator approval. 
(6)  Parking spaces to be shared must not be reserved for a specific person, individual, or use on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. 
(7)  Handicap parking spaces cannot be shared, unless the uses that are to share the spaces are adjacent to the handicap spaces and no inconvenience to the users of such spaces would be created. 
(8)  Loading spaces shall not be shared. 
(9)  Any proposed change in the use of a structure that shares a parking area will require proof that adequate parking is available. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 5223 - Off-site and shared parking. 
    Off-site and shared parking may be used in combination to develop parking areas, provided all the requirements of this division are met. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1598, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2011, amended App. A, § 5223 title to read as herein set out. Former App. A, § 5223 title pertained to off-site and shared facilities. 
Secs. 5224-5229 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5230 - Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities. 
(a)  Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through facility or areas having drop-off and pick-up areas. The following general standards shall apply to all stacking spaces and drive-through facilities: 
(1)  Stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through stations shall not impede on and off-site traffic movements, shall not cross or pass through off-street parking areas, shall not be located in front of the building, and shall not create a potentially unsafe condition where crossed by pedestrian access to a public entrance of a building. 
(2)  Drive through lanes shall be separated from off-street parking areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked or otherwise distinctly delineated. 
(3)  Approach lanes for drive-through facilities shall have the following minimum widths: 
a.  One lane = Twelve (12) feet. 
b.  Two or more lanes = Ten (10) feet per lane. 
(4)  All drive-through facilities shall be provided with a bypass lane with a minimum width of ten (10) feet. 
(5)  Alleys in residentially zoned areas adjacent to drive-through facilities shall not be used for circulation of customer traffic. 
(6)  Each stacking space shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  The number of stacking spaces shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Financial institutions with drive-through windows: Four (4) stacking spaces for the first drive-through window and two (2) stacking spaces for each additional window. 
(2)  Car wash: Four (4) stacking spaces per bay/stall for self-service establishments and five (5) stacking spaces per bay/stall for an automated establishment. 
(3)  Drive-in or fast food restaurant: Three (3) stacking spaces per drive-through window measured from the order board or station. 
(4)  All other uses: Three (3) stacking spaces for each window. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Secs. 5231-5239 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5240 - Off-street loading, generally. 
    General provisions: 
(1)  All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the structure or use. 
(2)  All off-street loading spaces and their appurtenant aisles and driveways shall not be reduced in any manner except upon approval by the Administrator when a change in land use or building size reduces the total number of loading spaces required. 
(3)  Loading spaces facing a street shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in width unless screened so as not to be visible from the right-of-way. 
(4)  No loading space shall be located within the front yard setback applicable in any residential, office or commercial or industrial district. 
(5)  No required off-street loading area shall be used to meet the space requirement for off-street parking, and no loading area shall interfere with the free circulation within the off-street parking area. 
(6)  All off-street loading spaces shall have safe and convenient access to a street. If any such spaces are contiguous to a street, the street side of such space shall be curbed. 
(7)  All off-street loading areas, including aisles and driveways, shall be constructed and maintained with a dustless surface in accordance with construction standards presented in this ordinance. 
(8)  All off-street loading spaces shall comply with the geometric standards in this section. 
(9)  When a building includes a combination of uses as set forth in this section, the required number of loading spaces will be the sum of the required loading spaces for each use. In no case shall the development be required to provide in excess of five (5) loading spaces. 
(10)  All references to square feet (sq. ft.) in the off-street loading requirements below shall mean the square feet of gross floor area, unless specifically stated otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 31, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 5241 - Loading spaces-Classifications. 
    A loading space shall consist of a rectangular area of one (1) or more of the following classes: 
(1)  Class A. An area at least fourteen (14) feet by fifty-five (55) feet having a vertical clearance of fifteen (15) feet or more, plus adequate area for ingress and egress. 
(2)  Class B. An area at least twelve (12) feet by thirty (30) feet having a vertical clearance of fifteen (15) feet or more, plus adequate area for ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 5242 - Minimum loading spaces required. 
(a)  Except in the Downtown Commercial Zoning district, and except as provided below, loading spaces shall be provided for retailing, wholesaling, warehousing, processing and similar activities or uses in accordance with the following schedule. "Square footage" refers to gross square footage of the improvement. 
Activity or Use Class Required Industrial, manufacturing, and warehousing: 15,000 square feet or less One Class B space Greater than 15,000 square feet Two Class A spaces Office Uses: Less than 4,000 square feet None Greater than 4,000 square feet One Class B space Retail uses: Less than 2,000 square feet None 2,000 square feet to 10,000 square feet One Class B space 10,001 square feet to 40,000 square feet One Class A space 40,001 square feet or more Two Class A spaces All other nonresidential uses: Less than 2,000 square feet None 2,000 square feet or more One Class B space  
(b)  The Administrator may substitute a Class A space for a Class B space if tractor-trailer use is expected. The Administrator may substitute a Class B space for a Class A space if no tractor-trailer use is expected. 
(c)  The Administrator may require additional Class A or Class B loading spaces to reduce anticipated traffic congestion due to an expected large number of deliveries. Where the Administrator finds a reduced need or the absence of need for loading spaces, due to a small number of anticipated deliveries, the Administrator may reduce or eliminate the requirement for loading spaces and for Class B spaces allow shared loading. 
(Ord. No. 1598, § 1, 2-8-11) 
Secs. 5243-5299 - [Reserved]. 
DIVISION 3. - BUFFER YARDS AND SCREENING 

Sec. 5300 - Buffer yards-Purpose. 
    The purpose of buffer yards is to limit the view and reduce the noise between abutting incompatible uses, and to ease the transition from one (1) zoning district to another. Buffer yards are intended to provide a physical integration of uses which promote the public health, welfare and safety by: 
(1)  Preventing visual pollution; 
(2)  Preventing the overcrowding of land; 
(3)  Preventing the undue congregation of people and vehicles; and 
(4)  Promoting the peaceful enjoyment of property within the Town of Blacksburg. 
Secs. 5301-5304 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5305 - Buffer yards-When required. 
(a)  A buffer yard shall be required of any lot in any zoning district when the lot in that district abuts a zoning district of lower intensity. 
(b)  When a public right-of-way separates zones of different intensities, the following criteria shall apply, regardless of whether the zoning line is on one (1) side or the other or the center of the public right-of-way : 
(1)  If the public right-of-way is an alley, a buffer yard with screening shall be provided as per the table below. 
(2)  If the public right-of-way is a local or collector street, a buffer yard with screening shall be provided on any side or rear of the higher intensity use which abuts the right-of-way as per the table below; however the buffer yard shall not be required on the front of the higher intensity use where the front abuts the public right-of-way. 
(3)  If the public right-of-way is an arterial street or highway, no buffer yard or screening shall be required for the portion of the higher intensity use abutting the public right-of-way. 
(c)  No buffer yard is required within or adjacent to the University zoning district. 
(d)  When a site plan is submitted to modify or expand an existing building or site improvements, or accommodate a change in land use, buffer yard and screening requirements shall only be applied to those portions of the site that are directly affected by the proposed improvements, or change in land use, as determined by the Administrator. 
Secs. 5306-5309 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5310 - Buffer yards-General standards. 
(a)  Buffer yards shall contain vegetative and/or architectural screening that achieves the purpose of the buffer yard, and which meets the requirements for screening, below. Trees used for screening purposes shall be suitable as defined in Section 5331. 
(b)  The maximum slope of any buffer yard shall be 2H:1V. Additional width shall be added to any portion of any buffer yard which exceeds this slope such that the minimum buffer yard width is met by land less steep than 2H:1V. 
(c)  The buffer yard shall be located entirely within the higher intensity zoning district and abutting the zoning district line, or adjacent right-of-way if such right-of-way separates the lot from the zoning district line. However, the buffer yard may be placed in the lower intensity zoning district or partially within both zoning districts if both sides of the zoning district line and entire buffer yard width are within common ownership and a permanent easement is provided over any portion of the buffer yard not within the higher intensity zoning district. 
(d)  A driveway required to serve the principal structure on the site may exist in the buffer yard. This driveway shall run substantially perpendicular to the buffer yard. 
(e)  Buffer yards shall be maintained in a natural condition free of structures, loading or storage areas, parking, roads, or driveways except as provided for in (d) above. 
(f)  Buffer yards required by this Section shall be applied equally to all similarly situated properties. Modifications to these standards may be granted in writing by the Administrator based on the existence of the following circumstances on the proposed building site, or surrounding properties: 
(1)  Natural land characteristics such as topography or existing vegetation on the proposed building site would achieve the same intent of this section. 
(2)  Innovative landscaping or architectural design is employed on the building site to achieve an equivalent screening or buffering effect. 
(3)  The required screening and landscaping would be ineffective at maturity due to the proposed topography of the site, and/or the location of the improvements on the site. 
(4)  The topography of adjacent and surrounding sites is such as to render required screening ineffective at maturity. 
(g)  When the acreage of a site is significantly larger than the area proposed for physical improvements or active usage, buffer yards shall be reserved as required by this section. However, to achieve the intent of this section, the Administrator may require an alternative location and design for required screening and plantings. 
(h)  When property lines abut an adjacent jurisdiction, the Administrator shall determine the specific screening and buffering requirements along that property line after consideration of the zoning designation and or land use of the adjacent property. Requirements shall not exceed those that would be required for similarly situated/zoned property within the Town. 
(i)  Buffer yard dimensions and screening requirements shall be provided as detailed in the chart below: 
Abutting District 
(Higher intensity; where buffer is to be located) Abutted District (Lower intensity to be protected) RR1, RR2, R-4, R-5, OTR, PR RM-27, RM-48, PMH O DC, GC, PC, RD I, PIN MXD RR1, RR2, R-4, R-5, OTR, PR N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A RM-27, RM-48, PMH B N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A O B A N/A N/A N/A N/A DC, GC, PC, RD C B N/A N/A N/A C I, PIN D C C C N/A D MXD C when abutting RR1, RR2, or R-4. 
B when abutting R-5, OTR or PR. B A A when abutting RD N/A N/A  
Buffer Yards Architectural Vegetative A 4' screen 
10' buffer yard 
small evergreen trees 20' buffer yard, 
Small evergreen trees and one row small evergreen shrubs B 6' screen 
15' buffer yard 
Small evergreen trees 30' buffer yard, 
small evergreen trees, and one row evergreen shrub C 6' screen 
25' buffer yard 
Large and small evergreen trees 50' buffer yard, large 
evergreen trees, small 
evergreen trees, and one row of evergreen shrub D 8' screen 
30' buffer yard 
Large deciduous and large evergreen trees 60' buffer yard, large 
evergreen trees, small evergreen trees, and one row of evergreen shrubs  
(Ord. No. 1215, § 32, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Secs. 5311-5329 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5330 - Screening-When required. 
(a)  Screening shall be provided within a buffer yard to ease the transition of one (1) land use or activity to another, to achieve the purposes of the buffer yard. Screening may be accomplished through architectural or vegetative materials. 
(b)  Screening shall be provided, in addition to the requirements listed above, for: 
(1)  All articles or materials being stored, maintained, repaired, processed, erected, fabricated, dismantled, or salvaged, such that the activity is not visible from surrounding properties or roads. 
(2)  Refuse storage and loading areas such that these activities are not visible from surrounding properties or roads. 
(3)  Rooftop and ground level mechanical equipment such that it is not visible from surrounding properties or roads. 
(4)  All trash dumpsters or containers used for recycling shall be screened so that it is not visible from surrounding properties or roads. At minimum, the dumpster or container shall be screened on three (3) sides with architectural screening supplemented by plantings. Screening shall be based upon the standards below and subject to the approval of the Administrator. 
a.  Four (4) foot tall architectural screening is acceptable when household style trash containers are used in place of dumpsters; 
b.  The requirement for supplemental plantings may be waived by the Administrator in cases where dumpsters or containers are added to an existing development. In determining whether to grant a waiver, the Administrator shall be guided by these standards: proximity of the facility to residential structures; efficacy of screening to mitigate any adverse effect of the use; and benefit of the screening relative to its cost. 
(c)  No screening is required within or adjacent to the University zoning district. 
(d)  When a site plan is submitted to modify or expand an existing building or site improvements, or accommodate a change in land use, screening requirements shall only be applied to those portions of the site that are directly affected by the proposed improvements, or change in land use, as determined by the Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 63, 8-13-02) 
Sec. 5331 - Screening-General standards. 
(a)  Screening shall be continuous and in place at the time of occupancy. If vehicular or pedestrian access through the screen is necessary, the screening function shall be preserved. 
(b)  Screening may be architectural or vegetative, per the requirements below: 
(1)  Acceptable architectural screening materials include stockade fences, decorative masonry walls, brick walls, and earth berms, and other like materials approved by the Administrator. 
(2)  Architectural screening shall be at least four (4) feet in height, shall be supplemented with plantings, and shall be subject to the provisions of Blacksburg Town Code Section 21-304, "sight triangles established." 
(3)  Vegetative material shall be alive and in good health. 
(4)  Small evergreen trees shall be at least four (4) feet in height at planting and allowed to grow to at least six (6) feet in height. Large evergreen trees shall be at least six (6) feet in height at planting and allowed to grow to at least ten (10) feet in height. All required evergreen vegetation shall be maintained in good condition. 
(5)  Deciduous trees shall be at least one and one-half (11/2) inches caliper or ten (10) feet to twelve (12) feet in height. They shall be supplemental and not deemed to be adequate screening in themselves. 
(6)  Acceptable vegetative plantings include any tree listing in the "recommended list of trees" for screening purposes; or yew, box honeysuckle or similar dense hedge. 
(c)  Screening design and development shall be compatible with the existing and proposed land use and the development character of the surrounding land and structures. 
(d)  Screening shall be of sufficient density and diversity to achieve the intent of this section. However, at the time of planting, the spacing of trees shall not exceed twelve (12) feet on center, and the planting pattern shall be staggered. Shrubbery shall be more closely-spaced. Specific exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the Administrator to encourage quality and creativity of design where the intent of this section is met. 
(e)  Existing vegetation within buffer yards shall be considered as a substitute for otherwise required landscaping or screening, if in the opinion of the Administrator, the type, size, and density of the existing vegetation complies with the standards and intent of this section. 
(f)  When a proposed buffer yard has a variation in elevation of greater than ten (10) vertical feet at any point, the required screening or landscaping within the yard shall be placed to maximize the effectiveness of the screening or landscaping, as determined by the Administrator. 
(g)  Trees planted to meet any of the screening requirements may also be used to meet any other landscaping requirement within this Article. 
(h)  Screening required by this section shall be applied equally to all similarly situated properties. Modifications to these standards may be granted in writing by the Administrator based on the existence of any of the following circumstances on the proposed building site, or surrounding properties: 
(1)  Natural land characteristics such as topography or existing vegetation on the proposed building site would achieve the same intent of this section. 
(2)  Innovative landscaping or architectural design is employed on the building site to achieve an equivalent screening or buffering effect. 
(3)  The required screening and landscaping would be ineffective at maturity due to the proposed topography of the site, and/or the location of the improvements on the site. 
(4)  The topography of adjacent and surrounding sites is such as to render required screening ineffective at maturity. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 20, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
DIVISION 4. - LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 5400 - Landscaping-Purpose. 
    The preservation of existing trees and vegetation, as well as the planting of new trees and vegetation, can significantly add to the quality of the physical environment of the community. The regulations outlined herein are designed to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town. Trees can provide the following benefits to the community: 
(1)  Provide buffers and screens against noise, air pollution, and unsightly and incompatible land uses; 
(2)  Reduce the hazards of flooding and aid in the control of erosion and storm water runoff. Trees also assist in the stabilization of soil and replenish groundwater supplies; 
(3)  Act to moderate extremes of temperature and provide shade; 
(4)  Absorb carbon dioxide and supply oxygen in our atmosphere, which is an essential ecological function in the preservation of human and animal life. Trees can provide a haven for birds which, in turn, assist in the control of insects; 
(5)  Aid in energy conservation; 
(6)  Are physiologically, psychologically, sociologically and aesthetically necessary counterpoints to the man-made urban setting. 
Secs. 5401-5409 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5410 - Landscaping-When required. 
    The requirements of this division apply to any development for which a site development plan is required by Article V, Division 1, "Site Development Plans," section 5100. 
Secs. 5411-5419 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5420 - Landscaping-General standards. 
(a)  Acceptable trees include, but are not limited to, those identified as suitable for the intended use in the "Recommended list of trees" figure below. Acceptable vegetative ground cover consists of shrubs and ground cover including grass. Using standards from recognized texts on the subject, the Administrator shall decide the appropriateness of any such trees and ground cover. 
(b)  Species of trees shall not be planted if the roots cause damage to public works, the branches are subject to a high incidence of breakage, and the fruit is considered a nuisance or high maintenance, as determined by the Administrator. 
(c)  The planting of trees shall be done in accordance with the standardized landscape specifications jointly adopted by the Virginia Nurserymen's Association, the Virginia Society of Landscape Designers and the Virginia Chapter of the American Society of Landscape Architects. 
(d)  All trees shall be planted in good condition and meet "American Standard for Nursery Stock" (1990), ANSI Z60.1-1990, as may be amended. 
(e)  The developer shall plant, or install, as appropriate grass, tree grates, porous pavers, or similar pervious surfaces, which shall extend to twice the initial drip line of the newly planted tree. Minimum tree grate size shall be five square feet. 
(f)  Trees planted to meet any of the requirements below may also be used to meet any other screening or landscaping requirement within this Article. 
Secs. 5421-5424 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5425 - Tree replacement requirements. 
    Any trees on the site which are a caliper of five inches or more at a height of one foot above the ground, or ornamental trees over twelve feet in height which are to be removed during site development shall be replaced up to the maximum canopy coverage required in Section 5426 below. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 21, 9-12-00) 
Sec. 5426 - Canopy coverage requirements. 
(a)  Trees shall be provided within the limits of construction to the extent that at twenty years from the date of planting, tree canopies or covers will provide at least the following minimums: 
Zoning District Tree Canopy RR1 20% R-4, R-5 20% OTR 20% RM-27, RM-48 10% GC, O, IN, R&D, MXD 10% Planned Districts Per Uses Above  
(b)  Existing trees or wooded areas which are to be preserved, at the applicants option may be included to meet all or part of the canopy requirements, provided the site plan identifies such trees and the trees meet the standards of size, health, placement, etc. set out in this section. The Administrator shall evaluate use of existing trees to ensure they have adequate health and strength to allow such use. 
(c)  Existing trees designated to be included as part of these requirements shall be protected during construction by fencing placed at a distance in feet equal to or greater than the diameter of the tree in inches at the height of 41/2 feet. 
(d)  The extent of canopy at maturity shall be based on published reference texts described below, generally accepted by landscape architects, nurserymen, and arborists. 
(Ord. No. 1215, § 33, 5-11-99; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 5427 - Parking lot landscaping. 
(a)  The following provisions are intended to require that 5% of the entire parking lot, excluding the access drive, is landscaped with trees and vegetative ground cover. The area of the parking lot is the square foot area of the parking spaces and aisles and interior parking lot islands, excluding access drives that do not contain either parallel or perpendicular parking spaces. 
(b)  Within the parking lot there shall be planted one tree per ten spaces, rounded down to the closest whole number. 
(c)  Planter islands or peninsulas containing trees shall be located within the parking lot, such that each island or planter is surrounded on at least 3 sides by parking lot or an access road to the parking lot. Their size shall be eighteen feet square in area, or equal total area in irregular shapes such that adequate space is provided for adequate tree canopy maturation. 
(d)  Planter islands may be combined or placed together such that more than one tree may be provided in the combined planter island, so long as the total space equals a multiple of the requirements above. 
(e)  Perimeter plantings may be used to satisfy this requirement in parking facilities less than forty-two feet in width. 
(f)  Perimeter planting beds at least 10 feet in width shall be provided whenever a parking area is immediately adjacent to a public right-of-way. If a question arises as to whether or not a parking area is immediately adjacent to a public right-of-way, the Zoning Administrator shall make the determination. (Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98) 
(1)  Plantings within this area shall include trees and vegetative ground cover. 
(2)  Berms may be used in addition to, but not instead of plantings. 
Sec. 5428 - Street trees. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements set out above, in every development requiring a site development plan, there shall be planted on or adjacent to the site an average of at least one tree for every thirty feet of public street frontage. 
(b)  The trees shall be planted adjacent to the public right-of-way on the site being developed, or with the concurrence of the developer, and the Administrator in the public right-of-way. 
(c)  The Administrator may reduce or eliminate this standard based on the size, street frontage, existing vegetation, and specific conditions of the site. 
Sec. 5429 - Recommended tree species. 
    Acceptable trees include, but are not limited to, those identified as suitable for the use intended in the table below: 
RECOMMENDED TREE SPECIES 
Species Name Minimum 
Height/ 
Caliper Canopy at 
20 years 
(sq.ft.) Suitability Acer rubrum "October Glory", October Glory Red Maple 21/2? 314 P,L Acer palmatum, Japanese Maple 5' 177 L Acer rubrum columnare, Columnare Red Maple 21/2? 314 P,L Acer saccharum, Sugar Maple* 11/2? 314 L Acer pseudoplatanus, Sycamore Maple* 21/2? 314 P Acer platanoides, Norway Maple 21/2? 314 P Acer saccharaum columnare, Columnare Sugar Maple* 11/2? 314 L Amelanchier arborea, Serviceberry* 6' 201 L Betula nigra, River Birch* 2? 254 L Carpinus caroliniana, American Hornbeam* 2? 177 L Celtis occidentalis, Common Hackberry* 21/2? 380 P,L Cercis canadensis, Eastern Redbud* 5' 201 L Chionanthus virbinicus, White Fringe Tree* 11/2? 113 L Cornus kousa, Korean Dogwood 4' 177 L Cornus florida rubrua, Flowering Dogwood, Pink* 4' 177 L Cornus florida, Flowering Dogwood, White* 4' 177 L Cornus mas, Cherry Bark Dogwood 4' 113 L,S Cotinus coggygria, Smoke Tree 5' 177 L Crataegus phaenophydrum, Washington Hawthorn* 4' 113 L,S Fagus grandifolia, American Beech* 11/2? 177 L Fagus sylvatica cuprea, Copper Beech 4' 177 P Fraxinus americana, White Ash* 2.5? 254 P,L Fraxinus lanceolata (Marshall's Seedless), Green Ash Marshall's Seedless* 21/2? 177 P,L Fraxinus lanceolata, Green Ash* 21/2? 177 P Ginko biloba, Ginko (Male Variety) 11/2? 133 L Gleditcia tricanthos inermis, Sharemaster Thornless Honey Locust 21/2? 314 P,L Ilex opaca, American Holly* 5' 38 L Juniperus virginiana, Eastern Red Cedar* 4' 38 S Koelreuteria paniculata, Golden Rain Tree 11/2? 177 L Liriodendron tupilifera, Tulip Poplar* 21/2? 254 P,L Malus floribunda, Japanese Flowering Crab 4' 177 L Metaequola glyptostrobolies, Dawn Redwood 11/2? 177 L Nyssa sylvatica, Sour Gum* 11/2? 177 L Ostrya virginiana, American Hophornbeam* 1.5? 254 L Oxydendrum arboreau, Sourwood* 5' 113 L Picea abies, Norway Spruce 4' 177 S Picea glavca, White Spruce 4' 113 P Pinus strobus, White Pine* 4' 177 S Platanus occidentalis, American Sycamore* 11/2? 491 L Platanus acerfolia, London Plane Tree 21/2? 380 P,L Prunus serrulata kawanzan, Kwansan Cherry 4' 177 L Prunus serotina, Black Cherry 5' 133 L Quercus palustris, Pin Oak 2? 254 L Quercus phellos, Willow Oak* 21/2? 177 P,L Quercus alba, White Oak* 2? 254 L Quercus rubra, Northern Red Oak 21/2? 254 P,L Quercus accutissim, Saw Tooth Oak 11/2? 177 L Quercus robur fastigiata, 
Pyramidal English Oak 21/2? 79 P,L Quercus macrocarpa, Bur Oak 21/2? 177 P,L Quercus montana, Chesnut Oak* 11/2? 177 L Quercus coccinea, Scarlet Oak* 2? 254 L Tilia americana, American Linden* 2? 314 P,L Tilia cordata, Little Leaf Linden 21/2? 177 P,L Tilia cordata greenspire, Greenspire Linden 21/2? 177 P,L Tsuga canadensis, Canada Hemlock* 4' 177 S X Cupress ocypari leylandii, Leyland Cypress 21/2? 113 S Zelkov serrata, Japanese Zelkova 11/2? 177 L Zelkov serrata village green, 
Village Green Zelkova 11/2? 177 L  
P = Parking Lot and Street Trees 
L = General Landscape Trees 
S = Screening Trees 
* = Use of native species is encouraged 
Sizes shown in feet are height; sizes shown in inches are caliper 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1308, § 64, 8-13-02) 
Secs. 5430-5439 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5440 - Landscaping-Modifications. 
(a)  Tree canopy and tree replacements shall not be required of playing fields and other nonwooded recreation areas, and other facilities and uses of a similar nature. 
(b)  Tree canopy provisions shall not apply where they would negatively affect the preservation of wetlands. 
(c)  Landscaping requirements of this Section shall be applied equally to all similarly situated properties. Modifications to these standards may be granted in writing by the Administrator based on the existence of any of the following circumstances on the proposed building site, or surrounding properties: 
(1)  Natural land characteristics such as topography or existing vegetation on the proposed building site would achieve the same intent of this section. 
(2)  Innovative landscaping or architectural design is employed on the building site to achieve an equivalent screening or buffering effect. 
(3)  The required screening and landscaping would be ineffective at maturity due to the proposed topography of the site, and or the location of the improvements on the site. 
(4)  The topography of adjacent and surrounding sites is such as to render required screening ineffective at maturity. 
(d)  When a site plan is submitted to modify or expand an existing building or site improvements, or accommodate a change in land use, landscaping requirements shall only be applied to those portions of the site that are directly affected by the proposed improvements, or change in land use, as determined by the Administrator. 
(e)  No landscaping or screening shall be required which in the opinion of the Administrator interferes with traffic safety, or which violates Town Code Section 21-304. 
(Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1680, § 1, 5-14-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1680, § 1, adopted May 14, 2013, amended § 5440 title to read as herein set out. Former § 5440 title pertained to landscaping-exceptions. 
Secs. 5441-5449 - [Reserved]. 
DIVISION 5. - SIGNS 

Sec. 5500 - Purpose of division. 
    The sign regulations are intended to define, permit, and control the use of signs which are legible from the public right-of-way. Town Council has adopted these regulations in order to achieve all of the following community goals and objectives: 
(1)  Protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(2)  Equitably distribute the privilege of using the public environs to communicate private information. 
(3)  Safeguard the public use and nature of the streets and sidewalks. 
(4)  Protect and enhance the visual environment of the Town. 
(5)  Discourage the diminishing of property values with the Town. 
(6)  Minimize visual distractions to motorists using the public streets. 
(7)  Promote an aesthetically pleasing environment for the citizens of this Town. 
(8)  Promote the economic growth of the Town by creating a community image that is conducive to attracting new business and industrial development. 
(9)  Permit reasonable legibility and effectiveness of signs and to prevent their over-concentration, improper placement and excessive height, bulk, density, and area. 
(10)  Promote the safety of persons and property by requiring that signs not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, decay, or abandonment. 
(11)  Ensure that signs do not obstruct fire-fighting efforts, and do not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting motorists or by impairing drivers' ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, or other vehicles or to read traffic signs. 
(12)  Provide for reasonable advertising of business and civic products and services, with recognition of the effects of signage on the character of the community. 
(13)  Control visual clutter, and encourage high professional standards in sign design and display. 
Sec. 5501 - Standards. 
(a)  Any sign displayed in the Town of Blacksburg, shall comply with: 
(1)  All provisions of this Article; 
(2)  All applicable provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and all amendments thereto; and 
(3)  All state and federal regulations pertaining to the display of signage. 
(b)  If any two or more sections of the above referenced regulations are in conflict, the provision that provides the most restrictive standard shall apply. 
Sec. 5502 - Excluded signs. 
    The following shall be deemed to be excluded from the regulations of this division: 
(1)  Any sign with an area of one square foot or less. 
(2)  Signs on the inside of store windows, except those signs specified as "Prohibited Signs" in this Article. 
(3)  Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, such as, but not limited to, traffic, warning, directional, street, regulatory signs or governmental signs which are directly related to the health, safety, convenience or welfare of the community. Governmental signs for proprietary or identification purposes shall not be included with this subparagraph and must conform to the regulations of the district in which they are located. 
(4)  Memorial signs or bulletin boards, as provided below: 
(a)  memorial signs shall be two square feet or less in display area and integrated with the primary structure (not a free-standing sign); 
(b)  bulletin boards on which notices of public interest are temporarily posted shall be a maximum 12 square feet in area and mounted on a wall. Bulletin boards shall be excluded only for public uses or permitted civic uses. 
(5)  Signs displayed for the direction or convenience of the public, including signs which identify restrooms, location of public telephones, public entrances, freight entrances or the like provided such signs do not exceed a total surface area of three square feet per sign on any lot or parcel. 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Gasoline price signs, provided the total area of all such signs is twelve square feet or less. 
(9)  Signs displayed during the month of December for the purpose of selling Christmas trees and other holiday vegetation and accessory items. 
(10)  Flags of the Commonwealth of Virginia, United States of America, and any other flag of a state or nation flown for noncommercial purposes; or flags displaying purely ornamental and noncommercial information, such as graphic depictions such as flowers and the like. 
(11)  Reserved. 
(12)  Street address signs, not exceeding 10 square feet in size. 
(13)  Signs displayed on a truck, bus, or other vehicle while in use in the normal conduct of business. This section shall not be interpreted to permit the parking for display purposes a vehicle to which a sign is attached or the use of such a vehicle as a portable sign. 
(14)  Reserved. 
(15)  Menu/Daily Special signs, not exceeding four square feet in size, provided the sign is attached to a building facade. 
(16)  Street Graphics. 
(17)  Reserved. 
(18)  Signs that are not legible from a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 22, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1308, § 65, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1415, § 23, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 5503 - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited in this Town: 
(1)  A sign which imitates or approximates an official highway sign or carries the word, "STOP" or "DANGER"; or any sign which obscures a sign displayed by public authority for the purpose of giving traffic instruction or direction or other public information. 
(2)  Flashing or revolving lights, or beacons intended to direct attention to a location, building or service, or any similar device otherwise displayed that imitates by its design or use, emergency service vehicles or equipment. Flashing or revolving lights that by their design or use imitate emergency service vehicles or equipment, placed within an establishment so as to be visible from a public right-of-way are also prohibited. 
(3)  Any sign, except an official public notice, which is nailed, tacked, posted, or in any other manner attached to any utility pole, or structure supporting wire, cable, or pipe; or to public property of any description. 
(4)  Signs advertising activities or products that are illegal under federal, state, Town or county law. 
(5)  Any electrical sign that does not display the UL, ETL, CSA or ULC label. 
(6)  Any sign that due to its size, location or height obstructs the vision of motorists or pedestrians at any intersection, or similarly obstructs the vision of motorists entering a public right-of-way from private property. 
(7)  A sign which obstructs any window or door opening used as a means of egress, or which prevents free passage from one (1) part of a roof to any other part thereof, and a sign which interferes with an opening required for ventilation. 
(8)  A sign in a public right-of-way except as provided in Sections 5562, (Banners) 5523, (Location) and 5531(d), (Neighborhood identification signs) of this article. Any sign existing or having been allowed in a public right-of-way may be ordered removed by the Administrator upon thirty (30) days' notice if the use of that right-of-way is changed to require the signs' removal, or if the public right-of-way is to be used for any public purposes inconsistent with the existence of the sign. 
(9)  A sign or illumination that causes any glare into or upon any building or land other than the building and land to which the sign is accessory. 
(10)  A sign that violates any provision of any federal or state law relative to outdoor advertising. 
(11)  Signs with moving components. 
(12)  Pennants, streamers, except as provided in Section 5504 (Temporary signs). 
(13)  Large floating or stationary balloons. 
(14)  Signs attached, painted, or mounted to unlicensed and inoperative or generally stationary vehicles. 
(15)  A-frames and portable roadside signs. 
(16)  Strip lights or strip lighting. 
(17)  Any sign representing or depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or sexually oriented goods. Any sign containing obscene text or pictures as defined by the Virginia Code. 
(Ord. No. 1278, § 14, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1340, § 6, 8-12-03) 
Sec. 5504 - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Temporary signs are permitted provided they meet the standards of this section. The area of any temporary sign maintained per this section shall not count for the allowable permanent sign area for any lot or structure. 
(b)  A "temporary sign" is a sign that is not permanently mounted to a building or into the ground. Signs attached by rope, string, chain, tape, paste, and similar mechanisms; signs not rigidly attached to a supporting structure; signs made of paper, cardboard, cloth, and similar materials; and signs that are pushed, hammered or similarly put into the ground are considered temporary signs. 
    Examples of temporary signs include garage or yard sale signs, political campaign signs, real estate signs, construction signs, menu/daily special signs. 
(c)  Each temporary sign shall be maintained in good, safe condition, securely affixed to a building or the ground. 
(d)  Temporary sign area per lot shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(e)  Any temporary sign pertaining to an event must be removed within ten (10) days after the event. For example, garage or yard sale signs, political campaign signs, and real estate signs are subject to this provision. For all other temporary signs, a maximum posting period of fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days is permitted, up to five (5) times per calendar year. Such signs shall not be attached in any way to utility poles, meter posts, or trees within any public street right-of-way. No person shall put up any notice upon any building, wall, fence or other property of another person without having first obtained the consent of the owner of such property. 
(f)  A temporary sign shall not be illuminated. 
(g)  Pennants and streamers, without advertising, may be displayed simultaneously with temporary signs, but at no other time. 
(h)  In addition to the foregoing, during the two (2) week period beginning one (1) week before the start of classes for the fall term of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University and during the Homecoming Weekend (Friday noon through Monday noon) businesses and other persons shall be allowed up to two (2) temporary signs with no permit required, provided: 
(1)  Each sign is thirty-two (32) square feet or less in area; 
(2)  Each sign is on-premises and attached to the structure or a permanent sign; 
(3)  Such signs are displayed no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 23, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1308, § 66, 8-13-02) 
Secs. 5505-5509 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5510 - Sign permit process. 
(a)  No sign may be erected or displayed, enlarged, relocated, changed, or modified without an approved sign permit, except as provided in Section 5502, "Excluded Signs." 
(b)  Applications for a sign permit may be obtained from the Town of Blacksburg department of planning and building. 
(c)  Any owner or tenant of a parcel of land upon which a sign is to be displayed, or any authorized agent of such owner or tenant may apply for a sign permit. 
(d)  Every application for a sign permit shall include a sketch of the property indicating the lot frontage. The application shall also indicate the square footage and location of all existing signs on the property, and the area, size, structure, design, location, lighting, and materials for the proposed signs. In addition, the Administrator may require that the application contain any other information that is necessary to ensure compliance with, or effectively administer, these regulations. 
(e)  All applications for a sign permit in the Planned Commercial, Planned Residential, Planned Industrial, and Planned Manufactured Home districts must be in accord with the sign plan approved for that district. 
(f)  All applications for a sign permit for property upon which a permitted conditional use is located must be in accord with the conditional use permit. In the alternative, the applicant may apply for an amended conditional use permit. 
(g)  A nonrefundable sign permit fee is due and payable with the filing of a sign permit application. More than one (1) sign on one (1) building or group of buildings located on the same parcel of land may be included on one (1) application provided that all such signs be applied for at one (1) time. 
(h)  After the issuance of an approved sign permit, the applicant may install and display any such sign or signs approved. Once installed, the Administrator may inspect the sign(s) for conformance with the approved sign permit and this ordinance. 
(i)  Any sign permit issued shall be null and void if any sign for which the permit was issued is not installed in accordance with the permit within six (6) months of the date the permit was approved. 
(j)  Maintenance, repair, or restoration of nonconforming signs shall be in accordance with Section 1237, "Nonconforming Signs." 
(k)  Upon the occupant's vacating a lot or building, the owner, within six (6) months after vacation shall remove all signs, sign supports, and attendant hardware from the premises, unless the provisions of the next sentence are applicable. An owner with a new tenant or a new owner has six (6) months after such vacation to use or remove all signs, sign supports, and attendant hardware. Each subsequent occupant of the lot or building shall obtain a new sign permit prior to erecting or changing the structure of any sign. 
(Ord. No. 1465, § 1(c), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 5520 - Sign measurement rules. 
    Sign area shall be calculated as follows: 
(a)  The area of an attached sign where the sign consists of words, numerals or symbols painted on or affixed to a wall, or awning shall be the entire area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of each word, symbol, numeral, groups of symbols, or groups of numerals, where the symbols or numbers are meant to be read as a unit. Where there is a symbol that encompasses or partly encompasses the message of the sign, the sign area shall be the entire area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the symbol. 
(b)  The area of a suspended, attached, or projecting sign, where the letters, numerals, or symbols are on a sign surface which is hung or affixed to a structure, shall be the total area of the hung or affixed surfaces. 
(c)  The area of freestanding monument sign shall be the total area above the base visible from the public right-of-way or other point from which the sign is intended to be viewed. Only one (1) display face shall be measured in computing the total sign area where the sign faces are arranged to be viewed at one (1) time. 
(d)  The area of a monument sign shall not include the surface area of the base of the sign which is not designed to contain any copy area. 
(e)  The area of a V-shaped sign shall be the area of all surfaces legible from the public right-of-way or other point from which the sign is intended to be viewed. Only one (1) face shall be measured if the angle of the sign is forty-five (45) degrees or less. 
(f)  The Administrator shall determine the area of any sign not specifically provided for herein, according to the principles contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1231, § 1, 1-11-00) 
Sec. 5521 - Calculation of sign area by facade. 
    Signage based on building facade is calculated as follows: 
(a)  The area of an attached, suspended, awning, cabinet, v-shaped or projecting sign is based on a percentage of the building facade to which the sign is attached as specified by zoning district. 
(b)  The area of the facade is calculated by multiplying the width by height of the facade. The height shall be measured by calculating the vertical distance from grade to the top of the wall of a flat roof, or to the eave line of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. For a multi-establishment building, the area of the facade shall be determined for each individual establishment, and a change in establishment shall constitute a change in facade for the purposes of these calculations. 
(c)  In cases where the height of the building cannot be determined the average height shall be twelve (12) feet per story. 
(d)  Facades may not be combined for the purposes of calculating sign area. 
(e)  For individual buildings occupied by one (1) or more establishments, including shopping centers, a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet of attached, suspended, awning, cabinet, v-shaped, or projecting signage per facade may be allowed. In any event, no building facade shall be covered by signage that exceeds the maximum percentage allowed. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 24, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 5522 - Calculation of allowable sign area on corner lots. 
(a)  On corner lots, the frontage shall be either (1) the side fronting the street providing primary vehicle access, or (2) the side which the main pedestrian entrance of the structure faces. Where neither of these methods clearly distinguishes the front, the Administrator shall make a determination. Where both of these methods would identify a front, the Administrator shall make the determination. 
(b)  For commercial or industrial uses, the front shall not be a primarily residential street. 
Sec. 5523 - Required sign clearance and placement. 
(a)  Awning signs: Awning signs shall be securely attached to the building, must be at least seven (7) feet above the sidewalk, and shall not extend beyond the curb line. Where there is no curb, awning signs shall not extend beyond the edge of street pavement. 
(b)  Attached signs: An attached sign shall not extend above the roof line of a building to which it is attached. 
(c)  Directional signs: A directional sign shall be located adjacent to curb cuts, at least three (3) feet from the right-of-way, with no more than one (1) sign per one-way curb cut and two (2) directional signs per two-way curb cut. 
(d)  Projecting and suspended signs: Such signs may project from a building wall a maximum of eighteen (18) inches. 
(e)  Freestanding monument signs: Such signs shall be located a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from the edge of any public right-of-way, if the right-of-way is fifty (50) feet or more in width. Such signs shall be located a minimum distance of thirty-five (35) feet from the center line of any public right-of-way where the right-of-way is less than fifty (50) feet in width. Freestanding monument signs shall have a maximum height of eight (8) feet, monument style. Freestanding monument signs shall be located within a landscaped area which includes vegetative materials such as shrubs, trees, or flowering plants. This subsection shall not apply to neighborhood identification signs. 
(Ord. No. 1184, adopted 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1278, § 15, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 5524 - Illumination of signs. 
(a)  Signs may be illuminated either through the use of backlighting or direct lighting provided the following standards are met: 
(1)  Information on any illumination proposed as part of a sign must be provided by the applicant on the sign permit application. 
(2)  No light from any illuminated sign shall cause direct glare into or upon any building other than the building to which the sign is related. 
(3)  No light from any illuminated sign shall cause direct glare on to any adjoining piece of property, or any adjoining right-of-way. 
(b)  Any sign containing electrical components shall conform to current UL, ETL, CSA, or ULC standards and display a label from one (1) of these recognized testing labs. 
Sec. 5525 - Monument sign base requirements. 
    The base of a monument sign is the structure or apparent structure in direct contact with the ground that supports or appears to support the message portion of a monument sign. All monument signs shall have a minimum base height of eighteen (18) inches and a maximum of four (4) feet. The width of the base shall not exceed twice the height of the total structure and shall not extend more than one (1) foot beyond either outside edge of the message portion of the sign. The minimum width of the base shall be one-half (1/2) the width of the message portion of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 1231, § 2, 1-11-00) 
Secs. 5526-5529 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5530 - Signage regulations by district. 
    Signs are permitted within the various zoning districts of the Town in accordance with the regulations set forth below. 
Sec. 5531 - Uniform sign regulations for all zoning districts. 
(a)  Historic site signs, up to a maximum of one (1) for each site, structure, or landmark registered with the Virginia Landmarks Register or the National Historic Register are permitted in all zoning districts. The maximum size sign permitted is twelve (12) square feet, with a maximum height of nine (9) feet. 
(b)  Historic district signs, containing information relating to the historic, architectural, cultural, or archeological significance of the district. The maximum size sign permitted is twelve (12) square feet, with a maximum height of nine (9) feet. The sign plan for historic district signs must be submitted with the rezoning application for the historic district. 
(c)  Location sign: Such signs may be freestanding and may be located within the public right-of-way, provided written permission is obtained from the Administrator. Only one (1) location sign per establishment is permitted. 
(d)  Neighborhood identification signs, meeting the requirements of this subsection, may be located in any zoning district. 
(1)  A neighborhood identification sign shall be a monument style sign with a permanent base, not to exceed five (5) feet from the grade in height. 
(2)  The maximum sign area shall be eight (8) square feet. 
(3)  The sign shall not be illuminated. 
(4)  A neighborhood identification sign shall be located in the public right-of-way, or where insufficient right-of-way exists, within five (5) feet of the right-of-way. A neighborhood identification sign may be located within a median if approved by the Town Engineer and Director of Public Works. 
(5)  A maximum of four (4) neighborhood identification signs is permitted for any single neighborhood planning area, as designated by the Department of Planning and Building. 
(6)  Every application for a neighborhood identification sign shall be referred to the Historic or Design Review Board, for advisory review. 
(Ord. No. 1278, § 16, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-10-14) 
Sec. 5532 - Residential zoning districts. 
(a)  A maximum of two (2) permanent signs and three (3) directional signs is permitted per lot in a residential zoning district. 
(b)  Of the maximum number of signs permitted in subparagraph (a) above, a maximum of one (1) sign may be a freestanding monument sign, provided the lot contains a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of frontage on a public street. 
(c)  One (1) freestanding identification sign is permitted at each principle entrance to a residential development within a residential zoning district, up to a maximum total of two (2) freestanding identification signs. 
(d)  In areas of public recreation such as public parks, a governmental entity may erect up to three (3) freestanding monument signs with a combined area of sixty (60) square feet. No individual sign shall exceed thirty-five (35) square feet. 
(e)  The following shall apply in the RR1, RR2, R-4, R-5, OTR, RM-27, and RM-48 Zoning Districts: 
Type of Sign Business Directional Identification 
(When Allowed) Maximum size of Signage in Square Feet 12 square feet 3 square feet 50 square feet total 
.35 square feet per sign. Maximum Height of Freestanding monument signs 4 feet 4 feet 8 feet  
(Ord. No. 1415, § 25, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 5533 - Downtown commercial zoning district. 
(a)  A maximum of two signs plus three directional signs is permitted per lot in the Downtown Commercial Zoning District. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a maximum of two signs is permitted per establishment in a multi-establishment building. 
(c)  Of the maximum number of signs permitted in subparagraph (a) above, a maximum of one sign may be a freestanding monument sign, provided the lot contains a minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public street. 
(d)  The following shall apply in the Downtown Commercial Zoning District: 
Type of Sign Business Directional Identification 
(When Allowed) Maximum Size of Signage in Square Feet Single-establishment building: 0 to 50 foot frontage = 15 square feet; 50 to 75 ft. = 32 square feet; greater than 75 ft. = 50 square feet 
Multi-establishment building: Maximum 15 square feet per establishment. 
Of the total square footage allowed, the following square feet may be freestanding monument sign: greater than 100 foot frontage = 32 square feet 3 square feet 32 square feet 
(not deducted from business signage allowance) Maximum Height of Freestanding Monument Signs 8 feet 4 feet 8 feet  
(Ord. No. 1339, § 22, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1415, § 26, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 5534 - General commercial zoning district. 
(a)  A maximum of 3 signs plus three directional signs per lot is permitted in the General Commercial Zoning District. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a maximum of two signs is permitted per establishment in a multi-establishment building, and a maximum of two signs is permitted per single-establishment building on a multi-building lot. 
(c)  Of the maximum number of signs permitted in subparagraph (a) above, a maximum of one sign may be a freestanding monument sign, provided the lot contains a minimum of 75 feet of frontage on a public street. 
(d)  In shopping center developments, one freestanding identification sign shall be allowed announcing the name of the shopping center and listing the tenants. The size of this sign shall be limited to 50 square feet. 
(e)  The following regulations apply in the General Commercial Zoning District: 
Type of Sign Business Directional Identification 
(When Allowed) Maximum Size of Signage in Square Feet 8% of each building facade, up to a maximum 120 square feet on each facade. Of the total business square footage allowed, the following square footage may be a freestanding monument sign: 
0 to 75 foot frontage = 0; 
75 to 150 foot frontage = 35 square feet; 
greater than 150 foot frontage = 40 square feet 3 square feet 50 square feet 
(not deducted from business signage allowance) Maximum Height of Freestanding Monument Signs 8 feet 4 feet 8 feet  
(Ord. No. 1247, § 24, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1339, § 23, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1415, § 27, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 5535 - Office zoning district. 
(a)  A maximum of three (3) signs, plus three (3) directional signs are permitted per lot in the Office Zoning District. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a maximum of one (1) sign is permitted per establishment in a multi-establishment building, and a maximum of one (1) sign is permitted per single-establishment building on a multi-building lot. 
(c)  Of the maximum number of signs permitted in subparagraph (a) above, a maximum of one (1) sign may be a freestanding monument sign, no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet in total area. 
(d)  The following applies in the Office Zoning District: 
Type of Sign Business Directional Identification 
(When Allowed) Maximum Size of Signage in Square Feet 5% of each facade, but no more than 120 square feet on each facade 3 square feet 32 square feet 
(not deducted from business signage allowance) Maximum Height of Freestanding Monument Signs 8 feet 4 feet 8 feet  
(Ord. No. 1247, § 25, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1415, § 28, 7-11-06) 
Sec. 5536 - Research and development, and industrial zoning districts. 
(a)  A maximum of two (2) signs per lot, plus three (3) directional signs, is permitted in the Research and Development and Industrial Zoning Districts. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a maximum of two (2) signs is permitted per establishment in a multi-establishment building, and a maximum of two (2) signs is permitted per single-establishment building on a multi-building lot. 
(c)  Of the maximum number of signs permitted in subparagraph (a) above, a maximum of one (1) sign may be a freestanding monument sign, provided the lot contains a minimum of two hundred (200) feet of frontage on a public street. The freestanding monument sign may have a maximum size of one hundred (100) square feet. 
(d)  The following shall apply in the Research and Development and Industrial Zoning Districts: 
Type of Sign Business Directional Identification 
(When Allowed) Maximum Size of Signage in Square Feet 10% of the facade, but no more than 120 square feet. 10 square feet 100 square feet. 
1 freestanding monument sign per main entrance in an industrial park, listing names of occupant, owner, or developer Maximum Height of Freestanding Monument Signs 8 feet 6 feet 12 feet  
(e)  An advertising sign up to one hundred (100) square feet may be permitted with a conditional use permit in the Industrial District. 
(Ord. No. 1247, § 26, 9-12-00; Ord. No. 1415, § 29, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 5537. - Mixed Use District. 
(a)  A maximum of three (3) signs plus three (3) directional signs per lot is permitted in the MXD District. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a maximum of two (2) signs is permitted per establishment in a multiestablishment building, and a maximum of two (2) signs is permitted per single-establishment building on a multibuilding lot. 
(c)  Of the maximum number of signs permitted in subparagraph (a) above, a maximum of one (1) sign may be a freestanding monument sign, provided the lot contains a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet of frontage on a public street. 
(d)  In the total MXD Development, one (1) freestanding identification sign shall be allowed announcing the name of the MXD Development and may include a listing of the tenants. The size of this sign shall be limited to fifty (50) square feet. 
(e)  The following regulations apply in the MXD Zoning District: 
Type of Sign Business Directional Identification 
(When Allowed) Maximum Size of Signage in Square Feet 8% of each building facade, up to a maximum 120 square feet on each facade. Of the total business square footage allowed, the following square footage may be a freestanding monument sign: 0 to 75 foot frontage = 0; 
75 to 150 foot frontage = 35 square feet; 
greater than 150 foot frontage = 40 square feet 3 square feet 50 square feet 
(not deducted from business signage allowance) Maximum Height of Freestanding Monument Signs 8 feet 4 feet 8 feet  
(Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07) 
Secs. 5538, 5539 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5540 - Special signage districts and regulations. 
(a)  Off-premises signs. No off-premises signs are permitted in the Town of Blacksburg, except location signs which may be located off-premises. 
(b)  Planned developments: 
(1)  A signage plan shall be submitted as part of any proposal for a Planned Residential Development (PR), Planned Commercial (PC), Planned Manufactured Home (PMH) or Planned Industrial Development (PIN) district as authorized elsewhere in this ordinance. The signage plan shall be part of the required preliminary development plan. All signage plans shall be of sufficient detail to allow the Commission and Council to judge the compatibility of the proposed signage with the character of the proposed PR, PMH, PC or PIN. At a minimum, all signage plans shall provide information on the general size, location, style, color, and materials of all signs proposed. In evaluating the PR, PMH, PC or PIN proposal, the Commission and Council shall consider the appropriateness of the proposed signage plan in relation to the character of the proposed development, and the surrounding area. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a sign permit for any sign in an existing planned zoning district, a signage plan, approved by the Administrator, meeting the requirements of this ordinance shall be in place. Such a plan shall be required for each establishment or multi-establishment building and shall establish the location of all proposed signs and the maximum sign area proposed. The Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove, according to the standards in this division, each signage plan. A signage plan shall include the following information: 
a.  A site plan showing the location and dimensions of any freestanding monument signs. 
b.  A drawing to scale of each facade of an establishment or multi-establishment building indicating the number and size of signs to be allowed on each facade. 
c.  Evidence of any unifying design characteristics of the proposed signs in the district. These characteristics may include, design, size, and style of signs; materials and colors; size and style of lettering; placement and location of signs on the building facade; the type, color, and method of lighting. 
    The Administrator shall review the proposed sign against any existing signage plan and shall approve any proposed sign that the Administrator finds in conformity with the plan. The Administrator shall disapprove, or approve with conditions designed to achieve approval, any sign found not in conformity with the plan. 
(c)  Special housing district. A signage plan shall be submitted with every application for a conditional use permit for special housing. All signage plans shall be of sufficient detail to allow the Commission and Council to judge the compatibility of the proposed signage with the character of the neighborhood. At a minimum, all signage plans shall provide information on the general size, location, style, color, and materials of all signs proposed. In evaluating the conditional use permit application, the Commission and Council shall consider the appropriateness of the proposed signage plan in relation to the character of the proposed development, and the surrounding area. 
(d)  Designation of additional special signage districts. Special signage districts may be designated by the Town Council without altering the adopted zoning map. Designation of an area as a special signage district would affect on the district sign regulations applicable to that area. The procedure for adopting special signage districts is the same as the procedure for rezoning property. 
(e)  Permitted conditional uses. A signage plan shall be submitted as part of any application for a conditional use permit as authorized elsewhere in this ordinance. The signage plan shall be of sufficient detail to allow the Planning Commission and Town Council to judge the compatibility of the proposed signage with the character of the conditional use and the surrounding neighborhood. At a minimum, all signage plans shall provide information on the general size, location, style, color, and materials of all signs proposed. In evaluating the conditional use permit application, the Commission and Council shall consider the appropriateness of the proposed signage plan in relation to the character of the proposed development, and the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Secs. 5541-5549 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5550 - Damaged and neglected signs. 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to order the removal, without compensation, of any sign or sign structure that due to neglect or damage poses a clear danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(b)  In lieu of removal, the Zoning Administrator may require the immediate repair of any sign or sign structure which has been damaged or which has deteriorated so as to become a public hazard. The repair of any nonconforming sign shall be in accordance with Section 1237. 
Secs. 5551-5559 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5560 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1247, § 27, adopted Sept. 12, 2000, repealed § 5560 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to temporary signs. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 5561 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1247, § 27, adopted Sept. 12, 2000, repealed § 5561 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to application for temporary signs. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 5562 - Banners over the public rights-of-way. 
    Banners are not permitted over public rights-of-way. 
( Ord. No. 1724, § 1, 6-10-14 ) 
Sec. 5563 - Identification signs at entrances to Town. 
    Freestanding group identification signs announcing the names of churches, social organizations, and the time and place of meetings of civic clubs shall be permitted at the major entrances of Blacksburg. Additionally, freestanding identification signs announcing the name of the Town of Blacksburg, or governmental purpose, may also be permitted at the major entrances of the Town. Such freestanding monument signs shall not exceed twenty feet in height or fifty square feet in area. Any such sign shall require a sign permit. Groupings of signs along the major entrance routes to the Town shall be designed as an integrated unit, where possible, and shall be landscaped. These signs may be located within a public right-of-way provided approval is granted by the Administrator and the director of public works. 
DIVISION 6. - EXTERIOR LIGHTING 

Sec. 5600 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of outdoor lighting is to provide a safe, secure, enjoyable, productive nighttime environment for both pedestrians and vehicles, while enhancing lighting efficiency. These regulations are designed to protect the general welfare allowing exterior lighting to efficiently light areas, controlling the spillover of light onto adjacent properties, and protect the public safety by preventing glare from outdoor luminaries. The regulations advise on the direction of light emitted from luminaries, and limit the intensity of light on certain adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 67, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 24, 9-9-03) 
Sec. 5601 - Standards. 
(a)  Light sources shall not cast excessive light upon adjacent property or upon a public right-of-way. The maintained horizontal illuminance at grade at adjoining streets shall not exceed 0.5 foot candles, and the maintained horizontal illuminance at grade at adjoining residential properties shall not exceed 0.1 foot candles. 
(b)  Light trespass may be controlled or reduced through the use of properly designed luminaries suitable for the task; use of internal or external reflectors and visors; optimum location or placement of luminaries and adjustment or proper selection of mounting height of post, pole or building mounted luminaries, and other methods. 
(c)  Light diffusers and ambient light may be visible from adjacent property if the light defusers shield or diffuse the light source. 
(d)  Poles supporting lights shall be no taller than twenty (20) feet in a residential district, twenty-five (25) feet in a commercial or office district or a commercial part of a planned development residential district, twenty-five (25) feet in a MXD Development district (regardless of use), and thirty (30) feet in any industrial district. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to the light sources on public utility poles in the public right-of-way or to public street lights, which shall meet roadway lighting standards of IES and VDOT for the appropriate roadway classification. 
(f)  All exterior lights will be full cutoff luminaries. Exterior lighting shall be designed at or below the following average maintained horizontal illuminance levels for the various uses. Uniformity shall not exceed the ratio listed below, which is a measure of the maximum lighting achieved within the area to the minimum lighting within the areas. 
    Exterior lighting shall be designed at or below the following average maintained horizontal illuminance levels for the various uses. Uniformity shall not exceed the ratio listed below, which is a measure of the maximum lighting achieved within the area to the minimum lighting within the area. 
Application Average Fc Uniformity Airports Hanger Apron 
Service Apron 1.0 
0.5 - Archery, Badminton, Baseball, Softball, Pools, Tennis Courts, Horseshoe Pitching Shuffleboard 10 3:1 Auto Dealerships 20 - Bulletin & Poster Boards 50 - Commercial Building Exteriors 20 - Football, Soccer 30 4:1 Golf 
Driving Range 
Miniature 10 3:1 Loading Docks 20 10:1 Malls, Buildings 10 - Other Uses As determined by the Administrator based on like use and compatibility with surrounding area. Parking Areas, Commercial 5 15:1 Parking Areas, Residential 2 15:1 Parks & Gardens 0.2 - Playgrounds 5 10:1 Protective Entrances, Storage Areas 5 10:1 Residential Security and Yard Lighting 0.5 - Rifle & Pistol Range 
Firing point, range, target 10, 5, 50 2:1 Skeet and Trap Shooting 
Firing, Target 5, 30 3:1 Tournament Softball 20 3:1 Tournament Tennis Courts 30 4:1  
Source: Illumination Engineering Standards 
(Ord. No. 1308, § 67, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1339, § 24, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07) 
DIVISION 7. - MISCELLANEOUS STANDARDS 

Secs. 5700-5718 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5719 - Alleys. 
(a)  Use of alleys for ingress and egress to other than single unit residential use shall require a conditional use permit in all zoning districts; provided, however, that the use of alleys internal to a MXD district for ingress and egress shall be by right. 
(b)  In granting, denying, or conditioning such a conditional use permit, the Town Council shall be guided by these considerations: 
(1)  The function of the alley in the neighborhood or other area; 
(2)  Length and width of the alley; 
(3)  Level of improvement of the alley; 
(4)  Level of existing traffic on the alley; 
(5)  Function of the alley in the overall transportation network; 
(6)  New traffic anticipated to be generated by the proposed use; 
(7)  Whether or not additional traffic will have a negative impact on the surrounding neighborhood or area; 
(8)  Safety of using the alley for the proposed use; or 
(9)  Any additional improvements needed for the proposed use, as determined by the Administrator, based on the impact of the proposed use of the alley and the standard needed to support the existing and proposed uses of the alley. 
(Ord. No. 1439, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 5720 - Exterior speakers. 
(a)  Except provided by subsection (c), speaker noise shall not be audible by an occupant of adjacent property with a property line nearest the source of speaker noise. 
(b)  No use featuring an external speaker shall be authorized except by conditional use permit. 
(c)  The use of amplified sound systems associated with public park and recreation area uses shall be conditioned to minimize speaker noise audible by occupants of adjacent properties and surrounding neighborhoods. To determine appropriate conditions, the Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to submit a report from a professional noise control engineer on the impact of the proposed amplified sound system. Conditions may include noise limits based on adjoining land uses, noise measurements at property lines, hours of operation, times of day, duration of noise, and noise measuring specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1405, § 3, 8-8-06; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Secs. 5721-5729 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5730 - Fences and walls. 
(a)  Fences may be constructed in any location on any lot, except as prohibited for traffic safety and visibility. 
(b)  Fences and walls shall not obstruct views at street intersections, and shall not be located in the sight triangle as defined in Town Code Section 21-304. 
(c)  Fences and walls between a street and front building line shall not be more than four (4) feet in height except as required in specific zoning district regulations. 
(d)  Fences located behind the front building line shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(e)  Barbed wire, electric wire, or high tensile wire fencing shall only be permitted in the Rural Residential districts. However, barbed wire used in conjunction with and on top of chain link security fencing shall be permitted for allowable storage areas in commercial, industrial, and office districts. 
(f)  Gabion retaining walls shall be screened from view of the right-of-way and adjacent properties, except when used for stream flow protection. 
(Ord. No. 1415, § 30, 7-11-06) 
Secs. 5731-5739 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5740 - Lots without public road frontage. 
(a)  Existing lots or parcels which do not abut a public right-of-way shall be used for one single-family dwelling only. Such land shall have access to a lawfully developed public street through a private right-of-way which is a minimum of twelve feet wide and has a maintained, all weather surface extending from the parcel to the public street. 
(b)  The private right-of-way shall be held in the same fee simple ownership as the parcel served, or shall be within a perpetual private easement to serve the parcel. 
Sec. 5750 - Maintenance of required features. 
    Any features required by this chapter [Appendix], including but not limited to landscaping, parking, bicycle racks, walkways, and pavement striping shall be maintained for the life of the use. 
Secs. 5751-5768 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5769 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Repealed by Ord. No. 1339, § 25, adopted Sept. 9, 2003. 
Sec. 5770 - Reserved. 
Sec. 5771 - Recycling trailers. 
(a)  Parking spaces, above those occupied by the trailer or bin, or both, required for other establishments using the parking lot shall meet the standards of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Required parking for the trailer or bin or both shall meet the standards of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(c)  Parking facilities which are nonconforming as to planter islands, landscaping, or dimensions shall not be required to become conforming due to the placement there of the trailer or bin or both. 
(d)  All bin or trailer sites must be paved according to the standards of the Zoning Ordinance and to any other requirements of the Town necessary to enable the pavement to withstand movement of the trailer or bin. 
(e)  The placement of the trailer or bin shall meet all site requirements of the applicable district. For this purpose, recycling activities at the trailer or bin shall not involve a loading function. 
(f)  A site development plan is required for the placement of a recycling trailer or rolloff recycling bin, or both. This site plan may consist of an amended existing site plan if the Administrator determines that sufficient information exists to determine consistency with the Zoning Ordinance. 
(g)  Sufficient room in the opinion of the Administrator must exist on the site to allow for the safe maneuvering of trucks, trailers, and equipment. 
(h)  A recycling trailer or rolloff recycling bin may be placed on an undeveloped lot under the above applicable standards. In that case, and for purposes of the Zoning Ordinance, the facility shall be treated as if it were a permanent structure. 
(i)  Sidewalks or other pedestrian access shall not be required for the trailer, or bin, or both. 
(j)  An attached sign of no greater than six square feet shall be allowed to indicate the name of the recycler and the hours of operation of the facility. 
Sec. 5780 - Street names. 
    The Zoning Administrator shall review and approve proposed street names. Street names which duplicate existing street names, or which closely approximate existing street names, shall be disapproved, because of potential disruption of the E-911 public safety system. 
Secs. 5781-5788 - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 5789 - Temporary housing. 
(a)  A temporary housing unit may be approved for location during the reconstruction of a permanent single-family home, damaged or destroyed due to natural or other disasters, subject to all yard restrictions. 
(b)  The temporary housing unit must be on the same lot as the house being reconstructed and shall be connected to all public utilities. 
(c)  Use shall be limited to a period of 12 months or until reconstruction of the structure is complete or a permanent structural certificate of zoning compliance is issued, whichever is sooner. 
(d)  Town Council may grant extensions to this period, and may request a recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
Sec. 5790 - Yards. 
    The yard space required for a use or structure shall, during its life, remain free of all uses or occupancies except as follows: 
(a)  Fences, walls or landscaping shall be permitted in any required yard, along the edge of any yard; provided, that no fence or wall between a street and a front building line is more than four (4) feet in height except as required in specific zoning district regulations of this chapter [Appendix] and provided that no fence, wall or landscaping is in violation of Blacksburg Town Code Section 21-304. 
(b)  Eaves, cornices, window sills and belt courses may project into any required yard a distance not to exceed two feet. 
(c)  A deck or patio may project beyond the front building line (but not into the front yard setback) or into a rear yard setback a distance not to exceed five feet. 
(d)  Driveways shall be permitted in required yards, but shall be three feet or more from any property line, except where such driveways are developed jointly as a common drive to adjoining lots. 
(e)  Handicap ramps shall be allowed to encroach in all yards if the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The encroachment by the ramp must be the minimum necessary to accomplish safe access; 
(2)  The ramp must meet the current edition of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and the Town of Blacksburg Code; 
(3)  The minimum size of a building entry landing associated with the ramp shall meet Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code requirements. The maximum building entry landing size shall be six (6) feet by six (6) feet; 
(4)  The ramp must be removed after either (i) five (5) years from the date of the building permit issuance, unless the property owner requests an extension (extensions shall be granted in five (5) year increments) or (ii) three (3) months after the time the ramp is no longer needed to accommodate handicap access. 
(Ord. No. 1339, § 26, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1419, § 1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1654, § 1, 9-11-2012) 
APPENDIX B - Ordinance No. 1217 BLACKSBURG SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE 
ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 

Sec. 1-100. - Title. 
    This ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance of Blacksburg, Virginia," or the "Subdivision Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 1-101. - Policy. 
(a)  Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until adequate public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewerage. 
(b)  Proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown in the Comprehensive Plan and the capital improvement program of the Town, and it is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, the Zoning Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, and the capital improvement program of the Town. 
(c)  Land that has been subdivided prior to the effective date of these regulations should, whenever possible, be brought within the scope of these regulations to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 1-102. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to establish procedures and regulations for the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the Town of Blacksburg, Virginia, and to accomplish the objectives listed below: 
(1)  To achieve the orderly development of land through reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivision and re-subdivision of land; and ensure proper legal description and marketing of subdivided land. 
(2)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(3)  To guide future growth and development in accordance with the policies of the comprehensive plan; applicable zoning regulations and other adopted policy documents of the Town. 
(4)  To provide for the orderly extension of water and sewer, streets, sidewalks and bikeways, stormwater facilities, and other public facility services in a safe, adequate and efficient manner; to secure adequate provision of street lighting, fire and police protection, recreation and educational facilities, and similar municipal services. 
(5)  To coordinate proposed public facilities and streets in new subdivisions with existing public services in a manner that minimizes adverse effects on adjacent or nearby neighborhoods. 
(6)  To reduce and prevent air, soil, noise, water pollution, and flooding; and to insure appropriate development with regard to natural resources and features, and open space which will contribute to the beauty of the community and value of the land. 
(7)  To promote the economic, social and environmental stability of the community and to protect the character of Blacksburg through the encouragement of beneficial and balanced urban development patterns. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 1-103. - Jurisdiction and applicability of chapter. 
(a)  This chapter shall constitute the comprehensive regulations governing all subdivision of land located within the corporate limits of the Town occurring on or after December 14, 1999. No land may be subdivided through the use of any legal description other than with reference to a plat approved by the agent in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any subdivision for which a currently effective preliminary plat was approved on or before the effective date of this chapter. These plats or subdivisions shall be reviewed and acted on under applicable prior subdivision ordinances. 
(c)  No existing subdivision shall be modified except by approval in accordance with this and other applicable ordinances of the Town. 
(d)  This ordinance shall govern residential and nonresidential subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 1-104. - Adoption, amendment, and recordation of this ordinance. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall prepare and recommend the subdivision ordinance and transmit it to the Town Council. The Town Council shall approve and adopt a subdivision ordinance only after notice has been published, and a public hearing held, in accordance with Virginia Code § 15.2-2204. 
(b)  The Planning Commission on its own initiative may or at the request of the Town Council shall prepare and recommend amendments to the subdivision ordinance. The procedure for amendments shall be the same as for the preparation, recommendation, approval and adoption of the original ordinance; provided that no amendment shall be adopted by the Town Council without a reference of the proposed amendment to the Planning Commission for recommendation, nor until 60 days after such reference, if no recommendation is made by the commission. 
(c)  When the subdivision ordinance has been adopted or amended, a certified copy of the ordinance and any and all amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk, and in the clerk's office of the Montgomery County Circuit Court. 
State Law reference- Va. Code §§ 15.2-2251, 15.2-2252, 15.2-2253. 
Sec. 1-105. - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be the minimum requirements for submission, preparation and recordation of all plats and plans. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, except where the natural construction of this chapter indicates otherwise; words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural include the singular; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; "may" is permissive. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 1-106. - Effective date. 
(a)  This chapter shall be effective December 14, 1999, at which time, Appendix B., Subdivision Ordinance, Blacksburg Town Code, and all amendments thereto shall be repealed. 
(b)  Any subdivision for which a preliminary or final plat has received written approval prior to the effective date of this chapter and for which a final plat for the subdivision or a section thereof is recorded within one year of the date of such approval, may be developed in accordance with the subdivision ordinance in effect on the date of such approval. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 1-107. - Relationship to zoning ordinance. 
    The zoning ordinance and zoning map shall control the type and intensity of use of all property within the Town. Particular reference is made to the minimum lot sizes and setback requirements, use restrictions, overlay districts, and cluster development regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-100. - Planning Commission. 
    The Planning Commission shall exercise authority to review, approve and disapprove the preliminary plats for major subdivisions of land within the corporate limits of the Town of Blacksburg. In so doing, the Planning Commission shall be considered the agent of the Town Council. The Planning Commission shall perform its duties in regard to subdivisions in accordance with this chapter and the Land Subdivision and Development Act, Title 15.2, chapter 22, article 6 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2260. 
Sec. 2-101. - Agent. 
(a)  The Director of Planning and Building, or his or her designee, is appointed to be the Town Council's agent to administer and enforce this ordinance. The agent's approval, disapproval, or other action shall be that of the governing body. 
(b)  The agent shall exercise authority to review, approve and disapprove the final plats for the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the Town of Blacksburg. 
(c)  The agent shall exercise authority to review, approve and disapprove plans for the construction of public facilities within new subdivisions within the corporate limits of the Town of Blacksburg. 
(d)  All departments, officials and public employees of the Town who are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or approvals under this chapter shall adhere and conform to the provisions of this chapter. Any such approvals or permits issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(d), 2-12-08) 
State Law reference- Va. Code §§ 15.2-2241; 15.2-2255. 
Sec. 2-102. - To consult. 
    The agent may call for opinions or decisions, either oral or written, from other departments or agencies in considering details of any submitted plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 2-103. - Additional authority. 
    The agent may establish any reasonable administrative procedures deemed necessary for the proper administration of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 2-104. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall subdivide any tract of land that is located within the jurisdiction of the Town except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and any other applicable Town ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall subdivide land without making and recording a plat of such subdivision and without fully complying with the provisions of this subdivision ordinance and of general law. 
(c)  No such plat of any subdivision shall be recorded unless or until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the agent or by the Planning Commission as appropriate. 
(d)  No person shall sell or transfer any land of a subdivision before the plat has been approved and recorded as provided herein unless such subdivision was lawfully created prior to the adoption of this ordinance or any predecessor subdivision ordinance; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the passage of title of property which has not been legally subdivided. 
(e)  Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each lot or parcel of land so subdivided or transferred or sold, and shall be required to comply with all provisions of the subdivision ordinance. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. 
(f)  The agent and Town Attorney may take such other legal action as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this ordinance, including suit for injunction, for abatement or restraining order or other appropriate proceeding. 
(g)  The Zoning Administrator shall not approve a site plan nor issue a building permit for a lot that was created in violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1415, § 31, 7-11-06) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2254. 
Sec. 2-105. - Schedule of fees. 
    Administrative review fees for permits and procedures specified by this ordinance shall be established by the Town Council. A schedule of these fees is available in the Department of Planning and Building. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1361, § 1, 5-11-04; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(d), 2-12-08) 
Sec. 2-106. - Costs. 
    In addition to the fees set out above, the subdivider shall pay the necessary basic notice and advertising costs, if any (computed by the agent) associated with the application. These costs shall be refunded if the application is withdrawn prior to the Town's contracting for the placing of the legal advertisement, or prior to the Town's mailing of written notice, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
DIVISION 2. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 2-200. - Variances authorized. 
    In cases of unusual situations or where strict adherence to the general regulations in this ordinance would result in substantial injustice or hardship, the agent or Planning Commission, as appropriate, may vary any of the provisions of this ordinance, under the terms, procedures, and conditions established in this division. No variance shall be granted which is illegal or which would prejudice the health and safety of citizens of this Town. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2242. 
Sec. 2-201. - Process. 
    Each request for a variance from the terms of this ordinance shall be made in writing by the subdivider, stating specifically the provision from which the variance is requested, and the grounds therefor. Where possible, the subdivider should submit a request for a variance with the preliminary plat submission. All variance requests shall be accompanied by such plats, drawings, and engineering documents required by the agent to allow the agent or Planning Commission to understand and act on the variance. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 2-202. - Authority to grant variance. 
    The agent shall review, approve or disapprove any request for a variance in subdivisions of five (5) lots or less. The Planning Commission shall review and shall by resolution approve or disapprove any request for a variance in subdivisions of six (6) or more lots. The Town Council may provide for variances in the ordinance approving the final master plans for planned zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 2-203. - Time period for consideration of request; notice. 
    The agent or Planning Commission, as appropriate, shall take action on a request for a variance within sixty (60) days after the application is filed. At least ten (10) days prior to final action, the agent or Planning Commission shall give written notice by regular mail or by delivery to landowners adjoining the plat involved in the request. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 2-204. - Action on request. 
    The agent or Planning Commission, as appropriate, shall grant or deny each request in writing, stating the reasons therefor. As to each variance, the agent shall preserve and record the application and the basis for the variance or denial of the variance. These records shall be kept by the Town Clerk at least ten (10) years from the date of the granting or denial of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 2-205. - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by the agent's or Planning Commission's decision on a variance may appeal the action to the Town Council on written application filed with the Town Clerk within fourteen (14) days from the date of the decision. After at least ten (10) days' written notice to the adjoining landowners and to the applicant for the variance, the Town Council shall act by resolution to approve or deny the variance within thirty days from the receipt of the application for appeal. The decision of the Town Council in any case shall be final. During the pendency of the appeal, the approval of the subdivision shall be held in abeyance. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
ARTICLE III. - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 3-100. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this appendix, the words and terms set out in this section shall have the meanings described below. Any word or phrase used in this appendix shall have the same meaning as that set forth in the Town of Blacksburg Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Any reference to this ordinance includes all ordinances amending it. All distances and areas refer to measurement in a horizontal plane. 
(c)  Definitions: 
    Acceptance: The point when the public improvement is either: 
(1)  Accepted by resolution of the Town Council; or 
(2)  Taken over for operation and maintenance by the Town or other public authority which is responsible for maintaining and for operating such facility upon acceptance. 
    Agent: The Director of Planning and Building or his or her designee. 
    Aggrieved person: A person or group of people with an immediate, pecuniary and substantial interest in a subdivision as opposed to a remote or indirect interest. The subdivider may be an aggrieved person. A person is also aggrieved if the person suffers a denial of some personal or property right or imposition of a burden or obligation different from that suffered by the public in general. 
    Alley: A public or private lane designed to provide access to the side or rear of properties which front on primary public streets and roads. 
    Bikeway: Any facility which provides for bicycle travel and may be one (1) of the two (2) following types: 
(1)  Bike trail: A completely separate right-of-way designed for alternative transportation use. Cross flows by pedestrians and motorists are minimized. This may also be referred to as a multi-use trail. 
(2)  Bike lane: A restricted right-of-way integrated with a vehicular roadway and designed for the exclusive use of bicycles. Through travel by motor vehicles is not permitted, but crossflows may be allowed. 
    Building envelope: That area within which the principle structure may be located in compliance with all minimum setback requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
    CBR: California Bearing Ratio. 
    Chapter. The "Subdivision Ordinance of Blacksburg, Virginia (1999)." 
    Circuit court: The Montgomery County, Virginia Circuit Court. 
    Commission: The Planning Commission of Blacksburg, Virginia. 
    Department of transportation standards: The "Subdivision Street Requirements," Virginia Department of Highways and Transportation (June 26, 1981); "Road and Bridge Standards," Vols. I and II, Virginia Department of Highways and Transportation (1986); and comparable or later revisions of these works. 
    Easement: A right expressed in a recorded writing, given by the owner of land to another party for specific limited use of that land. 
    Final subdivision plat: The map of a subdivision submitted to the agent for final approval and subsequently to be recorded with the Montgomery County Circuit Court. 
    Governing body: The Town Council of Blacksburg, Virginia. 
    Health official: The Health Director or Sanitarian of Montgomery County, Virginia. 
    Lot: A numbered and recorded portion of a subdivision, created in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and intended for the transfer of ownership. 
    Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, depth of: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot of record: A lot on a plat which has been recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Montgomery County, Virginia, or on a plat which was otherwise validly created prior to the adoption of this subdivision ordinance. 
    Major subdivision: A subdivision creating more than fifty (50) lots. 
    Minor subdivision: A subdivision creating fifty (50) or fewer lots. 
    Multi-use trail: A hard surface path, usually asphalt, that is used for alternative transportation (non-motorized), recreation, education, physical fitness, or other purposes and may lie within greenway or stream corridors, parks, and other open spaces. This may also be referred to as a bike trail. 
    Performance security: Cash in the form of a certified check payable to the Town, cash escrow agreement or letter of credit. 
    Plan: The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of public improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance as a condition of approval of the plat. 
    Preliminary plat: The preliminary drawing or drawings, including the elements required by this chapter, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval. 
    Public improvement: Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, bicycle or pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the Town may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may effect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. 
    Resubdivision: A change in a map or an approved or existing subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved thereon for public use or any lot line. 
    Right-of-way: A legally established area or strip of land on which an irrevocable public right of passage has been recorded, and which is occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, utility service, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or other similar use. 
    Right-of-way width: The total width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel within which roadway, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, planting strips and undeveloped land may be located. 
    Sidewalk: A paved walk located in a right-of-way adjacent to the public street. 
    Solar access: The availability of direct sunlight to land on buildings and in particular on solar energy collection systems. 
    Street: A right-of-way improved for vehicular traffic (which right-of-way may also in part serve as a way for pedestrian or bicycle traffic), whether called street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, through road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, alley, mall or otherwise designated. 
    Street, arterial: A heavily traveled thoroughfare or highway that carries a large volume of through traffic, and for the purposes of this chapter shall be those streets so designated in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Street, collector: A street that conducts traffic between arterial and local streets and provides for the collection of traffic within, or for an entrance to, or a principal means of circulation within one (1) or more subdivisions. Existing and planned collector streets are so designated in the 1996 Comprehensive Plan. 
    Street, cul-de-sac: A street with only one (1) outlet and an appropriate turnaround for a safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
    Street, local: A street that provides direct public access to the abutting properties. 
    Street width: The total width of the improved vehicle travel way as measured from face of curb to face of curb, or edge of pavement to edge of pavement for roads without a curb. 
    Subdivide: To divide any tract, parcel or lot of land into two (2) or more parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, and including all changes in street or lot lines. 
    Subdivider: An individual, corporation, partnership, or other entity owning any property to be subdivided. 
    Subdivision: The division of any tract, parcel or lot of land into two (2) or more parts for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, including all changes in street or lot lines. 
    VDOT: Virginia Department of Transportation. 
    Walkway: A walk not located within the right-of-way of a public street, which may be constructed of asphalt, concrete or other surface material. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1339, § 30, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(d), 2-12-08; Ord. No. 1550, § 1, 12-8-09 ; Ord. No. 1744, § 1, 12-9-14 ) 
ARTICLE IV. - APPROVAL OF PLATS 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-100. - Submission of plat and plans to agent. 
(a)  Whenever the owner of any tract of land located at least in part within the town desires to subdivide the tract, and before the sale of any lot located in said subdivision, he or she shall submit a plat and plan of the proposed subdivision to the agent. The agent shall process the plat and plan in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any change in a recorded subdivision plat that modifies, creates, or adjusts lot lines shall be approved in the manner and under the requirements provided herein. This section applies to any subdivision plat of record, whether or not recorded prior to the adoption of a subdivision ordinance. Where a street, alley, easement for public passage, or other public area or easement laid out or described in such plat is affected, the plat, or pertinent part thereof, shall be vacated prior to resubdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2258. 
Sec. 4-101. - Approval process, minor subdivision. 
    An applicant for a minor subdivision shall submit a final plan to the agent for review and approval. At the option of the subdivider, a preliminary plat may be submitted and reviewed as described in this article. 
(a)  The agent shall act to approve or disapprove the plat within 60 days of its acceptance. If a plat is disapproved, the agent shall make a good faith effort to identify all deficiencies, if any, with the initial submission. Specific reasons for disapproval shall be stated either in a separate document or the plat itself. The reasons for disapproval shall identify deficiencies in the plat that cause the disapproval by reference to specific ordinances, regulations or policies and shall identify the corrections or modifications that will permit approval by the agent. 
(b)  If a previously disapproved plat is modified, corrected and resubmitted for approval, the agent shall act to approve or disapprove the resubmitted plat within 45 days of its acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1415, § 32, 7-11-06 ; Ord. No. 1744, § 1, 12-9-14 ) 
Sec. 4-102. - Approval process, major subdivision. 
    An applicant for a major subdivision shall submit a preliminary plat to the agent, who shall refer the application to the planning commission. After the approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant shall submit a final plat and plan to the agent for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99 ; Ord. No. 1744, § 1, 12-9-14 ) 
Sec. 4-103. - Approval process, planned zoning district. 
    The approved master plan of a Planned Residential, Planned Manufactured Home, Planned Commercial, or Planned Industrial zoning district shall constitute the approved preliminary subdivision plat thereof. An applicant for the subdivision of land within such a zoning district shall submit a final plat and plan to the agent for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 4-104. - Series of minor subdivision plats. 
    The agent may determine that a series of minor subdivision plats in fact constitutes a major subdivision if the series of plats relates to the same parcels or related groups of parcels. If the agent determines that the series of plats in fact constitutes a major subdivision then he or she shall require the subdivider to follow the process for the review of major subdivision plats. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 4-105. - Changing plats after approval. 
    No change, erasure or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat of a subdivision, nor on accompanying plans, after approval by the Planning Commission or agent, unless authorization for such change has been granted in writing by the Planning Commission or agent. In no case shall the commission or agent approve a revision of a previously approved plat unless the date of the revision and the fact that it is a revised plat is clearly stated thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Secs. 4-106-4-109. - [Reserved] 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLATS 

Sec. 4-200. - Size and information required on a preliminary plat. 
(a)  All preliminary plats shall be either seventeen (17) by twenty-two (22) inches or twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches in size. 
(b)  Prior to final approval by the Planning Commission, the preliminary plat shall be signed by the owner of the land proposed for subdivision. The signature shall certify that the owner is aware of the requirements imposed by the plat and applicable Town codes, and shall further certify that the owner agrees to comply with these requirements, unless modified in accordance with the Town Code. 
(c)  The preliminary plat shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the Blacksburg Zoning Ordinance and this chapter. It shall contain the following elements: 
(1)  Name of the subdivision, with the notation, "Preliminary Plat." 
(2)  Name(s) of owner(s) of subdivision 
(3)  Name of surveyor or engineer 
(4)  Location of proposed subdivision by vicinity map showing adjoining roads, names of roads, and jurisdiction in which the subdivision lies 
(5)  Adjoining subdivisions 
(6)  Parcel tax numbers 
(7)  Deed references 
(8)  True, record or grid north 
(9)  Identification of graves, objects, or structures marking a place of human burial 
(10)  Scale of drawing 
(11)  Boundary survey 
(12)  Total acreage in overall parcel or parcels involved. 
(13)  Total acreage of subdivided area 
(14)  Number of lots 
(15)  Area of each lot 
(16)  Frontage of each lot 
(17)  Purpose of dedication of land to public use 
(18)  Area in common open space, park or public lands 
(19)  Percentage of land to be subdivided as common open space, park or public lands 
(20)  Names of all existing, platted and proposed streets 
(21)  Width of existing, platted and proposed streets 
(22)  Location of existing buildings within the boundaries of the tract 
(23)  Existing and proposed utility and other easements 
(24)  Sidewalks and bikeways 
(25)  Parking spaces 
(26)  Existing and proposed storm sewer facilities 
(27)  Water courses 
(28)  Names, if any, of water courses 
(29)  Topography at contour intervals satisfactory to the agent for full engineering review 
(30)  Road profiles showing existing and proposed street grades 
(31)  Proposed connections with existing sanitary sewers 
(32)  Existing water supply and proposed connections thereof 
(33)  Any non-public means of disposal of sewage 
(34)  Any non-public means of water service 
(35)  Provisions for stormwater management 
(36)  Contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 4-201. - Metes and bounds descriptions-Preliminary plats. 
    Metes and bounds descriptions on a preliminary plat shall include distances measured to the nearest foot, and bearings to the nearest minute. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 4-202. - Process of review-Optional pre-application conference. 
    The applicant may schedule a conference with the agent to review a concept sketch for a proposed major subdivision, in order to determine whether the sketch generally meets the requirements of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances, and to identify any concerns or issues raised by the proposed major subdivision. The agent's comments on the sketch shall be informal, and shall not constitute a formal approval or disapproval of the subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 4-203. - Optional concept sketch standards, review. 
    The concept sketch shall conform to the following guidelines: 
 drawn on white paper or on a print of a topographic map of the property; 
 scale of not less than two hundred (200) feet to the inch; 
 include the name, location, dimensions of all streets entering the property, adjacent to the property or terminating at the boundary of the property to be subdivided; 
 show the approximate location of natural features, such as slopes with approximate gradients, watercourses; 
 show approximate location and dimensions of all proposed streets, lots, parks, playgrounds and other proposed uses of the land to be subdivided; 
 include approximate dimensions of the property to be subdivided. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 4-204. - [Reserved]. 
Sec. 4-205. - Acceptance of plat and plan. 
(a)  A preliminary plat accepted for review and accompanied by the correct fee shall be deemed officially submitted to the Town. The agent shall forward the accepted preliminary plat and accompanying plans to the Planning Commission for review. 
(b)  The agent is authorized to reject a preliminary plat on account of significant (as determined by the agent based on the requirements of this chapter) deficiencies. 
(c)  Preliminary plat applications which are found deficient in content shall not be accepted until the deficiencies have been properly addressed and remedied. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1415, § 33, 7-11-06) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2260. Authority to require submission of preliminary plat. 
Sec. 4-206. - Advertisement of Planning Commission public hearing. 
(a)  Notice of the public hearing to consider the proposed preliminary plat shall be advertised in accordance with the standards in Virginia Code § 15.2-2204. Notice shall include mailing of written notice to property owners per subsection B of that section. The agent shall mail the written notice within ten (10) working days after the acceptance of the preliminary plat. 
(b)  In addition, the subdivider shall cause notice to be posted on the property proposed for subdivision, in accordance with the standards in section 1153, Blacksburg Zoning Ordinance, Appendix A, Blacksburg Town Code, as amended, with necessary changes. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99 ; Ord. No. 1744, § 1, 12-9-14 ) 
Sec. 4-207. - Planning Commission review. 
(a)  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on preliminary plats after notice as specified above. The purpose of the public hearing shall be to determine the plat's compliance or not with the standards and requirements of this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable town ordinances. In addition, the Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the agent regarding utility service, and transportation access to and circulation within the proposed subdivision. 
(b)  The preliminary plat for each phase of a multi-phased development shall demonstrate compliance with this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable Town ordinances. 
(c)  The Planning Commission shall act to approve or disapprove the plat within 60 days of its acceptance; provided that if referral to a state agency review is necessary, the Planning Commission shall act within 90 days of acceptance. The Planning Commission's action shall take the form of a resolution. The commission shall thoroughly review the plat and shall make a good faith effort to identify all deficiencies, if any, with the initial submission. Specific reasons for disapproval shall be contained either in the resolution or on the plat itself. The reasons for disapproval shall identify deficiencies in the plat that cause the disapproval by reference to specific ordinances, regulations, or policies and shall identify modifications or corrections as will permit approval of the plat. 
(d)  The Planning Commission shall act on any proposed plat that it has previously disapproved within 45 days after the plat has been modified, corrected and resubmitted for approval. One resubmittal is allowed per application. 
(e)  Within 30 days after the approval of a preliminary plat by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall submit a mylar copy of the plat for the official records of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1415, § 34, 7-11-06 ; Ord. No. 1744, § 1, 12-9-14 ) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2259, deadline for Planning Commission action. 
Sec. 4-208. - Multi-phase subdivisions. 
    When the Planning Commission approves the preliminary plat of a multi-phase subdivision, it may approve an extended period for the recordation of the final plats of the subdivision. The final plats for all phases must be recorded within five years of the first recordation of a final plat for any phase, unless this period is extended by the Planning Commission at the time of the approval of the preliminary plat. The Planning Commission may grant the extension for such time as it may deem to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed subdivision. The final plats for unrecorded phases shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the engineering and construction standards and zoning requirements in effect at the time that each remaining phase is recorded, except if they conflict directly with the approved preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 4-209. - Term of validity of preliminary plat. 
    A preliminary subdivision plat remains valid for five years from the date of approval provided the subdivider submits a final subdivision plat for all or a portion of the property within one year of such approval and thereafter diligently pursues approval of the final subdivision plat. The final plat and final engineering plan shall meet all of the submittal requirements established by article IV of this chapter for the subdivision or section thereof. Failure to do so shall make the preliminary plat approvals null and void. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1308, § 68, 8-13-02) 
Sec. 4-210. - Appeal of failure to act on preliminary plat. 
    If the Planning Commission fails to approve or disapprove the preliminary plat within ninety days after it has been officially submitted for approval, the subdivider, after ten days' written notice to the commission, may petition the circuit court for an order with respect thereto as it deems proper, which may include directing approval of the plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2260. 
Sec. 4-211. - Appeal of disapproval of preliminary plat. 
    If the Planning Commission disapproves a preliminary plat and the subdivider contends that the disapproval was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, or was arbitrary or capricious, he or she may appeal to the circuit court of Montgomery County, which court shall hear and determine the case as soon as may be. The appeal must be filed with the circuit court within sixty days of the written disapproval by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2260. 
DIVISION 3. - ENGINEERING PLANS 

Sec. 4-300. - Plan elements. 
(a)  Every engineering plan shall be twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches in size and at a scale of not smaller than fifty (50) feet to the inch (1" = 50'), except in cases where the agent has approved an alternate scale. The applicant shall submit a reproducible mylar copy of the plan upon request of the agent. 
(b)  Prior to final approval by the Town, engineering plans shall be signed by the owner of the land proposed for subdivision. The signature shall certify that the owner is aware of the design requirements imposed by the plan and other applicable Town codes, and shall further certify that the owner agrees to comply with these requirements, unless modified in accordance with the Town Code. 
(c)  The engineering plan shall include the following: 
(1)  General information: 
a.  Name of subdivision 
b.  True, record, or grid north (identified as such) 
c.  Scale of drawing 
d.  Number of sheets 
e.  Name and address of person and firm preparing plat 
f.  Approval block providing for signature and date by Town Engineer and Town Planner 
g.  Vicinity map indicating adjoining roads and road names, and at a scale not smaller than 1? = 2000' 
h.  Date drawing prepared, and revision dates 
(2)  General notes: 
a.  Name and address of owner and developer 
b.  Magisterial district, county, Town and state in which subdivision lies 
c.  Address and tax parcel number of property to be subdivided 
d.  Zoning district 
e.  Number of lots 
f.  Total area of subdivision 
g.  A statement saying: "No building permit shall be issued until the public street construction, including paving, is completed and approved by the Town Inspector." 
h.  Means of providing water and sewer service to each lot (well or public water, etc.) 
(3)  Street information: 
a.  Plan and profile of all streets 
b.  Vertical and horizontal curve data for all streets 
c.  Stopping sight distance and headlight sight distance 
d.  Typical section of all streets including pavement structure proposed and typical grading and trail or sewer and water development 
e.  Traffic projections and analysis where necessary to estimate warrants for signalization, turn lanes, and other related features 
(4)  Stormwater management information: 
a.  Engineering calculations establishing pre- and post-development runoff for the subdivision 
b.  Detention facility calculations establishing the adequacy of proposed measures and downstream channels 
c.  Erosion and sediment control plan and narrative 
d.  Plan and profile and grading of a typical section of proposed detention facilities 
(5)  Drainage information: 
a.  Plan and profile of all proposed street drain pipes and channels identifying all inlets, specifying material type and size, with design of invert and top elevation 
b.  Existing and proposed easements 
c.  Watercourses, springs and other natural drainage features 
(6)  Water supply information: 
a.  Plan and profile, including material, size, cover and utility crossings, of existing and proposed water mains 
b.  Existing and proposed hydrants, valves and other associated features 
c.  Existing and proposed service laterals and meter locations 
d.  Existing and proposed easements 
e.  Fire flow and water pressure calculations 
(7)  Sanitary sewer information: 
a.  Plan and profile, including material, size, cover, grade, structures, invert, top elevation and utility crossings 
b.  Existing and proposed service laterals and clean out locations 
c.  Existing and proposed easements 
d.  Downstream sewer capacity analysis 
e.  Lowest floor elevation sewerable by gravity on each lot 
(8)  Other information: 
a.  Information, details or design as necessary to demonstrate or achieve compliance with the standards of this ordinance 
b.  Existing and proposed topographic lines at 2' intervals 
(9)  Standard notes: 
a.  Backflow prevention devices shall be provided by owner 
b.  All construction will be in accordance with Town of Blacksburg standards and specifications 
c.  All utilities will be visually inspected by the Town's inspector prior to backfilling trenches 
d.  Pavement work within the right-of-way requires the following inspections: 
1.  Subgrade prior to placement of base stone 
2.  Base stone prior to placement of pavement 
3.  Pavement 
e.  The Town will tap existing water lines for main extensions or laterals at the owners' expense; and the Town provide the meter at the owner's expense. 
f.  A pre-construction meeting will be held prior to beginning construction 
g.  It is the contractor's responsibility to meet compliance requirements with § 59.1-406, et seq., of the Code of Virginia (Overhead High Voltage Lines Safety Act) 
h.  The contractor shall plug with an angle wing nut test plug the connection of proposed to existing sanitary sewer prior to extending the sanitary sewer. The plug shall be maintained in place until such time as the sewer is completed, inspected and accepted by the Town. Failure of the contractor to appropriately install and maintain this plug shall cause him to be liable for any resulting blockages or repairs to the existing sewer. 
i.  (For revisions only) This plan reflects revision of the following items: [list of items proposed for revisions]. All other items conform to previously approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 4-301. - Waiver of plan elements. 
    The agent may waive the requirement to show on the plan specific items if, in his or her opinion, and based on recognized engineering principles and in an effort to achieve the goals of this chapter, they are unnecessary to determine compliance with appropriate codes and ordinances. Such waiver shall not be construed to authorize the reduction or waiver of any standard or required improvement. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 4-302. - Preparation of plan by certified professional engineer. 
    Every plan shall be prepared by a certified professional engineer or land surveyor, who shall endorse the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 4-303. - Process for approval of plan. 
    Engineering plans for the design and construction of required public facilities shall be submitted with the final plat. The agent shall approve or disapprove plans within thirty days of their submission. In the event of the failure of the agent to act within such period, the plans may be submitted, after ten days' notice to the Town, to the circuit court for its approval or disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2269. 
Sec. 4-304. - Effect of approval. 
    Approval of the engineering plan shall, upon issuance of all necessary permits including, but not limited to, land disturbing permits and utility certificates to construct, constitute authority to commence development and construction activities which are in accordance with the approved development plan but only within such section or sections which have received approval. Nothing in this provision however, shall be interpreted to authorize the construction of any structure on any proposed lot other than such structures which are appurtenant to utility installations. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
DIVISION 4. - FINAL PLATS 

Sec. 4-400. - Elements of final plats. 
(a)  All final subdivision plats shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink, at a scale of not smaller than fifty (50) feet to the inch (1' = 50'), except in cases where the agent has approved an alternate scale, on sheets being twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) or seventeen (17) by twenty-two (22) inches in size. The applicant shall submit a reproducible mylar copy of the final plat, upon the request of the agent. 
(b)  The final plat shall show the following information: 
(1)  General information: 
a.  Name of Subdivision 
b.  True, record, or grid north 
c.  Scale of drawing, which shall be not smaller than 1" = 50' 
d.  Number of sheets 
e.  Name and address of person and firm preparing plat 
f.  Vicinity map indicating adjoining roads and road names, and at a scale not smaller than 1" = 2000' 
g.  Date drawing prepared, and revision dates 
(2)  General notes: 
a.  Name and address of owner and developer 
b.  Magisterial district, county, Town and state in which subdivision lies 
c.  Address and tax parcel number of property to be subdivided 
d.  Zoning district 
e.  Number of lots 
f.  Total area of subdivision 
g.  A statement saying: "No building permit shall be issued until the public street construction, including paving, is completed and approved by the Town Inspector." 
h.  Means of providing water and sewer service to each lot (well or public water, etc.) 
(3)  Plat information: 
a.  Metes and bounds of the perimeter of the subdivision 
b.  Interior tract lines 
c.  Departing lot lines for adjacent parcels 
d.  Property owner names for adjacent parcels 
e.  Area of each proposed lot 
f.  Proposed lot numbers 
g.  Boundaries of proposed and existing rights of way with metes and bounds description, stated in one consistent direction 
h.  Right of way width of each existing and proposed, interior and adjacent, right-of-way 
i.  Names (and state route numbers where applicable) of all existing and proposed streets and alleys 
j.  Boundaries of any proposed common area or open space or public dedicated area, with metes and bounds 
k.  Intended use of any common area, open space, or public dedicated area 
l.  Boundaries of proposed and existing easements, with bearings and distances where necessary to establish location 
m.  Curve data table including curve number, arc length, tangent length and bearing, and radius 
n.  Major watercourses 
o.  Floodplain boundaries 
p.  Identification of graves, objects or structures marking a place of burial 
q.  All proffers, conditional use permit conditions, exceptions, or Board of Zoning Appeals actions applicable to the site. 
(4)  Statements and certifications: 
a.  Owner's consent and dedication statement (notarized), per Section 4-403, below 
b.  Surveyors source of title statement (signed and dated by a Virginia licensed surveyor) 
c.  Owner's conforming statement (notarized) 
d.  Health Department approval for septic fields or well sites 
e.  Approval block providing for signature and date by Town Engineer and Town Planner 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1513, § 1, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 4-401. - Final plats-metes and bounds descriptions. 
    Metes and bounds descriptions on a final plat shall include distances measured to the 0.01 foot and bearings to ten (10) seconds. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 4-402. - Preparation of final plat by certified professional engineer or land surveyor. 
    Every final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a certified professional engineer or licensed surveyor, who shall sign and date each plat and include a certificate signed by him setting forth the source of title of the owner of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the plat is of land acquired from more than one (1) source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated upon the plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2262. 
Sec. 4-403. - Final plats-Signature by owners, proprietors, and trustees. 
    Every final plat shall contain in addition to the professional engineer's or land surveyor's certificate a statement as follows: "The platting or dedication of the following described land (here insert a correct description of the land subdivided) is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any." The statement shall be signed by the owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgment of deeds. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Virginia Code § 15.2-2264. 
Sec. 4-404. - Deadline for filing final subdivision plat and engineering plans for major subdivisions. 
    The subdivider shall file with the agent the final plat and final engineering plans meeting the standards of this ordinance for all or one (1) or more sections of the subdivision within one (1) year of the Planning Commission's approval of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1339, § 31, 9-9-03) 
Sec. 4-405. - Review of final plat. 
(a)  The agent shall approve the final plat, if found to be in conformity with the requirements of law and this ordinance, within sixty (60) days after it has been officially submitted or resubmitted for approval. 
(b)  The final subdivision plat, including the final plat for each phase of a multi-phase development, shall demonstrate compliance with this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance, and other applicable Town ordinances. 
(c)  The agent shall not approve a final plat until any necessary deed of dedication has been submitted and approved by the Town Attorney. A deed of dedication is required to convey parkland, pump station sites, and other property to the Town. One is not necessary to convey streets, alleys, any easement for public passage, or an easement for the conveyance of stormwater, domestic water or sewage. 
(d)  The agent shall not approve a final plat until any necessary subdivision agreement, with surety has been submitted and approved by the Town Attorney. The agent shall receive any payment due for the fabrication and installation of street signs prior to the approval of the final plat. The agent shall receive any payment due for a fee in lieu of parkland prior to the approval of the final plat. 
(e)  Where appropriate, the agent shall not approve a final plat until any required deeds of easement to a homeowner's association are submitted and approved by the Town Attorney. 
(f)  After final plat approval by the agent, no change, erasure or revision shall be made on the plat or accompanying data sheets unless authorization for such change has been granted in writing by the agent. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2259. 
Sec. 4-406. - Disapproval of final plat. 
    In the case of disapproval, the agent shall give the subdivider specific reasons for denial, and these may be contained in a separate document or may be written on the plat. They shall relate in general terms such modifications or corrections as will permit approval of the plat if any there be. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2259. 
Sec. 4-407. - Effect of approval of final plat. 
(a)  Only a final plat approved by the agent may be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court. 
(b)  An approved final plat must be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court within one (1) year of the date of approval. However, this time period may be extended if: 
(1)  The subdivider has commenced the construction of facilities to be dedicated to public use, pursuant to an approved plan, or permit with security approved by the agent; or, if 
(2)  The subdivider has furnished surety to the agent by certified check, cash escrow, bond, or letter of credit in the amount of the estimated cost of construction for such facilities. 
These exceptions apply only if construction has commenced or security has been approved and accepted before the expiration of the one year time period. The deadline for filing the plat may be extended for the period specified in the security agreement. 
(c)  In any case where a deed of dedication accompanies the final plat, the agent shall record both the final plat and the deed of dedication. 
(d)  The subdivider shall record any required deeds of easement to a homeowner's association contemporaneously with the final plat. 
(e)  If the subdivider fails to timely record the final plat, then the approval shall become null and void the subdivider shall return the plat to the agent so that it may be so marked. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2241(8). 
Sec. 4-408. - Same-Recordation in phases. 
    If the subdivider records a final plat which is a section or phase of a subdivision as shown on the approved preliminary plat within the one year period established in section 4-407 above, then he or she may record the remaining sections or phases for a period of five years from the recordation date of the first section, in accordance with this section. The subdivider shall furnish the Town with a certified check, cash escrow, bond, or letter of credit in the amount of the estimated cost of construction of the facilities to be dedicated within said section for public use and maintained by the Town, the Commonwealth, or other public agency. The five year time period provided herein may be extended by the Planning Commission at the time of approval of the preliminary plat, as provided in section 4208, above. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2241. 
Sec. 4-409. - Effect of recordation of approved plat. 
(a)  The recordation of an approved plat shall operate to transfer, in fee simple, to the Town, the portion of the premises set apart for streets, alleys, bikeways, sidewalks or other public use, and to convey facilities and easements for the conveyance of stormwater, public water and sewage 
(b)  When the agent approves in accordance with this ordinance a plat or replat of land, then upon the recording of the plat or replat in the circuit court clerk's office, all rights-of-way, easements or other interest of the Town in the land included on the plat or replat, except as shown thereon, shall be terminated and extinguished. However, an interest acquired by the Town by condemnation, by purchase for valuable consideration and evidenced by a separate instrument of record, or streets, alleys or easements for public passage subject to the provisions of §§ 7-101-7-104 of this ordinance shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2265. 
Sec. 4-410. - Appeal of failure to act on final plat. 
    If the agent fails to approve or disapprove a final plat within sixty days after it has been officially submitted for approval, the subdivider, after ten days' notice to the agent, may petition the circuit court to decide whether the plat should or should not be approved. The court shall hear the matter and make and enter an order with respect thereto as it deems proper, which may include directing approval of the plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2259. 
Sec. 4-411. - Appeal of disapproval of final plat. 
    If the agent disapproves a final plat and the subdivider contends that the disapproval was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, or was arbitrary or capricious, he or she may appeal to the circuit court within sixty days of the written disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2259. 
DIVISION 6. - SECURITY FOR CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 4-600. - Surety in lieu of completion. 
(a)  Where the subdivider wishes to record the final plat, but physical improvements and installations, including public streets, shown on the approved engineering plan and/or final plat have not been made, in whole or in part, the subdivider may enter into a subdivision agreement with the Town and submit performance surety in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the satisfactory construction or completion of said improvements or installations. 
(b)  Such physical improvements and installations shall include, but not be limited to, any street; curb; gutter; sidewalk; bicycle trail; drainage or sewerage system; waterline as part of a public system; other improvement intended for dedication to public use to be maintained by the Town; site-related improvements required by this or other chapters of this Code for vehicular ingress or egress; public access streets; structures necessary to ensure the stability of slopes; and stormwater management facilities. 
(c)  Prior to acceptance, physical improvements and installations shall be inspected by Town staff. Administrative fees for inspections and other procedures specified by this division shall be established by the Town Council. A schedule of these fees is available in the Department of Planning and Building. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1395, § 1, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(d), 2-12-08) 
Sec. 4-601. - Subdivision agreement. 
    Where the subdivider chooses to post surety in lieu of completion of those physical improvements shown on the approved engineering plan and/or final plat in order to allow recordation prior to completion and acceptance of all required public improvements, he or she shall enter into a subdivision agreement, approved as to content and form by the Town Attorney, with the Town prior to approval of the final plat. The agent shall provide to the subdivider a sample subdivision agreement during review of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 4-602. - Time of performance. 
    The period within which improvements or installations shall be completed and inspected for acceptance shall be specified in the subdivision agreement. Unless otherwise provided by the agent, the period shall not exceed one (1) year from the date of recordation of the final plat. In approving the time of performance of the subdivision agreement, the agent shall require a report containing the following information from the subdivider: 
(1)  Percent of public improvements already completed; and 
(2)  Rate of construction activity including the estimated completion date for each major feature (roads, sewer, water, lights, etc.) remaining to be completed. 
The agent shall not permit a subdivision agreement to be executed where, on the basis of the report submitted by the subdivider, it is apparent that the improvements or installations covered by said agreement cannot reasonably be expected to be completed by the deadline established therein. If the improvements or installations are not completed and accepted within the construction period stated in the subdivision agreement, it may be extended upon payment of any additional required fees; provided, however, that an additional administrative fee may be charged for costs incurred in the third and subsequent extensions. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1395, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 4-603. - Form of security. 
(a)  The subdivider shall furnish to the Town a certified check or cash escrow in the amount of the estimated costs of construction or a personal, corporate or property bond, with surety satisfactory to the agent, in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of such facilities. 
(b)  The subdivider may furnish a bank or savings institution's letter of credit on certain designated funds, satisfactory to the agent as to the bank or savings institution, the amount and the form. The letter of credit may be used in lieu of the certified check, cash escrow, or bond in subsection (a). 
(c)  The amount of the certified check, cash escrow, bond, or letter of credit shall not exceed the total of the estimated cost of construction based on unit prices for new public or private sector construction in the locality and a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs, inflation, and potential damage to existing roads or utilities, which shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the estimated construction costs. 
(d)  The subdivider shall maintain any letter of credit, bond or other surety arrangement in effect until the facilities covered by the bond have been inspected and accepted. An administrative fee shall be charged for the costs incurred in ensuring compliance with this requirement in the event that the bond, letter of credit or other surety arrangement is not renewed or extended by the subdivider more than 35 days prior to its expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1395, § 1, 9-13-05) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2241. 
Sec. 4-604. - Periodic partial release of security. 
(a)  Upon completion of at least thirty percent of the facilities covered by any bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee, the agent is authorized to make periodic partial releases of the security. 
(b)  A maximum of three periodic partial releases per any twelve month period shall be authorized. The agent shall make periodic partial releases of such bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee in a cumulative amount equal to no less than ninety percent of the original amount for which the performance guarantee was taken. 
(c)  The agent shall provide for the periodic partial release of any bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee required by this chapter within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice by the subdivider or developer of completion of part or all of any facilities required to be constructed. 
(d)  No such release need be made if the agent notifies the subdivider or developer in writing of nonreceipt of approval by the applicable state agency or of any specified defects or deficiencies in construction and suggested corrective measures prior to the end of the thirty day period. 
(e)  If no such action is taken by the agent within the thirty (30) day time period, the request shall be deemed approved and a partial release granted to the subdivider or developer. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2245. 
Sec. 4-605. - Final and complete release of security. 
(a)  In addition to the written request for release of security and thirty (30) day time period established in Section 4-604, above, the subdivider or developer shall submit a second written request for the final and complete release of security. This request shall be sent by certified mail return receipt to the agent. The agent shall approve or deny the request within ten (10) working days of receipt of the request for final release. If no action is taken the request shall be deemed approved and final release granted to the subdivider or developer. 
(b)  Upon final completion and acceptance of the facilities, the agent shall release any remaining bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee to the subdivider or developer. For the purpose of final release, the term "acceptance" means: when the public facility is accepted by and taken over for operation and maintenance by the Town or other public agency which is responsible for maintaining and operating such facility. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2245. 
Sec. 4-606. - Grounds for refusal to release security. 
    The agent shall not refuse to make a periodic partial or final release of a bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee for any reason not directly related to the specified defects or deficiencies in construction of facilities covered by said bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2245. 
Sec. 4-607. - Use of security. 
(a)  In those cases where performance surety has been posted and the required improvements or installations have not been completed within the terms of the subdivision agreement, the agent shall declare the subdivider to be in default and shall draw on the posted surety. After the funds or proceeds from the property have been received, the agent shall cause such improvements to be completed. The subdivider shall be fully and completely responsible and liable for the entire cost of completing the improvements, even when such cost exceeds the amount of surety. 
(b)  If the funds or proceeds from the surety are insufficient to complete the improvements, the agent and the Town Attorney shall proceed to obtain such funds from the subdivider, its successor or assigns including such reasonable costs as may be expended in the process. 
(c)  If any funds remain after all improvements or installations are completed and accepted with all necessary fees paid and no defects are found therein which must be repaired, such remaining funds, less any such reasonable administrative or overhead costs which may have accrued, shall be returned to the subdivider within one hundred eighty (180) days of final acceptance of the final improvement or installation. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
ARTICLE V. - REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGN STANDARDS, PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND RESERVATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-100. - Land must be suitable. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements established by this ordinance, all subdivision plats shall comply with the Blacksburg Zoning Ordinance, Blacksburg Code Appendix A; all applicable chapters of the Blacksburg Code (1998) as amended; the rules and regulations of the Montgomery County Health Department; the rules and regulations of the Virginia Department of Transportation; and any other applicable federal, state, or local requirement. 
(b)  Each lot shall be suitable for a building site. Where public utilities are unavailable, each lot, other than recreation or public service lots, shall pass a percolation test for the installation of a septic system with both a primary and a one hundred (100) percent reserve drain field and have a suitable location for a potable water well. Land not suitable within a proposed subdivision shall be platted only for uses not endangered by periodic or occasional inundation and only where it will not produce conditions contrary to the public welfare. Otherwise, such non-suitable land shall be combined with other lots. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-101. - Flooding. 
(a)  Land in the flood hazard district of the zoning ordinance and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable because of flooding shall not be platted for residential occupancy or for such other uses that may increase danger to health, life or property, or cause erosion or flood hazards. Such land within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plat for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional flooding or shall not produce conditions contrary to public welfare. 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1529, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 5-102. - Off-site improvements. 
(a)  Where the construction or improvement of a subdivision of land makes necessary, at least in part, the installation of new or improved sewerage, water, or drainage facilities located outside the property limits of the subdivision, the subdivider or developer of the subdivision shall pay a proportionate share of the cost of the facilities, in accordance with this section. 
(b)  No such payment shall be required until the Town Council has established (or has committed itself by ordinance to the establishment of) a general sanitary sewer, water or drainage improvement program for an area having related and common sanitary sewer, water and drainage conditions, or any of them, and within which the land to be subdivided is located. The Town may develop and administer all three (3) programs together or any one (1), or other number, separately or jointly. 
(c)  The program shall include regulations that establish reasonable standards to determine the proportionate share of the total estimated cost of ultimate sanitary sewerage, water and drainage facilities required adequately to serve a related and common area, when and if fully developed in accord with the comprehensive plan, that shall be borne by each subdivider or developer within the area. 
(e)  The share to be borne by each subdivider shall be limited to the proportion of such total estimated cost which the increased sanitary sewerage flow, water use or increased volume and velocity of stormwater runoff to be caused by the proposed subdivision bears to the total estimated volume and velocity of such sanitary sewerage, water or runoff from such area in its fully developed state. In calculating the volume and velocity of stormwater runoff, the Town shall take into account the effect of all on-site stormwater facilities or best management practices constructed or required to be constructed by the subdivider or developer and give appropriate credit therefor. 
(f)  Each such payment received shall be expended only for the necessary engineering and related studies and the construction of those facilities for which the payment was required and, until so expended, shall be held in an interest-bearing account for the benefit of the subdivider. In lieu of such payment, the agent may accept a letter of credit satisfactory to the agent conditioned upon the payment at the commencement of construction. The payments received shall be kept in a separate account for each of the individual improvement programs until such time as they are expended for the improvement program. All payments shall be released and used, with any interest earned, as a tax credit on the real estate taxes on the property if construction of the facilities identified in the established water, sewer and drainage programs is not commenced within twelve (12) years from the date of the posting of the payment. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall imply or constitute an obligation on the part of the Town to upgrade or construct any sanitary sewerage, water or storm drainage facilities or prevent the subdivider from constructing on his own account and to satisfy his own schedule such off-site facilities necessary or desirable for the safe and proper provision of utility service to the subdivision in accordance with this subdivision ordinance and other ordinances of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2243. 
Sec. 5-103. - Improvements by developer. 
    All required subdivision improvements shall be installed by the subdivider at his or her cost. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-104. - Land for public purposes. 
    Where a subdivider dedicates or otherwise conveys land for public purposes including, but not limited to, parks, playgrounds, pump station lots, greenways, bikeways, and similar public uses, it shall be of a character, size, dimension, and location suitable for the particular use for which the land is dedicated or conveyed. Land held by the Town or other political subdivision or public agency is not required to meet the minimum street frontage, lot size, lot shape, or other lot requirements, so long as it is suitable for its public use. 
DIVISION 2. - LOT CHARACTERISTICS 

Sec. 5-200. - Lot shape. 
    The lot arrangement, design and shape shall be such that lots will provide appropriate sites for buildings and be properly related to topography so that each lot has an acceptable building site with direct access from an improved street. Lots shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations solely to provide necessary square footage of area which would be unusable for normal purposes. Subdividers are encouraged to shape and orient lots to maximize solar access. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-201. - Lot dimensions. 
    Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the Blacksburg Zoning Ordinance. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the Planning Commission or agent may require that those lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning ordinance and this ordinance. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the zoning ordinance. Townhouse lots may be subdivided along the party walls into lots smaller than those normally allowed for single-unit dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-202. - Lot orientation. 
    Each lot shall be served by and abut on a public street dedicated by the subdivision plat or on an existing public street. Lots shall be arranged so that each lot may access a local street, unless the parent parcel fronts only on an arterial or collector street and the parcel depth is insufficient to accommodate the construction of a new local street. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-203. - Lots dedicated to public use; common areas. 
    Lots dedicated to the Town for a public use and lots set aside as common area or open space are not required to meet the standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-204. - Remnants. 
    All land below minimum lot size left over after subdividing a tract shall be added to adjacent lots, or designated if appropriate as common area or parkland. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
DIVISION 3. - STREETS 

Sec. 5-300. - Subdivider to dedicate streets; private streets prohibited. 
(a)  Subject to all other applicable provisions of this ordinance, the following street improvements shall be installed and provided by the subdivider and shall be dedicated to the Town: 
(1)  Cross drains and catch basins 
(2)  Curbs and gutters 
(3)  Street paving 
(4)  Street name signs 
(5)  Traffic signalization 
(b)  Private streets shall not be allowed in any subdivision, nor shall there be private reserve strips controlling access to the street. This section shall not preclude the approval of parking lots and access drives for parking lots serving Townhouse, attached housing or multifamily dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-301. - Street names. 
    Street names shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plats and shall be approved by the agent or Planning Commission, as appropriate. Proposed streets which are in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the name of the existing street. In no case shall the name of the proposed streets duplicate or be similar, literally or phonetically, to existing street names, regardless of the use of the terms street, avenue, boulevard, driveway, place, lane or court. Names of existing streets shall not be changed except by the approval of the Town Council. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-302. - Dedication of streets. 
    The subdivider shall make provision for the dedication to the Town of proposed street extensions as set forth in the comprehensive plan or in other formal documents approved by the Planning Commission and Town Council and for the dedication to the Town of the fee simple title to land for other proposed streets in the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-303. - Access to adjoining property. 
    Where it is necessary for the orderly extension of the Town's transportation system to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary line of such property. Half streets along the boundary of land proposed for subdivision are not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-304. - Access from adjoining property. 
    The subdivider enjoys the right to tie into and access adjoining, existing streets under the guidelines and conditions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-305. - Coordination of streets with existing streets. 
(a)  The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas where streets already exist. Major, collector and local streets shall be respectively extended as such. The street arrangement must be such as to cause no unnecessary hardship to owners of adjoining property when the subdividers plat their land and seek to provide for convenient vehicle access to it. 
(b)  Access points to and from the subdivision and the arrangement of streets within the proposed subdivision and their relationship to adjoining, existing streets shall be such as to minimize the effects of traffic, noise, light and danger to pedestrians and children caused by vehicular traffic to and from the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2241. 
Sec. 5-306. - Inconsistent traffic flow prohibited. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 5-305 above, motor vehicle traffic which is inconsistent with and of more intense nature than the traffic in existing, residential neighborhoods adjacent to the proposed subdivision shall not be routed through this existing neighborhood. 
(b)  Inconsistent traffic would be traffic generated by a different type of land use. The types of land use for this purpose are: single-unit residential and agricultural; multiple unit and mobile home residential; commercial; industrial; and university. In the case of a planned development residential use, the character of the land use, as to land outside of the planned residential development and as to land within the planned residential development, shall be determined by the Planning Commission or agent, as appropriate, for purposes of this section using the functional categories set out above. 
(c)  "Intensity of traffic" refers to motor vehicle traffic generated by a particular type of land use. The higher the density allowed for a certain type of land use, the greater the intensity of motor vehicle traffic generated. Intensity does not refer to absolute numerical intensity. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-307. - Level of service. 
    No development shall be approved if such development, at ultimate build out, will result in or increase traffic on the arterial or collector street to which it is connected, so that the street does not function at an average daily traffic level of service C or better, or a peak traffic level D, as described in "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," latest edition, published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. The applicant may propose and construct approved traffic mitigation measures to provide adequate roadway capacity for the proposed development. The applicant for any development shall provide, at a minimum, the following information: 
(a)  Peak hour trip ends generated by the development as described in "Trip Generation," latest edition, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
(b)  Information on the street in which the connection is being made: peak hour traffic along with its directional distribution, lane and shoulder widths, the type of terrain, and the percentage of trucks, buses, and RV's on the connection street. The development engineer shall use this information to conduct a traffic capacity analysis as described in "The Highway Capacity Manual," latest edition, published by the Transportation Research Board. Additionally, the engineer shall determine if a left or right turn lane is necessary utilizing the "Minimum Standards of State Entrances" document, latest edition, published by the Virginia Department of Transportation. All or part of the traffic analysis may be waived by the director of engineering and GIS depending upon the type and size of development, the condition of the connection street, or an interpretation of the minimum information given above. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1278, § 17, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1465, § 1(d), 2-12-08) 
Sec. 5-308. - Approach angle. 
    All streets shall approach the major or collector streets at an angle of not less than eighty (80) degrees unless the agent or Planning Commission, by variance shall approve a lesser angle of approach for reasons of contour, terrain, or matching existing patterns. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-309. - Minimum right-of-way widths. 
(a)  The minimum right-of-way width of proposed streets shall be fifty (50) feet except for permanent culs-de-sac in which case the minimum width of the linear part of the cul-de-sac shall be forty (40) feet. 
(b)  If the existing streets within the subdivision are not fifty (50) feet in width the subdivider shall dedicate by subdivision plat so that such streets will meet the standards of this ordinance. 
(c)  If the existing streets abutting the subdivision are not fifty (50) feet in width, and if the need for additional right-of-way width is generated, in whole or in part, by the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate by subdivision plat additional right-of-way so that such streets will have a width of 25 feet from the center line where the street abuts the subdivided parcel. 
(d)  The agent may require additional right-of-way width where Virginia Department of Transportation standards for the traffic generated by the subdivision require additional width. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-310. - Culs-de-sac. 
(a)  A permanent cul-de-sac shall not be longer than nine hundred (900) feet, including the turnaround. The paved area of the bulb turnaround at the end of the cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of ninety (90) feet in diameter. In lieu of a bulb cul-de-sac, the agent or Planning Commission may permit a "T" or a "Y" cul-de-sac. 
(b)  Pavement on "T" turnarounds shall be at least forty (40) feet long and twenty (20) feet wide, which does not include the thirty (30) feet of roadway width at the "T." 
(c)  The pavement at a "Y" turnaround shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide and each leg shall be forty (40) feet long, and the radius and angle shall be adequate to permit vehicles to turn around on the paved surface. 
(d)  Rights-of-way at turnarounds and culs-de-sac shall be at least five (5) feet beyond the edge of the pavement or the back of the curve. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-311. - Traffic control devices. 
    The subdivider shall install traffic control devices within the subdivision and where subdivision streets connect with existing streets in accordance with Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices standards. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-312. - Turn lanes. 
    Turn lanes shall be provided on all streets adjacent to and within a subdivision where warranted by the standards of the "Minimum Standards of Entrances to State Highways," latest edition, published by the Virginia Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-313. - Street design. 
    Streets shall be designed as follows: 
(1)  Street grades may not exceed 10%, nor be less than 0.5% except as expressly approved by the agent or Planning Commission. 
(2)  Street intersections shall provide landings of not more than 5% grade for a distance of not less than 100 feet. 
(3)  All streets shall be designed and constructed with VDOT standard CG-6 curb and gutter and be a minimum of 30 feet in width or greater as required by VDOT subdivision street standards, based upon projected traffic generated by the development, except in the Rural Residential I, and Rural Residential II zoning districts or as expressly approved by Town Council as part of a planned residential or planned commercial zoning. 
(4)  In the Rural Residential I and II districts curb and gutter is not required. Further, the minimum street pavement width shall be 24 feet, or greater as required by VDOT subdivision street standards based upon projected traffic generated by the development. 
(5)  Street intersections shall be designed so as to provide a minimum stopping sight distance of 10 x the posted speed limit of the street. Intersection sight distance shall meet VDOT standards. 
(6)  Street pavement sections shall meet VDOT pavement design guidelines based upon a California Bearing Ratio ("CBR") of 10. The minimum roadway section shall be six (6) inches of aggregate base material (21-B) and two (2) inches of compacted SM2-A pavement. During construction, prior to subgrade approval by the Town, CBR test results must be provided to the Town, one per 400 feet of proposed roadway, or a minimum of three CBRs per subdivision. Pavement design based upon the actual CBRs shall be provided by a professional engineer. 
(7)  For design standards not explicitly set forth herein, Virginia Department of Transportation standards shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-314. - Street signs. 
    The subdivider shall be responsible for the cost of fabrication and installation of all street signs. Once the streets have been accepted for maintenance by the Town, the Town will maintain all standard signs. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-315. - Street inspections. 
    The subdivider is responsible for contacting the agent forty-eight (48) hours prior to required inspections. Base stone shall not be installed until the subgrade has been approved by the agent. No asphalt pavement shall be installed until the base stone has been inspected and approved by the agent. The agent may require compaction tests in areas suspected of inadequate compaction and may require undercutting and additional tests in areas that appear deficient during proof-rolling. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-316. - Handicap access. 
    Curb cut ramps for handicap access shall be provided at each intersection, for all streets within and adjacent to a subdivision, regardless of whether a sidewalk is installed at that location. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-317. - Blocks. 
    Design standards for blocks are as follows: 
(1)  Length: The length of blocks shall be determined by public safety, traffic flow, and natural topography considerations. Where streets are approximately parallel, connecting streets shall be provided between the parallel streets at reasonable intervals as established by application of the criteria in the preceding sentence. In general, residential blocks should be between five hundred fee (500') and twelve hundred feet (1200') in length. 
(2)  Width: Blocks shall be designed in two (2) tiers of lots, except where prevented by the natural topography, size of the property, or adjoining railroads or waterways, in which case the agent may approve a single tier of lots. Where the property to be subdivided adjoins an arterial road, the agent may require a single tier of lots and a restricted access easement along the arterial road. 
(3)  Orientation: Where a proposed subdivision adjoins an arterial or collector road, the agent may require that blocks be oriented and designed to limit or reduce the number of points of access to that road. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-318. - Driveways. 
(a)  A maximum of two driveway entrances per lot is permitted for single family dwellings and two family dwellings. The curb cut shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width and a maximum of 20 feet in width at the right-of-way line. Curb cuts on the same lot shall be separated by a minimum of 40 feet, measured from center line to center line. 
(b)  All entrances constructed from a new or existing street or road shall be in accordance with the "Minimum Standards of Entrances to State Highways" of the Virginia Department of Transportation, as amended from time to time, incorporated by reference except as these may be varied by this section. 
(c)  Driveways shall be located not less than 3 feet from a side lot line, unless a common drive is provided for two adjoining lots, in which case the driveway may be located adjacent to the side lot line. 
(d)  On local and collector streets, driveways shall be no closer than fifty (50) feet to an intersection with a public street measured according to diagram. 

(e)  On arterial streets, driveways shall be no closer than seventy-five (75) feet to an intersection with a public street measured according to diagram (see subsection 5-318(d). This dimension may be reduced by the agent or Planning Commission for lots without access to collector or local streets and where by reason of topography, sight distance or other similar considerations the seventy-five (75) foot dimension is not feasible. 
(f)  In the Rural Residential I and Rural Residential II zoning districts, the provisions of this section shall apply to all residential uses; provided, however, that no new driveway entrance shall be located on existing or proposed collector or arterial streets. All driveway entrances shall be located on local streets, unless the agent or Town Council by variance shall approve the location of an entrance on a collector street. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1339, § 32, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1415, § 35, 7-11-06; Amd. of 8-18-09) 
Sec. 5-319. - Street trees. 
    Street trees shall be provided along all collector and arterial streets within or adjacent to a proposed subdivision, in accordance with Section 5428 of the Zoning Ordinance [Appendix A]. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-320. - Medians. 
    Collector and arterial roads within a proposed subdivision shall be built with medians to provide for landscaping and to provide for efficient traffic movement. The medians shall meet the current standards of the Virginia Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-321. - Bicycle lanes. 
    All proposed collector and arterial streets within a subdivision shall be constructed with bicycle lanes. The bike lane width and intersection configuration shall meet current VDOT standards. Bike lanes may also be required on local streets as provided for in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-322. - Street lights. 
(a)  Street lights shall be provided on all collector and arterial streets within a subdivision. The street light layout shall be per Illumination Engineering Society standards. The Town will submit the lighting plan to the electric utility company for cost estimate for installation. The cost provided the Town will be per current contracts between the Town and the electric service provider. The installation cost shall be paid fifty (50) percent by the subdivider and fifty (50) percent by the Town. Payment is required or a security for payment provided to the Town, prior to subdivision plat approval. 
(b)  Street lights are not required to be installed upon local streets. The cost of providing street lights on local streets will not be shared by the Town. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-323. - Monuments visible for inspection. 
    Upon completion of subdivision streets, sewers and other improvements, the subdivider shall install at his expense all monuments required by the agent or Planning Commission. Such monuments shall be clearly visible and shall be inspected and approved by the agent before any improvements are accepted by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2241. 
Sec. 5-324. - Location of right-of-way iron rod. 
    Iron rods not less than five-eighths-inch in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches long shall be driven so as to be flush with the finished pavement at the following locations in the subdivision: the intersection of street center lines, intersection of street center lines with exterior boundaries of the subdivision, right-angle points and points of curve in street center lines and at all lot corners. When rock is encountered, a hole shall be drilled four (4) inches deep in the rock, and an iron rod shall be cemented therein with the top flush with the finished grade. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-325. - Standards for alleys. 
    In certain situations, the use of alleys may be a desirable alternative to the more traditional type of residential development. When new alleys are proposed for a subdivision, or when the improvement of existing alleys is proposed, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Frontage on an alley shall not be construed to satisfy any lot frontage requirements. 
(2)  Alleys shall be maintained and perpetuated by a duly constituted property owners' association and notations to this effect shall be clearly indicated on the face of the record plat. 
(3)  Alleys shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the potential for through traffic. 
(4)  Alleys shall have a minimum paved or sealed surface width of ten (10) feet. New alleys shall have a minimum right-of-way width of twenty (20) feet. 
(5)  Alleys to serve single-unit residential uses shall have chip and seal surface. Alleys to serve developments of greater intensity than single-unit residential uses shall have an asphalt surface constructed in accordance with Section 5-313 of this chapter. 
(6)  Sight distances which comply with Virginia Department of Transportation standards, and the standards of Town Code (1998) section 21-304 shall be provided at intersections with public streets. Alleys shall be built with a minimum pavement edge radius of 25 feet at their intersections with public streets. 
(7)  Alleys shall not dead end. Alleys shall end in an intersection with a public street, or in a cul-de-sac constructed to comply with the standards of section 5-310 of this ordinance. 
(8)  Alley length shall not exceed 1,000 feet without an intersecting street. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
DIVISION 4. - SIDEWALKS AND WALKWAYS 

Sec. 5-400. - Sidewalk and walkway policy. 
    Sidewalks and walkways within and adjacent to the subdivision are necessary to provide safe, convenient, and efficient transportation for the citizens of the Town. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-401. - Sidewalks required. 
(a)  The subdivider shall install and dedicate to the Town sidewalks along at least one side of all public streets within and adjacent to the subdivision. The sidewalks shall connect with existing sidewalks on streets adjacent to or within the land subdivided, and shall be placed so as to provide for eventual continuation with proposed or future sidewalks in the vicinity of the land subdivided. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by the Zoning Ordinance, sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete and shall be a minimum of five feet in width. A minimum four foot planting strip is required between the curb and sidewalk for pedestrian/vehicle separation and to provide for mailbox and utility service placement. 
(c)  Where there is no curb between the sidewalk and the street, the sidewalk shall be placed beyond the road shoulder and roadside ditch. Minimum separation in this case shall be as approved by the agent. 
(d)  Sidewalk construction materials and specifications shall meet current VDOT subdivision street standards, incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1369, § 16, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 1397, § 1, 10-11-05) 
Sec. 5-402. - Access to open space. 
(a)  Where common open space or public parkland is provided in a development, the subdivider shall provide pedestrian access to the site. 
(b)  Access to public parkland shall be dedicated to the Town. The access shall consist of a sidewalk which meets the requirements of section 5-401, above, or a bikeway, which meets the standards of section 5-503, below. 
(c)  Access to private common open space may be by a private access way. The access shall be paved with gravel, limestone dust, or asphalt. No minimum width is required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-403. - Sidewalk variance. 
(a)  The agent or the Planning Commission may waive the requirements of section 5-401 by granting a variance. In reviewing any request to eliminate sidewalks, the agent or Planning Commission shall consider the following issues: 
(1)  The existing sidewalk network in the area serving both short distance travel within the subdivision and longer distance travel; and 
(2)  The existing sidewalk network in the area; and 
(3)  The location of transit stops. 
(b)  The agent or Planning Commission may grant a variance to the requirement for sidewalks on classified local roads within a subdivision where an acceptable alternate internal asphalt walkway system is provided or proposed as part of the subdivision. This variance is not available for sidewalks on collector and arterial roads. If approved, all asphalt walkways shall be installed and dedicated to the Town. 
(1)  The agent or Planning Commission shall consider the following factors: 
(a)  The existing sidewalk network in the area serving both short distance travel within the subdivision and longer distance travel; 
(b)  Interconnections with existing bikeways or walkways shall be provided where possible; 
(c)  Consistent material shall be used when connecting to adjacent walkways. 
(d)  The alternative asphalt walkway serves as internal circulation for the subdivision providing access to all proposed lots in the subdivision; 
(e)  Interconnections with existing bikeways or walkways shall be provided where possible; 
(f)  Consistent material shall be used when connecting to adjacent walkways. 
(2)  The alternative walkway shall be constructed per section 5-503 construction and design standards. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1339, § 33, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 1415, § 36, 7-11-06) 
DIVISION 5. - BIKEWAYS 

Sec. 5-500 - Multi-use trails required. 
    A multi-use trail dedication and construction is required for proposed subdivisions where needed: 
(1)  To provide safe and more convenient access to schools, parks, the bikeway/greenway system or other public assembly areas. 
(2)  To provide safe and convenient access between adjacent subdivisions and certain dead-end streets within subdivisions to facilitate alternative transportation. 
(3)  To implement the concepts illustrated in the Comprehensive Plan's Bikeway/Greenway Master Plan when a rational nexus and rough proportionality exist. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1339, § 34, 9-9-03) 
Sec. 5-501 - Location of multi-use trails. 
    The location of the multi-use trail route shall be determined by the agent in consultation with appropriate departments of the Town. The trail route shall follow approximately the route provided for in the comprehensive plan, and it shall be placed so as to take into consideration the topography of the route, visibility, safe grades and curves for recreational use. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1339, § 35, 9-9-03) 
Sec. 5-502 - Access to future multi-use trails rights-of-way. 
    The agent or Planning Commission may require the reservation and development of rights-of-way for additional multi-use trails in new subdivisions where such routes are necessary for access to routes shown in the comprehensive plan . 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1339, § 36, 9-9-03) 
Sec. 5-503. - Construction and design standards. 
(a)  Multi-use trails shall be constructed of a minimum pavement section of 4" 21B aggregate and 1-1/2" SM2A asphalt. 
(b)  Multi-use trails shall be designed to minimize segments of trail where the slope exceeds 8%, to allow for handicap access. Where the slope exceeds 8%, pulloffs are required every 100 feet and a profile of the trail shall be submitted. 
(c)  Culvert crossings shall be provided where the multi-use trail crosses an existing or proposed drainage way so as to eliminate flow across the trail. The agent may waive this requirement where the flow across the trail is deemed insignificant, for example, less than 1 cubic foot per second. 
(d)  Minimum pavement width for multi-use trails is ten feet with a two foot graded and a three foot clear shoulder on each side 
(e)  Landings at road crossings shall be not more than 2% grade for a distance of fifteen (15) feet measured from the edge of the street pavement. 
(f)  Where the multi-use trail meets the curb, a handicap ramp shall be provided and approved by the Virginia Department of Transportation. 
(g)  A minimum four foot grass strip separation shall be maintained between the back of the curb and the asphalt trail. Where there is no curb between the asphalt trail and the street, the multi-use trail shall be placed beyond the road shoulder and roadside ditch. Minimum separation in this case shall be as approved by the agent or Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1339, § 37, 9-9-03) 
DIVISION 6. - WATER 

Sec. 5-600. - Public water required if available. 
(a)  Public water, if available to serve the proposed subdivision as determined by the agent, shall be extended at the subdivider's cost to all lots within a subdivision. Where the public water system is not available, individual wells may be installed; provided that such facilities are approved by the health official, the agent, and other applicable agencies. 
(b)  In considering the availability of public water, the agent shall consider the following criteria: the proximity of public waterlines; engineering feasibility and cost of extension of such lines to serve the subdivision; alternative sources of water; public health and safety of the proposed subdivision; and the Town's plans for waterline extension in the area; whether an alternate source of water, acceptable to the fire department, is available or will be provided for fire suppression purposes. 
(c)  If public water facilities are reasonably available to serve the proposed subdivision, but inadequate capacity as determined by the agent exists, the subdivider shall at his expense upgrade the public water mains or facilities to provide the additional capacity. Adequate capacity shall be determined as enabling 1,000 gallons per minute fire flow to be attained at the critical hydrant as determined by the agent, without dropping residual pressures elsewhere within the public water system to or below 20 pounds per square inch. 
(d)  Unless public water is determined not to be available, the subdivider shall install the public water distribution system within the subdivision, including water mains, service lateral through the curb line for each lot, and fire hydrants, and upon its completion, shall dedicate and convey title to the water distribution system to the Town. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-601. - Construction and design standards. 
(a)  Public water system design and construction shall be in accordance with Town Water Specifications incorporated by reference, and Chapter 24 of the Blacksburg Code. Fire hydrant placement shall be as specified in Town water specifications. 
(b)  Water mains shall be looped within or through the subdivision. 
(c)  Water meters shall be located on a lot corner remote from the electric service. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-602. - Placement of water laterals. 
    Public water shall be designed and constructed to be available to each lot, such that individual laterals shall not extend across lots to the served lot. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
DIVISION 7. - SANITARY SEWER 

Sec. 5-700. - Sanitary sewer required if available. 
(a)  Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems where available and adequate capacity exists. When sanitary sewers are not available, as determined by the agent, the agent shall require a written statement from the health official certifying that the area contained in the subdivision is satisfactory for the installation of septic systems, and that such septic systems will not create a public health hazard. 
(b)  In the Tom's Creek Basin Unsewered Area, public sanitary sewer shall be provided by STEG or STEP systems. The boundaries of the "Tom's Creek Basin Unsewered Area" are depicted on the map bearing the title "Areas of Town Where Public Sanitary Sewer Required for Development Shall Be Provided With STEG or STEP Systems," as approved by the town council and on file in the town clerk's office. 
(c)  In areas in which the town council has determined that conventional sewer service is not practical, public sanitary sewer shall be provided by STEG or STEP systems. The boundaries of the areas in which conventional sewer service has been determined to be impractical are shown on the map bearing the title "Areas of Town Where Public Sanitary Sewer Required for Development Shall Be Provided with STEG or STEP Systems," as approved by the town council and on file in the town clerk's office. 
(d)  If public sanitary sewerage facilities are reasonably available to serve the proposed subdivision, but the agent determines that there is not adequate capacity, the subdivider shall at his or her expense upgrade the sanitary sewerage lines or facilities to provide the additional capacity. The agent shall evaluate the downstream sewer system to the point where the flow contributed by the subdivision is less than one (1) percent of the flow in the system. 
(e)  In considering the availability of a public sewer, the agent shall consider the following criteria: the proximity of public sewer lines; engineering feasibility and cost of extension of such lines to serve the subdivision; the location of the subdivision in relation to the Tom's Creek Basin Unsewered Area or areas that the town council has determined are not practical to serve with conventional sewer service; public health and safety of the proposed subdivision; and the town's plans for sewer line extension or service in the area. 
(f)  Unless public sewer is determined not to be available, the subdivider shall install the sanitary sewer system within the subdivision and connect to an existing town system, in accordance with the standards of this division, and upon its completion, shall dedicate and convey title to the sanitary sewer system to the town. 
(g)  The sanitary sewerage plan shall include calculations of the amount of sanitary flow to be discharged from the subdivision upon complete occupancy of the site. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-14-09) 
Sec. 5-701. - Construction and design of sanitary sewer. 
(a)  The sanitary sewer shall be designed and constructed so as to serve by gravity the lowest floor elevation of proposed structures on all lots. 
(b)  The STEG system shall be designed so as to serve by gravity the individual lots, in accordance with Town Sanitary Sewer Specifications. Minor subdivisions (five (5) lots or fewer) may use STEP tanks if all lots cannot be served with STEG tanks. Major subdivisions shall be designed to maximize lots served with STEG, and provide public lift stations where necessary to minimize or eliminate individual STEP tanks. A variance to the requirements of this subsection may be granted by the agent. In reviewing any variance request, the agent shall, in consultation with the director of engineering and GIS, consider the site conditions of the proposed subdivision and public maintenance considerations. However, no variance may be granted if the site conditions in question were created by the subdivider. 
(c)  The STEG or STEP tank shall be located on the property that it serves or as allowed by the town sanitary sewer specifications. 
(d)  Public sewer shall be designed and constructed to be available to each lot, such that individual laterals shall not extend across lots to the served lot. 
(e)  Sewer design and construction shall be in accordance with Town Sanitary Sewer Specifications and Chapter 18 of the Blacksburg Code. 
(Ord. No. 1278, § 18, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 1308, § 69, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1467, § 1, 7-14-09) 
DIVISION 8. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 5-800. - Stormwater management required. 
(a)  The subdivider shall design and construct stormwater management facilities for the subdivision. The design shall include, but not be limited to, an analysis of: proposed stormwater drainage facilities, pre- or post-development stormwater runoff calculations, impacts on downstream properties, impacts upon downstream storm water management facilities, and existing and potential runoff from upstream drainage areas. All designs for stormwater management shall be in accordance with professionally accepted hydraulic engineering practices, the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook or any later, comparable source, Chapter 10 of the Blacksburg Code, and formal stormwater policies of the Town. 
(b)  The subdivider shall install the stormwater management system, including detention facilities. 
(c)  Each phase of a phased subdivision shall demonstrate compliance with these stormwater management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2241. 
Sec. 5-801. - Capacity standards for stormwater management facilities. 
(a)  The engineering calculations shall demonstrate that runoff from the subdivision post-development will be detained to pre-development levels as evaluated under the ten-year frequency storm, and under the two-year frequency storm. Evaluation and detention of storms more frequent than a two-year storm may be required by the Town Engineer on a case by case basis. Evaluation shall include downstream conditions, size of proposed impervious area, or total flow from the proposed detention facility or development. Stormwater detention may be waived by the agent if the subdivider provides field survey verification and calculations demonstrating that the existing downstream system is adequate to carry the increased runoff from the development to the point where the increased runoff is less than one (1) percent of the contributing flow. A regional stormwater management plan, adopted by Town Council, may establish a different detention standard for areas within the region. Detention of lower frequency storms shall be required by the agent if required by the relevant regional stormwater management plan. Where possible, the subdivider shall maintain pre-development runoff velocities and overland flows to encourage groundwater recharge, using engineering methods conducive to groundwater recharge. 
(b)  The engineering calculations shall demonstrate the safe passage of the 25-year storm and the 100-year storm through the stormwater management facility. Where the routing of these storms directs flow over a road crossing, the depth of flow over the road shall not exceed one (1) foot. 
(c)  Where the downstream channel is inadequate to carry the outfall from the detention pond, the 25-year storm shall also be detained to pre-development levels and the discharge from the pond shall be restricted so as to conform to the erosion and sediment control standards of Chapter 10 of the Blacksburg Code. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1339, § 38, 9-9-03) 
Sec. 5-802. - Regional stormwater management plans and facilities. 
    When a subdivision is located partially or wholly within an area for which a regional stormwater management plan has been adopted by Town Council, the subdivider shall share in the cost of downstream regional facilities, per the terms of Section 5-102, above. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-803. - Use of watercourses and low-lying lands. 
(a)  Watercourses that drain one hundred (100) acres or more shall be preserved in their natural state as drainage ways. 
(b)  Low-lying lands along such water courses, subject to flooding during a 100-year storm or more frequently, shall be preserved in their natural state as drainage ways. 
(c)  The subdivider shall retain natural drainage patterns and routes. The transfer of stormwater from one (1) natural drainage basin to another shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-804. - Maintenance of stormwater management facilities. 
    Stormwater management facilities serving a subdivision shall be maintained by the homeowner's association or equivalent body for that subdivision, unless Town maintenance or another arrangement is approved by the agent. A maintenance plan for the facilities shall be provided as part of the engineering plan for the subdivision, and maintenance responsibility shall be designated on the subdivision plat. The subdivider shall provide a maintenance easement to the party responsible for maintaining the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-805. - Storm drainage design and construction. 
    The subdivider shall design and construct a storm drainage system for the subdivision. Design and construction of the storm drainage system, including inlets, pipes, culverts, and appurtenances shall be in accordance with VDOT standards. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-806. - Drainage easements. 
    The subdivider shall dedicate drainage easements to the Town consistent with the storm water management plan for the subdivision. All drainage easements offered for dedication shall have a minimum width of fifteen feet. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
DIVISION 9. - OTHER UTILITIES 

Sec. 5-900. - Underground utility wiring. 
(a)  All new or extended transmission, distribution and customer service utility facilities installed within the boundaries of new subdivisions or within two hundred (200) feet of the boundaries of new subdivisions for the purpose of serving the subdivision shall be underground, except: 
(1)  Equipment normally installed above ground in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground distribution. 
(2)  Temporary overhead facilities required for construction. 
(b)  Streetlights, where provided, shall be installed with underground service. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-901. - Public utility easements. 
    The subdivider shall convey a 15 foot wide common or shared public utility easement centered on all interior lot lines and interior to all perimeter lot lines, to franchised cable television operators furnishing cable television and public service corporations furnishing cable television, gas, telephone, and electric service to the subdivision. Such easements may be conveyed by reference on the final plat to a declaration of the terms and conditions of such common easements and recorded in the Montgomery County land records. The agent may require a wider easement where necessary to provide adequate separation between water, sewer, and/or stormwater management facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2241(6). 
DIVISION 10. - RESERVATION OR DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS 

Sec. 5-1000. - Purpose. 
    Residential subdivision development generates demands and needs for public services and facilities. These include public parks and playgrounds the need for which is uniquely attributable to the subdivision. This need is best met on the site of the subdivision, by a reservation or dedication of land. This division shall set standards for the reservation or dedication of land for neighborhood parks and playgrounds. The requirements in this division shall be in addition to the requirements for public streets, easements, utilities, or rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-1001. - Reservation required. 
    The subdivider shall dedicate for public use a minimum of 10% of the total land area of the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-1002. - Private common space alternative. 
    Instead of dedicating land to the public as required by section 5-1001, above, the subdivider may reserve 10% of the total land area of the subdivision for private common recreation space. This area will be clearly identified on the subdivision plat. Any subdivider choosing this option shall form a homeowner's association for the maintenance of the space, and submit the homeowner's association documents to the agent or Planning Commission, as appropriate, for approval prior to approval of the final plat. The subdivider shall also submit plans for the park or playground to the agent. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
Sec. 5-1003. - Fee in lieu. 
    When in the opinion of the agent or the Planning Commission, as appropriate, based on the purposes and standards of this division, there is not a suitable or reasonable site within the subdivision for public or private land as described in this section, the subdivider shall pay to the Town an amount of money equal to the assessed value of the land that would be required by section 5-1000, above. In determining suitability and reasonableness, the agent or Planning Commission shall consider the purpose of the proposed dedicated land, its location, accessibility and topography, composition and flooding potential. This fee must be paid prior to approval of the final subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
ARTICLE VII. - REPLATS AND VACATION OF PLATS. 

Sec. 7-100. - Relocation or vacation of boundary lines. 
(a)  The boundary lines of any lot or parcel of land may be vacated, relocated or otherwise altered as a part of an otherwise valid and properly recorded plat of subdivision or resubdivision. Such action shall not involve the relocation or alteration of streets, alleys, easements for public passage, or other public areas. No easements or utility rights-of-way shall be relocated or altered without the express consent of all persons holding any interest therein. 
(b)  In a boundary line adjustment, the requirements to construct and dedicate streets, sidewalks, curb and gutter, bikeways, and public lands shall not be mandatory, unless the boundary line adjustment creates buildable lots from unbuildable lots. A buildable lot is one which complies with the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2275. 
Sec. 7-101. - Vacation of plat before sale of lot therein; by the owners. 
(a)  The owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, who signed the statement of consent to subdivide on the final recorded subdivision plat of any subdivision, may apply in writing for the vacation of the recorded plat or part thereof. The agent shall refer the application to the Planning Commission, which shall review the application for its consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Commission shall forward the application, with its recommendation, to the Town Council for action. 
(b)  With the consent of the Town Council, the owners, proprietors and trustees shall duly execute, acknowledge and record in the Montgomery County Circuit Court Clerk's office a written instrument declaring the plat or part thereof to be vacated. The Town Council's consent shall appear on the face of the instrument, by the signature of the mayor or agent. The effect of recording this instrument shall be to divest all public rights in, and to reinvest the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, with the title to the streets, alleys, easements for public passage and other public areas laid out or described in the plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2271. 
Sec. 7-102. - Vacation of plat before sale of lot therein; ordinance of vacation. 
(a)  The Town Council may adopt an ordinance vacating a recorded plat, or part thereof, where no lot has been sold. The Town Council may refer the ordinance to the Planning Commission for a review and recommendation in light of the Town's Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  The ordinance shall not be adopted until after notice has been given as required by Virginia Code, 1950, as amended § 15.2-2204. The notice shall clearly describe the plat or portion thereof to be vacated and state the time and place of the meeting of the governing body at which the adoption of the ordinance will be voted upon. Any person may appear at the meeting for the purpose of objecting to the adoption of the ordinance. 
(c)  An appeal from the adoption of the ordinance may be filed with the Montgomery County Circuit Court within thirty days of the adoption of the ordinance. Upon appeal the court may nullify the ordinance if it finds that the owner of the property shown on the plat will be irreparably damaged. 
(d)  If no appeal from the adoption of the ordinance is filed within the time above provided or if the ordinance is upheld on appeal, a certified copy of the ordinance of vacation may be recorded in the Montgomery County Circuit Court Clerk's office. 
(e)  The execution and recordation of the ordinance of vacation shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat, or any portion thereof, so vacated, and to divest all public rights in and to the property and reinvest the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, with the title to the streets, alleys, and easements for public passage and other public areas laid out or described in the plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2271. 
Sec. 7-103. - Vacation of plat after sale of lot; consent of all owners. 
(a)  The owners of all lots shown on a subdivision plat may apply in writing for the vacation of the recorded plat or part thereof. For the purposes of this section, the word "owners" shall not include lien creditors except those whose debts are secured by a recorded deed of trust or mortgage and shall not include a consort of an owner. 
(b)  In cases involving drainage easements or street rights-of-way where the vacation does not impede or alter drainage or access for any lot owners other than those lots owners immediately adjoining or contiguous to the vacated area, only the signature of those lot owners immediately adjoining or contiguous to the vacated area shall be required. 
(c)  The agent shall refer the application to the Planning Commission, which shall review the application for its consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Commission shall forward the application, with its recommendation, to the Town Council for action. 
(d)  With the consent of the Town Council, the owners shall duly execute, acknowledge and record in the Montgomery County Circuit Court Clerk's office a written instrument declaring the plat or portion thereof to be vacated. The Town Council's consent shall appear on the face of the instrument, by the signature of the mayor or agent. The effect of recording this instrument shall be to divest all public rights in, and to reinvest the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, with the title to the streets, alleys, easements for public passage and other public areas laid out or described in the plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2272. 
Sec. 7-104. - Vacation of plat after sale of lot; ordinance of vacation. 
(a)  The Town Council may adopt an ordinance vacating a recorded plat, or part thereof, where a lot has been sold. The ordinance may be initiated by motion of one of the Town Council members or on the application of any interested person. The Town Council may refer the ordinance to the Planning Commission for a review and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall consider the Town's comprehensive plan and whether the proposed vacation would irreparably damage the owner of any lot shown on the plat. 
(b)  The ordinance shall not be adopted until after notice has been given as required by Virginia Code, 1950, as amended § 15.2-2204. The notice shall clearly describe the plat or portion thereof to be vacated and state the time and place of the meeting of the governing body at which the adoption of the ordinance will be voted upon. Any person may appear at the meeting for the purpose of objecting to the adoption of the ordinance. 
(c)  An appeal from the adoption of the ordinance may be filed with the Montgomery County Circuit Court within thirty days of the adoption of the ordinance. Upon appeal the court may nullify the ordinance if it finds that the owner of the property shown on the plat will be irreparably damaged. 
(d)  If no appeal from the adoption of the ordinance is filed within the time above provided or if the ordinance is upheld on appeal, a certified copy of the ordinance of vacation may be recorded in the Montgomery County Circuit Court Clerk's office. 
(e)  The execution and recordation of the ordinance of vacation shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat, or any portion thereof, so vacated, and to divest all public rights in and to the property and reinvest the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, with the title to the streets, alleys, and easements for public passage and other public areas laid out or described in the plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2272. 
Sec. 7-105. - Effect of vacation of plat after lot has been sold. 
    The recordation of the instrument as provided in section 7-103 or of the ordinance as provided in section 7-104 shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat or part thereof so vacated, and to vest fee simple title to the centerline of any streets, alleys or easements for public passage so vacated in the owners of abutting lots free and clear of any rights of the public or other owners of lots shown on the plat, but subject to the rights of the owners of any public utility installations which have been previously erected therein. If any street, alley or easement for public passage is located on the periphery of the plat, the title for the entire width thereof shall vest in the abutting lot owners. The fee simple title to any portion of the plat so vacated as was set apart for other public use shall be revested in the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, who signed the statement of consent to the subdivision, on the final recorded subdivision plat, free and clear of any rights of public use in the same. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
State Law reference- Va. Code § 15.2-2274. 
Sec. 7-106. - Notation on vacated plat. 
    Immediately upon the vacation of a recorded subdivision plat, or part thereof, the clerk of the circuit court shall write in plain legible letters across such plat or part thereof, the word, "VACATED" and also make a reference on the same to the volume and page in which the instrument of vacation is recorded. The agent shall cause similar notations to be made on the Town's official copy of the plat. 
(Ord. No. 1217, § 2, 12-14-99) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the town used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the publication and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 1166  9- 9-97 App. A, § 2103 1170 11-11-97 App. A, § 1182, App. A, § 1183 App. A, § 3022 App. A, § 3041 App. A, § 3051 App. A, § 3061 App. A, § 3081 App. A, § 3091 App. A, § 3112 App. A, § 3122 App. A, § 3141 App. A, § 3151 App. A, § 3161 App. A, § 3181 App. A, § 3191 App. A, § 3201 App. A, § 4720 1180  2- 9-98 App. A, § 2103 1184  6- 9-98 App. A App. A, § 1109 App. A, § 1127 App. A, § 1150 App. A, § 1184 App. A, § 1210 App. A, § 1213 App. A, § 1231 App. A, § 1233, App. A, § 1234 App. A, § 1238 App. A, § 1244 App. A, § 2103 App. A, § 3020, App. A, § 3021 App. A, § 3023 App. A, § 3030 App. A, § 3052 App. A, § 3062 App. A, § 3081, App. A, § 3082 App. A, § 3091, App. A, § 3092 App. A, § 3113 App. A, § 3123 App. A, § 3143 App. A, § 3152 App. A, § 3161 App. A, § 3201 App. A, § 3231 App. A, § 3241 App. A, § 3263 App. A, § 4220 App. A, § 4241 App. A, § 4512 App. A, § 4703 App. A, § 4719 App. A, § 5100 App. A, § 5130 App. A, § 5202 App. A, § 5204 App. A, § 5331 App. A, § 5427 App. A, § 5429 App. A, § 5523 App. A, § 5770 1188 11-10-98 1 App. A, § 2103 1199 11-10-98 1 22-222 2 22-224 1206  5-11-99 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 3300-3325 2 App. A, § 2103 3       Added App. A, §§ 3270-3279 1207  3- 9-99 1       Added 12-417 1210  4-27-99 3 22-200 10 18-109(a), (b) 11 18-201(b) 12 24-301(b) 13 24-306(a) 14 18-400(a), (b) 15 24-602(a) 16 22-800 1213  6- 8-99 1 23-102(a)(1) 1215  5-11-99 1       Added App. A, § 1110 2 App. A, § 1211 3 App. A, § 1231(a) 4 App. A, § 1238(b) 5 App. A, § 2103 6 App. A, § 3022 7 App. A, § 3023(c) 8 App. A, § 3041(a) 9 App. A, § 3042(b) 10 App. A, § 3051(a) 11 App. A, § 3052(a)(1) 12 App. A, § 3061(a) 13 App. A, § 3062(a)(1), (c)(2) 14 App. A, § 3081 15 App. A, § 3082(a)(1), (c)(2) 16 App. A, § 3091(a) 17 App. A, § 3092(a)(1), (c)(2) 18 App. A, § 3113(d)(6) 19 App. A, § 3141(b) 20 App. A, § 3143(e) 21 App. A, § 3151(a), (b) 22 App. A, § 3161(b) 23 App. A, § 3191(b) 24 App. A, § 3203(e) 25 App. A, § 3231 26       Rnbd App. A, § 3235       as App. A, § 3236       Added App. A, § 3235 27 App. A, § 4328(a)(1) 28 App. A, § 4703       Added App. A, § 4703(c)(3) 29 App. A, § 5120(b) 30 App. A, § 5201(a) 31       Rpld App. A, § 5240(3) 32 App. A, § 5310(i) 33 App. A, § 5426(a) 34 App. A, §§ 4216(a)(4), 4231(b)(6), 4241(a)(2), 4304(a)(2), 4306(a)(1), 4308(b)(3), 4310(b)(2), 4313(b)(2), 4321(b)(2), 4326(b)(2), 4331(b)(3), 4338(b)(2), 4339(b)(3), 4341(b)(5), 4410(b)(5), 4420(b)(7), 4430(b)(2), 4521(b)(10), 4523(a)(1), 4525(b)(10), 4529(a)(1), 4555(b)(12), 4559(b)(11), 4561(b)(12), 4564(b)(11), 5221(1) 1217 12-14-99 2       Added App. B, §§ 1-100-7-106 1219  6- 8-99 1 6-201(b) 2       Added 6-400-6-411 3       Added 24-107(5) 1225  8-10-99 1 5-202(a), (c),       Added 5-202(e)-(g) 2       Added 6-102 3 6-203 4       Added 6-500-6-505 5 11-101 6       Added 11-507 7 14-204 8       Added 14-301-14-309 9 16-304(a) 10 16-500(c) 11 16-501(c)       Added 16-501(d) 12 20-205(a) 13 21-115(f) 14       Added 21-116 15 22-112 1229 12-14-99 1       Added 22-231 1231  1-11-00 1 App. A, § 5520(c) 2       Added App. A, § 5525 1235  4-25-00 12 18-109(a), (b) 13 18-201(b) 14 24-301(b) 15 24-306(a), (b) 16 18-400(a), (b) 17 24-602(a) 18 20-206 1238  5- 9-00 1 12-401 1242  6-13-00 1 12-309(a)       Added 12-309(h), (i) 1244 10- 2-00 1 1-113 2 2-306 3       Rpld 5-204(b) 5-204(k) 4 6-203(a) 5 11-203(g) 6 12-200(b), (c) 7       Added 12-400(a)(16), (17) 8 14-107(a) 9       Added 14-108(a)       Rnbd 14-108(a)-(c)       as 14-108(b)-(d) 10 14-110 11 14-200 12 16-107(1)a.       Added 16-107(d)1.-3. 16-107(2) 13 16-116(2) 14 16-200(a), (b) 15 16-201(a), 16-201(c)(5) 17       Added 22-130(c) 18 24-310(a) 1245  7-11-00 1       Rpld 22-700-22-706 2       Added 22-700-22-707 1247  9-12-00 1       Added App. A, § 1111 2 App. A, § 1140(a) 3 App. A, § 1141 4 App. A, § 1233(a)(1), (2) 5 App. A, § 1236(a) 6 App. A, § 1238(b) 10 2-00 7       Added App. A, § 1241(b)       Rnbd App. A, § 1241(b)-(d)       as App. A, § 1241(c)-(e) 8 App. A, § 2103 9 App. A, § 3032(a), (d) 10       Rpld App. A, § 3142(j) 11 App. A, § 3152(i) 12 App. A, § 3191(a) 13 App. A, § 4313(a)(1)       Added App. A, § 4313(c) 14       Rpld App. A, § 4328(b)(1)       Rnbd App. A, § 4328(b)(2), (3)       as App. A, § 4328(b)(1), (2) 15 App. A, § 4525(a)(1), App. A, § 4525(b)(6) 16 App. A, § 4559(a)(1) 17       Added App. A, § 4720(a)       Rnbd App. A, § 4720(a)-(c)       as App. A, § 4720(b)-(d) 18 App. A, § 5100(a) 19 App. A, § 5130(f)(8) 20 App. A, § 5331(b)(2) 21 App. A, § 5425 22       Rpld App. A, § 5502(6), (11), (14), (17) 23       Added App. A, § 5504 24 App. A, § 5534(b) 25 App. A, § 5535(b) 26 App. A, § 5536(b) 27       Rpld App. A, §§ 5560, 5561 1250  9-12-00 1 24-606(a) 2 24-607 1253 10-10-00 1 22-100 2       Rpld 22-400(c) 3       Added 22-410 4       Added 22-411 1258  1- 9-01 1 App. A, § 3022 2       Added App. A, § 4306       Rnbd App. A, §§ 4306-4309       as App. A, §§ 4307-4309 3 App. A, § 4328(b)(2)a. 1230  2-13-01 1       Rpld 24-700-24-712 2       Added 24-700-24-713 3       Added 24-115(a)(10) 1264  3-13-01 1 21-201 2 21-202 1265  3-13-01 1 18-400 2 24-602 1266  3-13-01 1       Added 6-200(b) 1267  4-10-01 1       Rnbd 12-417       as 12-418       Added 12-417 1270  4-24-01 12 18-109 13 18-201(b) 14 24-301(b) 15 24-306 16 18-400(a)       Rpld 18-400(b)(1)       Rnbd 18-400(b)(2)       as 18-400(b)(1)       Rpld 18-400(b)(3)       Rnbd 18-400(b)(4)       as 18-400(b)(2) 1274  8-14-01 1       Rpld 4-409(b)(9)       Rnbd 4-409(b)(10)-(12)       as 4-409(b)(9)-(11) 2 10-205(3) 3 10-213(a) 4 12-112 5 14-201(b) 6 14-205 7 18-204 8 18-503(3)(g), (s) 9 21-614 10 21-626 11 24-11 12 24-601(a)       Rpld 24-601(b)       Rnbd 24-601(c)-(e)       as 24-601(b)-(d) 13       Added 24-602(d) 1278 11-13-01 1 App. A, § 1200(a) 2       Added App. A, § 1213       Rnbd App. A, § 1213       as App. A, § 1214 3 App. A, § 2103 4 App. A, § 3141(a), (b) 5 App. A, § 3151(a) 6 App. A, § 3161(a) 7 App. A, § 3181(a) 8 App. A, § 3182(f) 9 App. A, § 3191(a) 10 App. A, § 3201(a) 11 App. A, § 3211 12       Added App. A, § 4241(d) 13 App. A, § 4527(a)(2) 14 App. A, § 5503(8) 15 App. A, § 5523(a), (e) 16       Added App. A, § 5531(d) 17 App. B, § 5-307 18       Rpld App. B, § 5-701(b) 1281 10- 9-01 1 10-204(a)       Rpld 10-204(c) 2       Added 21-501(c) 1283 10- 9-01 1 13-101 2 13-102 3 13-103(d), (h)       Added 13-103(m), (n) 4 13-105(a)(8) 5 13-106(a), (b)(7) 6       Rpld 13-107 1286 11-13-01 1 App. A, § 3191(b) 1290 12-11-01 A App. A, § 3201(b) 1293  1-22-02 1       Added 2-412 1306  6-11-02 1       Rpld 20-100-20-102, 20-200-20-214, 20-301-20-308       Added 20-100-20-104, 20-120, 20-121, 20-130, 20-131, 20-140-20-142, 20-200-20-209, 20-220, 20-221 20-400-20-404 1308  8-13-02 1       Added App. A, § 1150(a)(4) 2 App. A, § 1201(a)(2) 3       Added App. A, § 1234(i) 4 App. A, § 2103 5 App. A, § 3022 6 App. A, § 3081(b) 7 App. A, § 3091(b) 8       Rpld App. A, § 3152(i)       Rnbd App. A, § 3152(j)-(l)       as App. A, § 3152(i)-(k) 9 App. A, § 3201 10 App. A, § 3241 11 App. A, § 4241(d)(3) 12       Added App. A, § 4308(1)(tit.), (2) 13       Added App. A, § 4309(c) 14 App. A, § 4310(b)       Added App. A, § 4310(e) 15 App. A, § 4313(b)       Added App. A, § 4313(d) 16 App. A, § 4319(b)       Added App. A, § 4319(d) 17 App. A, § 4321(b) 18       Added App. A, § 4321(d) 19       Added App. A, § 4326(c) 20       Added App. A, § 4331(c) 21       Added App. A, § 4331.1 22 App. A, § 4338(b)       Added App. A, § 4338(d) 23       Added App. A, § 4339(c) 24       Added App. A, § 4341(d) 25       Added App. A, § 4350(h) 26       Added App. A, § 4410(f) 27       Added App. A, § 4420(d) 28       Added App. A, § 4430(e) 29       Added App. A, § 4509(e) 30 App. A, § 4510(a)(tit.)       Added App. A, § 4510(b) 31       Added App. A, § 4511(e) 32 App. A, § 4512(a)(3)       Added App. A, § 4512(c) 33       Added App. A, § 4513 34       Added App. A, § 4516(c) 35       Added App. A, § 4521(e) 36       Added App. A, §§ 4521.1-4521.4 37       Added App. A, § 4522(c) 38 App. A, § 4523(tit.) 39       Added App. A, § 4523.1 40 App. A, § 4524 41       Added App. A, 4525(c) 42       Added App. A, § 4526(b) 43       Added App. A, § 4527(d) 44       Added App. A, §§ 4528.1, 4528.2 45       Added App. A, § 4531(b) 46 App. A, § 4541(a)       Rnbd App. A, § 4541(b)-(g)       as App. A, § 4541(1)-(7)       Added App. A, 4541(b) 47 App. A, § 4542(b)(15), (c) 48       Added App. A, §§4544-4546 49       Added App. A, § 4552(b) 50       Added App. A, § 4552.1 51       Added App. A, § 4553(b) 52       Added App. A, § 4555(d) 53       Added App. A, § 4559(c) 54       Added App. A, § 4561(c) 55 App. A, § 4564(b)       Added App. A, § 4564(d) 56       Added App. A, § 4565 57       Added App. A, § 4605(c) 58       Added App. A, § 4606 59 App. A, § 4626(a)       Rnbd App. A, § 4626(a), (b)       as App, A, § 4626(a)(1), (2)       Added App. A, § 4626(b) 60 App. A, § 4720(b)(1)c.       Added App. A, § 4720(e) 61       Added App. A, § 5120(g) 62 App. A, § 5220(b) 63 App. A, § 5330(b)(4) 64 App. A, § 5429 65       Rpld App. A, § 5502(7) 66 App. A, § 5504(e) 67 App. A, § 5600(a), (b), (e) App. A, § 5601 68 App. B, § 4-209 69       Rpld App. B, § 5-701(c) 1309  8-13-02 1       Added Ch. 12, art. IV, div. 4(tit.) §§ 12-650-12-658 1314 10- 8-02 6       Added 12-414(b)       Rnbd 12-414(b)       as 12-414(c)       Added 12-104(d)       Rnbd 12-414(c)       as 12-414(e) 7 12-503 1321  2-11-03 1       Added 6-400(c)       Added 6-402(c)       Rnbd 6-402(c)       as 6-402(d) 6-403(a) 6-404 1329  5-13-03 12 18-109(a), (b) 13 18-201(b) 14 24-301(b) 15 24-306(a), (b) 16 18-400(a), (b) 17 24-602(a)(1), (2) 18 20-206 1332  6-10-03 1 22-900 1333  5-10-03 1 22-701 1339  9- 9-03 1 App. A, § 1213 A., C. 2 App. A, § 1234(i) 3 App. A, § 1237(c) 4 App. A, § 2103 5 App. A, § 3123(e)(2)       Added App. A, § 3123(e)(4) 6       Rpld App. A, § 3142(f) 7 App. A, § 3181(a) 8 App. A, § 3191(a), (b) 9 App. A, § 3141 10 App. A, § 3243(a) App. A, § 3243(a)(1)       Added App. A, § 3243(b) 11 App. A, § 3244(a)       Added App. A, § 3244(b)       Rnbd App. A, § 3244(b)       as App. A, § 3244(c) 12 App. A, § 3245(a)       Added App. A, § 3245(b) 13 App. A, § 3246(a)       Added App. A, § 3246(b) 14 App. A, § 3247(e) 15 App. A, § 3251 16       Rpld App. A, § 4225(b)(2)f.(1)-(3) 17 App. A, § 4328(b)(1) 18       Added App. A, § 4333 19 App. A, § 4420(b)(2) 20 App. A, § 4430(c)(2) 21 App. A, § 4720(b)(4)d. 22 App. A, § 5533(d) 23 App. A, § 5534(e) 24       Added App. A, Div. 6, §§ 5600, 5601 25       Rpld App. A, § 5769 26 App. A, § 5790(c) 27 App. A, §§ 4308(2), 4309(c), 4310(e), 4313(d), 4319(d), 4321(d), 4326(c), 4331(c), 4331.1, 4338(d), 4339(c), 4341(d), 4350(h), 4410(f), 4420(d), 4430(e), 4509(e), 4512(c), 4521(e), 4321.1, 4521.2, 4521.3, 4521.4, 4523.1, 4525(c), 4537(d), 4528.1, 4528.2, 4542(c), 4544, 4545, 4546, 4552.1, 4553(b), 4555(d), 4559(c), 4561(c), 4564(d), 4565 28 App. A, §§ 3022, 3041(b), 3051(b), 3061(b) 29 App. A, §§ 3081(a), 3091(a), 3111(a), 3121(a), 3141(a), 3151(a), 3161(a), 3181(a) 30 App. B, § 3-100(c) 31 App. B, § 4-404 32 App. B, § 5-318(d), (e) 33 App. B, § 5-403(b)(2) 34 App. B, § 5-500 35 App. B, § 5-501 36 App. B, § 5-502 37 App. B, § 5-503(a)-(d), (f), (g) 38 App. B, § 5-801(a) 1340  8-12-03 1 App. A, § 2103 2 App. A, § 3151(a) 3       Added App. A, § 4501 4       Added App. A, § 4501.5 5 App. A, § 5520(e) 6       Added App. A, § 5503(17) 1341  9- 9-03 1       Added 6-204(a)(15) 1343  9- 9-03 1 12-414(b), (d) 1344  9- 9-03 1 23-101 1345 10-14-03 1 13-102 2 13-103 1348  3- 9-04 1 18-500 2 18-502(g)(6) 1350  2-10-04 1 App. A, § 3051(b) 1351  1-13-04 1 22-221 2 22-222 1353  2-10-04 1 6-200 2 6-205(tit.), 5-205(a)       Rpld 6-205(b)       Rnbd 6-205(c)       as 6-205(b) 3 6-500 1356  3- 9-04 2 18-109(a), (b) 1360  4-27-04 11.5 2-411 12 6-204(a)(1)-(8)       Added 6-204(a)(9)       Rnbd 6-204(a)(10)-(15)       as 6-204(a)(11)-(16)       Added 6-204(a)(17)-(19) 13 6-403(b) 14 12-200(b), (c) 12-202 15 12-606(a) 16       Added ch. 12, div. 5(tit.), 12-660 17 18-512 18 21-501(c) 19 22-100 20 22-500 21 18-201(b) 22 24-301(b)(1)a., b. 23 24-206(a), (b) 24 18-400(a), (b) 25 24-602(a), (d) 26 20-206 1361  5-11-04 1 App. B, § 2-105 1362  4-13-04 1 17-402 2 17-404 3 17-405 4 17-406 1363  4-13-04 1       Added 14-111 1364  6- 8-04 1 22-900 1365  7-27-04 1 23-224 1368  7-13-04 1 1-113 2 12-108(a) 3 12-112 4 14-107(a) 5 14-204 1369 10-12-04 1 App. A, § 1237(c) 2 App. A, § 2103 3 App. A, § 3052(a)(2), (c)(1) 4 App. A, § 3062(a)(2) 5 App. A, § 3082(a)(2) 6 App. A, § 3092(a)(2) 7 App. A, § 3141(a) 8 App. A, § 3151(a) 9 App. A, § 3151(b) 10 App. A, § 3182(a), (b) 11       Added App. A, § 3263(e) 12       Rnbd App. A, § 4513       as App. A, § 4514 13       Added App. A, § 4513 14 App. A, § 4231(b)(13) 15 App. A, § 5220(e) 16 App. B, § 5-401(b) 1372  9-14-04 1       Rpld 14-110       Added 14-110.5 1377 12-14-04 1 22-221(a) 2 22-222 1380  4-26-05 12       Added 6-204(a)(20) 13 22-500 14 18-201(b)(1), (2) 15 24-301(b)(1)a., b. 16 24-306(a), (b) 17 18-400(a)(1), (2) 18-400(b)(1), (2) 18 24-602(a)(1), (2) 24-602(d) 19 20-206 20(Exh. 1) 2-411 1383  4-26-05 1 22-900 1387  6-14-05 1 6-400-6-409 2       Rpld 24-107(5) 1388  7-12-05 1 2-411 2 10-103, 10-106, 10-107 1392  7-12-05 1 11-101, 11-306, 11-308, 11-309       Added 11-310 1393  8- 9-05 1       Added 20-105 1394  8- 9-05 1 9-101 1395  9-13-05 1       Added App. B, § 4-600(c) App. B, § 4-602       Added App. B, § 4-603(d) 1397 10-11-05 1 App. B, § 5-401(b) 2 App. A, § 3141(a)       Added App. A, § 3142(f) 1398 10-11-05 1 10-102 10-200(a)       Added 10-200(f) 10-201 10-206(b) 10-213(a) 1401 11- 8-05 1 23-223 1405  8- 8-06 1 App. A, § 2103 2       Added App. A, § 4320 3 App. A, § 5720(a)       Added App. A, § 5720(c) 1411  2-14-06 1 ch. 16 1414  4-25-06 1 18-201(b) 2 18-400(a), (b) 3 20-2016 4 24-301(b) 5 24-306(a), (b) 6 24-602(a), (d) 7 24-607(d( 1415  7-11-06 1 App. A, § 1152(a) 2 App. A, § 1163 3       Rpld App. A, § 1238       Rnbd App. A, § 1239       as App. A, § 1238 4 App. A, § 2103 5 App. A, § 3032(d) 6 App. A, § 3091(a) 7 App. A, § 3113(a) 8 App. A, § 3141(b) 9 App. A, § 3151(a), (b) 10 App. A, § 3161(a) 11 App. A, § 3181(b) 12 App. A, § 3191(a), (b) 13 App. A, § 3263(d)(3) 14 App. A, § 4220(c) 15 App. A, § 4509(d) 16       Rpld App. A, § 4511(b), (c)       Rnbd App. A, § 4511(d), (e)       as App. A, § 4511(b), (c) 17 App. A, § 4516(b) 18       Added App. A, § 4527(a)(1)-(3)       Rnbd App. A, § 4527(a)(1)       as App. A, § 4527(a)(4) App. A, § 4527(a)(4)       Rpld App. A, § 4527(a)(2)       Rnbd App. A, § 4527(a)(3)       as App. A, § 4527(a)(5)       Added App. A, § 4527(a)(6)-(8)       Rpld App. A, § 4527(b)(6)-(8)       Rnbd App. A, § 4527(b)(9)       as App. A, § 4527(b)(6)       Rpld App. A, § 4527(b)(10)       Rnbd App. A, § 4527(b)(11)-(15)       as App. A, § 4527(b)(7)-(11)       Rpld App. A, § 4527(b)(16), (17) App. A, § 4527(c)       Rpld App. A, § 4527(d) 19 App. A, § 4703(a)(1) 20       Added App. A, § 4721 21       Added App. A, § 4722 22 App. A, § 5202(c) 23 App. A, § 5502(4) 24 App. A, § 5521(d) 25 App. A, § 5532(e) 26 App. A, § 5533(d) 27 App. A, § 5534(e) 28 App. A, § 5535(d) 29 App. A, § 5536(d) 30       Added App. A, § 5730(f) 31 App. B, § 2-104(e) 32 App. B, § 4-101 33 App. B, § 4-205(c) 34 App. B, § 4-207(c)       Added App. B, § 4-207(d)       Rnbd App. B, § 4-207(d)       as App. B, § 4-207(e) App. B, § 4-207(e) 35 App. B, § 5-318(d) 36 App. B, § 5-403(a)(1) App. B. § 5-402(b)(1)(a)-(c) 1416  7-11-06 1 App. A, § 3141(b) 2 App. A, § 3151(b) 3 App. A, § 3181(b) 4 App. A, § 4606 5       Added App. A, § 4607 1418  7-11-06 1 5-204(a), 5-204(c)-(e) 5-204(j), (k)       Added 5-204(l), (m) 2 6-209(c) 3 12-112 4 16-201(b) 5 22-705 1420  7-11-06 1 20-120(a)       Rpld 20-120(b), (c)       Rnbd 20-120(d), (e)       as 20-120(b), (c) 2 20-121 3 22-129 4 24-314(a), (c) 1429 12-12-06 13-103 1431 12-12-06 22-221 22-222 1432 12-12-06 24-115(c) 24-116 24-310(a) 24-601(c), (d) 24-606(b) 24-607(e) 24-608 1433  2-13-07 App. A, § 1150(a)(4)       Added App. A, § 1150(f) App. A, § 1182(d), (e) 1439  4-10-07 App. A, § 2103       Added App. A, art. III, div. 28, §§ 3300-3305 App. A, § 4216(a)(6) App. A, § 4231(b)(11) App. A, § 4241(a)(1), (3), (6) App. A, § 4308(2) App. A, § 4309(c) App. A, § 4310(e) App. A, § 4313(d) App. A, § 4319(d) App. A, § 4321(d) App. A, § 4326(c) App. A, § 4331(c) App. A, § 4331.1(1) App. A, § 4338(d) App. A, § 4339(c) App. A, § 4341(d) App. A, § 4350(h) App. A, § 4410(f) App. A, § 4420(d) App. A, § 4430(e) App. A, § 4510(b) App. A, § 4511(c) App. A, § 4512(c) App. A, § 4514 App. A, § 4521(e) App. A, § 4521.1 App. A, § 4521.3 App. A, § 4521.4 App. A, § 4528.1 App. A, § 4528.2 App. A, § 4542(c) App. A, § 4546 App. A, § 4552(b) App. A, § 4552.1 App. A, § 4553(b) App. A, § 4555(d) App. A, § 4559(c) App. A, § 4561(c) App. A, § 4564(d) App. A, § 4703(c) App. A, § 5310(i) App. A, § 5426(a)       Added App. A, § 5537 App. A, § 5601(d) App. A, § 5719(a) 1442  3-13-07 1 12-200(b), (c) 12-202 12-203 12-205(a), (c) 12-212 1447  4-24-07 1 18-201(b) 18-400 20-206 24-301(b)(1) 24-306 24-314(a) 24-602(a), (d) 1450  5-29-07 1 App. A, § 2103 App. A, § 3151(b)       Added App. A, § 4560 1451  5- 8-07 1 23-100 23-101(A)4.       Added 23-101(A)13. 2       Rpld 23-102 1452  7-10-07 1       Added 12-310 1454  8-14-07 1 18-403 18-404 24-608 1455  8-14-07 1       Added 2-300(d) 16-116(1) 1456  8-14-07 4-301(a) 4-401(c) 5-200(b)(2) 5-202(d) 7-109(c) 8-103(a)(2) 11-101 11-301 11-308(d) 11-400(a)(1) 11-500(a), (b) 11-504(c) 12-203(b) 12-414(c) 12-500 12-502(a) 12-602(a) 12-612(a), (e) 14-101 14-102(1) 14-107(a) 14-202(a) 16-304(a), (f) 16-402(a), (b) 17-308(b)(6)a. 18-100 18-305(a) 18-603(a) 20-209 21-612(d), (g) 22-127 23-111(a) 24-613 1457  8-14-07 1 23-110 1458  9-11-07 1 12-113 1462 11-13-07 1 10-100 10-102-10-104 10-105(b), (c), (f)       Added 10-105(g), (h) 10-106(a), (c) 10-107 10-108 10-200(a), (c), (e), (f) 10-201(a)       Added 10-201(b)-(e) 10-202 10-203 10-204(a) 10-205 10-208(2) 10-210(a), (c)       Added 10-210(d) 10-211(4)       Added 10-211(5) 10-213 1419 12-12-07 1 App. A, § 1124 App. A, § 1160(d)       Added App. A, § 1211(c) App. A, § 1213 A. App. A, § 1233       Rpld App. A, § 1234(c)       Rnbd App. A, § 1234(d)-(i)       as App. A, § 1234(c)-(h)       Added App. A, § 1235 App. A, § 1237(c) App. A, § 1240(a), (f) App. A, § 5110(f) App. A, § 5440(e) App. A, § 5790(a) 1465  2-12-08 1(a)       Added 2-409 1(b) 2-410(a)-(d)       Rpld 2-410(e), (f) 2-411(a) 2-412(a) 6-102(a)       Rpld 6-102(b)       Rnbd 6-102(c), (d)       as 6-102(b), (c) 6-102(b), (c) 6-402(b)       Rpld 6-403(a)       Rnbd 6-403(b), (c)       as 6-403(a), (b) 6-403(a), (b) 6-405(b) 6-407(a) 6-408(a) 18-203 18-204 18-301 18-302 18-601 18-602 18-605 21-101 21-103 21-109(b) 21-301(a), (b) 21-501(a), (b) 21-503 21-508 24-200(b) 24-201 24-202 24-308 24-401 24-402 24-702 1(c) App. A, § 1100 App. A, § 1205 App. A, § 3243(a)(1) App. A, § 3244(b) App. A, § 3245(b) App. A, § 4335(b)(2)b., c. App. A, § 5510(b) 1(d) App. B, § 2-101(a) App. B, § 2-105 App. B, § 3-100(c) App. B, § 4-600(c) App. B, § 5-307(b) 1467  7-14-09 1 18-100 18-106 18-200 18-201 18-202 18-203 18-301-18-303       Rltd App. B, § 5-700(b)-(e)       As App. B, § 5-700(d)-(g)       Added App. B, § 5-700(b), (c) App. B, § 5-701 1468  1- 8-08 9-100, 9-101 1469  1- 8-08 1 12-202 1479  3-11-08 22-221(a), 22-222 1480  3-11-08 21-115, 21-116       Added 21-117 1483(Amd.)  4- 8-08       Rpld 18-600-18-606       Added 18-600-18-623 1485  4-28-08 1 18-201(b), 18-400(a), (b) 20-206, 24-301(b) 24-306(a), (b), 24-314(a), 24-601, 24-602(a), (d) 1486  4-28-08 1 22-701 1489(Amd.)  4- 8-08 1 12-200(a)       Added 12-200(d), 12-203.1 12-203-12-205, 12-207 2       Rpld 12-208-12-211, 12-213, 12-405 1490  5-13-08 1 6-204(b) 1491  5-13-08 1 21-301, 21-305 1493  6-10-08 1 21-613 1494(Amd.)  6-10-08 14-102       Added 14-112 1497  8-12-08 1       Added 12-106.1 1499  8-12-08 1 5-200(a)       Added 5-200(c), (d) 1503 10-14-08 1 12-700 1504 11-11-08 1       Added 2-421 1506 11-11-08 1 12-414 1507 12- 9-08 1       Added 14-113 1509  2-10-09 1 App. A, § 2103 App. A, § 4560 1512  1-13-09 1 22-221(a) 22-222 22-224(d) 1513  4-14-09 1 18-608 App. A, Art. I, Div. 8(title) App. A, § 1110 App. A, § 1150(e), (f) App. A, § 1153(a) App. A, § 1180 App. A, § 1181 App. A, § 1182(a)-(d) App. A, § 1183-1186 App. A, § 1201(b)(4) App. A, § 1213A.3., 9. App. A, § 1233(4) App. A, § 1234(t) App. A, § 2103 App. A, § 3022 App. A, § 3024 App. A, § 3031 App. A, § 3041(b) App. A, § 3050 App. A, § 3051(a), (b) App. A, § 3060 App. A, § 3061(b) App. A, § 3081(b) App. A, § 3091(a), (b) App. A, § 3111(a) App. A, § 3112 App. A, § 3121(a) App. A, § 3122 App. A, § 3141(a), (b) App. A, § 3151(a), (b) App. A, § 3161(a), (b) App. A, § 3181(a), (b) App. A, § 3191(a), (b) App. A, § 3201(b) App. A, § 3211 App. A, § 3233 App. A, § 3250 App. A, § 3252 App. A, § 3253(a)-(c) App. A, § 3262 App. A, § 3301(a), (b) App. A, § 4216(a)(7), (b)(5) App. A, § 4220(b)(10), (d) App. A, § 4225(b)(1)g., i. App. A, § 4225(b)(2)a., f. App. A, § 4231(b)(9), (b)(12) App. A, § 4241(a)(6) App. A, § 4306(a)(6) App. A, § 4307(b)(6) App. A, § 4309(a)(4) App. A, § 4310(b)(6), (b)(7), (c) App. A, § 4313(c)(1), (c)(2) App. A, § 4319(b)(7), (c) App. A, § 4320(a) App. A, § 4321(b)(6), (c) App. A, § 4326(b)(6) App. A, § 4331(b)(4) App. A, § 4339(b)(6) App. A, § 4341(b)(6), (7), (c) App. A, § 4350(a)-(f) App. A, § 4410(c)(6), (e)(1) App. A, § 4420(b)(6), (c) App. A, § 4430(b)(1), (b)(5), (d)(1) App. A, § 4521(b)(2), (7), (9), (d) App. A, § 4523(b)(1), (5) App. A, § 4525(b)(1), (5) App. A, § 4527(a)(1), (7) App. A, § 4529(a)(10), (14) App. A, § 4542(b)(11), (b)(12) App. A, § 4543(b)(3) App. A, § 4552(a) App. A, § 4555(b)(5), (b)(10) App. A, § 4555(c)(1)-(3) App. A, § 4559(b)(4), (b)(8) App. A, § 4560(d), (h), (j) App. A, § 4561(b)(4), (b)(8), (b)(10) App. A, § 4564(b)(4), (b)(8), (c)(1) App. A, § 4720(a), (b)(3), (b)(10) App. A, § 4722(a)(4), (a)(50 App. A, § 5100(a), (e) App. A, § 5221(4), (5) App. A, § 5130(a)(15) App. A, § 5510(f) App. A, § 5536(e) App. A, § 5540(c), (e) App. A, § 5719(a), (b) App. A, § 5720(b) App. B, § 4-400 (b)(3)q. 1517  4-28-09 1 22-502 22-703 1518  4-28-09 1 18-201(b) 18-400(a), (b) 20-121 1, 2 20-206 1, 2 24-301(b) 1, 2 24-306(a), (b) 1 24-310(a) 1, 2 24-314(a) 1, 2 24-602(a), (d) 1519  4-28-09 1       Dltd 12-414(a)(6)       Rnbd 12-414(a)(7), (a)(8)       As 12-414(a)(6), (a)(7) 1520  4-14-09 1 4-400 4-401(a) 4-402 4-403 4-407       Added 4-409(b)(12) 4-411 4-412 4-413(a)       Added 4-413(d)       Added 4-418-4-420 1522  7-14-09 1 12-417 12-418       Added 12-419-12-426 1529  8-11-09 1 App. A, § 2103 App. A, §§ 3240-3249.1       Added App. A, § 3249.2 App. B, § 5-101 1530  7-14-09 1 App. A, § 3034 (email)  8-18-09 App. B, § 5-318(d) 1537  9- 8-09 1 13-100-13-108 1541 10-13-09 1 10-106       Added 10-106(b)(1)-(b)(4), (d)-(f)       Added 10-108(b)-(d)       Rnbd 10-207(b)(2)-(b)(6)       as 10-207(b)(3)-(b)(7)       Added 10-207(b)(2), (b)(8), (b)(9) 1542 10-13-09 1 12-309(b), (f)       Rltd 12-309(h), (i)       as 12-309(i), (j)       Added 12-309(h) 1543 10-13-09 1       Added 12-502(d)       Added 12-503.1 1544 10-13-09 1       Rpld 24-501 1548 11-10-09 1       Added 2-600-2-608 1550 12- 8-09 1 App. B, § 3-100 1552 12- 8-09 1 16-116(2), (3) 16-201 1553 12- 8-09 1 22-221(a) 22-222 1554 12- 8-09 1 12-200(a)-(c) 1561  1-12-10 1 12-418(a)(5) 12-419(e), (g)       Dltd 12-426       Added 12-426 1562  1-12-10 1 Ch. 15, Art. I(title) 15-100-15-102       Dltd 15-103-15-113 Ch. 15, Art. II(title) 15-200-15-204 2 21-612 21-613 1563 1 -12-10 1 14-109 14-110.5(f) 1566  2- 9-10 1 7-105 1567  2- 9-10 1 2-501 2-502 2-504(c) 2-505(a)       Added 2-506 1573  4-27-10 1 18-400(a), (b) 20-206 24-310(a) 24-314(a) 24-602(a), (d) 1580  8-10-10 1       Rpld 21-200-21-202 2       Added 21-200-21-206 1582  8-10-10 1 12-112 1591 10-12-10 1 12-112(b) 1595 11- 9-10 1 22-221, 22-222 1598  2- 8-11 1 App. A, § 203 App. A, § 5200 App. A, § 5201 App. A, § 5202 App. A, §§ 5204-5206 App. A, § 5210(d), (e) App. A, §§ 5211-5213       Added App. A, §§ 5214, 5215 App. A, §§ 5220-5223 App. A, § 5230 App. A, §§ 5240-5242 2       Added App. A, Art. V, Div. 2(note) 1600  3- 8-11 1 20-130, 20-131 20-142 20-403 1604  3- 8-11 2 App. A, § 2103 App. A, § 3270 App. A, § 3271 App. A, §§ 3273-3277       Added App. A, §§ 3280-3288 1607  4-26-11 1 18-201(b) 18-400(a)(1), (a)(2), (b)(1), (b)(2) 20-206       Added 20-405 24-301(b)(1)a., (b)(1)b. 24-306(a), (b) 24-310(a) 24-314(a) 24-602(a)(1), (a)(2), (d) 1611  6-14-11 1 14-109 1612  6-14-11 1       Added 22-227, 22-228 1614  6-14-11 1 23-210       Rpld 23-212 23-213, 23-214, 23-216, 23-221, 23-224 1615  7-12-11 1       Added 15.5-100- 
15.5-111 1623 10-11-11 1 12-611(a) 1625 10-11-11 1       Rpld 24-114       Added 24-800-24-805 1626 10-11-11 1       Rpld 13-105 2 13-106(b), (b)(5), (c), (e) 1627 10-11-11 1       Added 18-109(d)       Added 24-306(d) 1628 11- 8-11 1       Added 12-400(a)(18) 1632  1-10-12 1 App. A, § 3111 App. A, § 3113 App. A, § 3115 1633  1-10-12 1 22-221, 22-222 1640  3-12-12 1       Rpld 20-404       Rnbd 20-405       as 20-404       Added 20-300-20-302 1643  4-24-12 1 18-201(b) 18-400(a), (b) 20-121 20-206 20-404 24-301(b)(1) 24-306(a), (b) 24-314(a) 24-602(a), (d) 1644  4-24-12 1 22-400(a) 22-410(a)(1), (a)(2) 22-411(a)(1), (a)(2) 1647  5- 8-12 1 20-130(b) 1649  8-14-12 1 App. A, § 3023(f) App. A, § 3042(e) App. A, § 3052(f) App. A, § 3062(f) 1651  8-14-12 1       Added App. A, §§ 1206, 1207 App. A, § 1210(b) App. A, § 1213A., A.2.       Added App. A, § 1213G. 1654  9-11-12 1       Added App. A, § 5790(e) 1656  9-11-12 1       Added 6-103 1657  9-11-12 1 5-202(a)-(e) 5-204 13-103(11) 1655 12-11-12 1       Added App. A, §§ 3400-3406 1658 10- 9-12 1       Rpld 17-108 1660 12-11-12 1       Rpld 2-600-2-608       Added 2-600-2-611 1666  1- 8-13 1 23-101 1667 12-11-12 1 22-221(a) 2 22-222 1668  4- 9-13 1 App. A, § 4552.1 App. A, § 4553(a)       Added App. A, § 4555(a)(2) 1680  5-14-13 1       Added App. A, Section 1112 App. A, § 1127 App. A, § 4216(a)(4) App. A, § 4231(b)(6) App. A, § 4241(a)(2), (d)(3) App. A, § 4304(a)(2) App. A, § 4307(a)(1) App. A, § 4308(2) App. A, § 4309(b)(3), (c) App. A, § 4310(b)(2), (e) App. A, § 4313(b)(2), (d) App. A, § 4319(b)(2), (d) App. A, § 4321(b)(2), (d) App. A, § 4326(b)(2), (c) App. A, § 4331(b)(3), (c) App. A, § 4331.1 App. A, § 4333(b)(2) App. A, § 4338(b)(2), (d) App. A, § 4339(b)(3), (d) App. A, § 4341(b)(5), (d) App. A, § 4350(h) App. A, § 4410(b)(5), (f) App. A, § 4420(b)(7), (d) App. A, § 4430(b)(2), (e) App. A, § 4501(h) App. A, § 4501.5(c) App. A, § 4509(d) App. A, § 4510(b) App. A, § 4511(c) App. A, § 4512(b)(4), (c) App. A, § 4513(a)(2) App. A, § 4514 App. A, § 4516(c) App. A, § 4521(b)(10), (2) App. A, § 4521.1 App. A, § 4521.2 App. A, § 4521.3 App. A, § 4521.4 App. A, § 4522(c) App. A, § 4523(a)(1) App. A, § 4523.1 App. A, § 4524(b) App. A, § 4525(b)(10), (c) App. A, § 4526(b) App. A, § 4528.1 App. A, § 4528.2 App. A, § 4529(a)(1) App. A, § 4531(b) App. A, § 4541(b) App. A, § 4542(b)(15), (c) App. A, § 4544 App. A, § 4545 App. A, § 4546 App. A, § 4552(b) App. A, § 4552.1(b) App. A, § 4553(b) App. A, § 4555(b)(12), (d) App. A, § 4559(b)(11), (c) App. A, § 4560(j) App. A, § 4561(b)(12), (c) App. A, § 4564(b)(11), (d) App. A, § 4565 App. A, § 4605(c) App. A, § 4606(b) App. A, § 4607(b) App. A, § 4626(b) App. A, § 4720(e) App. A, § 4722(a)(6) App. A, § 5120(d)(1), (d)(2) App. A, § 5221(4) App. A, § 5310(f) App. A, § 5331(h) App. A, § 5440(c) 1681  5-14-13 1       Added App. A, § 1113 App. A, § 1123 App. A, § 1140 App. A, § 1141 App. A, § 1153 App. A, § 1160 App. A, § 1168 App. A, § 1200 App. A, § 1210 App. A, § 1241 App. A, § 1243 App. A, § 1245 App. A, § 2103 1684  6-11-13 1 17-201       Rpld 17-202       Rpld 17-204 17-205(a), (c)       Rpld 17-206, 17-207 2 17-400(a) 17-401       Rpld 17-402 17-403       Rpld 17-404       Rpld 17-406, 17-407 1685  6-11-13 1 App. A, § 3141(b) 1678  4-23-13 1 18-201(b) 18-400(a),(b) 20-206 20-404 24-301(b)(1) 24-306(a),(b) 24-314(a) 24-602(a),(d) 1704  1-14-14 1       Added 21-310 21-501(c) 1705  1-14-14 1 12-505 1707  1-14-14 1 15-100(a) 15-101 21-612(a) 21-613 1708  1-14-14 1 2-302 1713  2-11-14 1       Added 12-405 1720  4-22-14 1 18-201(b) 18-400(a),(b) 20-206 24-301(b)(1) 24-306 24-314(a) 24-602(a),(d) 1722  5-13-14 1 App. A, § 2103 App. A, § 3141(a) App. A, § 3151(a)       Added App. A, § 4547 App. A, § 4548 1725  5-13-14 1       Rpld 24-313 1723  6-10-14 1       Added 18-700-18-709 1724  6-10-14 1 App. A, § 1103 App. A, § 1150(f) App. A, § 1162(d) App. A, § 2103 App. A, § 3111 App. A, § 3113(b)(1)c., (k) App. A, § 3151(b) App. A, § 3215 App. A, § 4509(d), (e) App. A, § 5120(b) App. A, § 5531(d)(5) App. A, § 5562 1726  6-10-14 1 11-203(e) 1727  6-10-14 1 16-116(3) 16-201(a) 1728  6-10-14 1       Rpld 18-600-18-623       Added 18-600-18-629 1741 10-14-14 1       Added 12-101.1 1742 10-14-14 1       Added 22-1000 1744 12- 9-14 1 App. B, § 3-101 App. B, §§ 4-101, 4-102 App. B, §§ 4-206(a), 4-207(a) 1748 12- 9-14 1 2-403 1755  1-13-15 1 2-300       Added 2-307 1757  2-10-15 1 7-109(b) 1762  4-14-15 1 23-224       Added 23-225 1763  4-28-15 1 18-201(b) 18-400 24-301(b)(1) 24-306(a), (b) 24-310(a) 24-314(a) 24-602(a), (d) 1765  6- 9-15 1 12-413(a), (d) 12-414(a)-(c), (f)       Added 12-414(g) 12-500-12-504 1768  9- 8-15 1 App. A, § 1200(a) App. A, § 1240(d) App. A, § 1241 App. A, § 2103 1772  8-11-15 1       Added 18-109(e)       Added 24-306(e) 1770 10-13-15 1 App. A, §§ 3140-3144 App. A, § 3281 App. A, § 4216 App. A, § 4231 1775 10-13-15 1 5-200(a) 1776 10-13-15 1 14-103, 14-104       Added 14-103.5 1777  1-12-16 1       Added App. A, art. I, div. 18, §§ 1280-1284 App. A, § 2103 App. A, § 3151(a) App. A, § 3181(a) App. A, § 3191(a) App. A, § 3301(b)       Rpld App. A, § 4530       Added App. A, art. IV, div. 8, §§ 4800, 4801 1780  1-12-16 1 11-203(g) 1781  3- 8-16 1 22-703(c) 1789  4-12-16 1 18-201(b)(1), (2) 18-400(a), (b) 24-301(b)(1) 24-306(a), (b) 24-314(a) 24-601(d) 24-602(a), (d) 1791  5-10-16 1       Rpld 2-101       Added 2-104(e) 2-105       Rpld 2-107 2-108-2-111       Rpld 2-112       Added 2-112-2-122 1794  6-14-16 1 2-602(a) App. A, § 3401(a) 1795  8- 9-16 1 18-702 18-703(e)(1) 18-704(h) 18-705(a) 1798  8- 9-16 1 20-130 20-203 20-402 1799  8- 9-16 1 21-112 1800 10-11-16 1 App. A, § 1112 1804 10-11-16 1 21-116 1807 12-13-16 1       Added Ch. 6, Art. VI, §§ 6-601-6-606 2 22-500, 22-501 1809  1-10-17 12-606 12-611 12-614 1810  1-10-17 1 21-117       Added 21-118 1811  1-10-17 1 20-120(a) 20-130(b) 20-142 20-206 20-403 20-404 1814  3-14-17 1       Added 21-630 1816  4-11-17 1       Added App. A, Div. 17, §§ 1270, 1271 App. A, § 2103 App. A, § 3021 App. A, § 3031 App. A, § 3032 App. A, § 3041 App. A, § 3042       Added App. A, § 4201 1819  3-14-17 1 13-103 13-104(2) 1822  4-11-17 1 18-303(c) 24-403(c) 1823  6-13-17 1       Added 5-117 1826  5- 9-17 1 18-201(b) 18-400(a)(1), (b) 20-206 24-301(b)(1) 24-306(a), (b) 24-310(a) 24-602(a), (d) 1830  5- 9-17 1 23-100 23-101       Added 23-102 23-111       Added 23-112 1831  5- 9-17 1 16-116(1) 1838  8- 8-17       Added 12-602.5 1845 12-12-17 1 App. A, § 2103 App. A, § 3191 App. A, § 3201       Added App. A, § 4524.1 App. A, § 5220 1849  1- 9-18 1 22-129 1856  1- 9-18 1       Added 22-600-22-605 1670  8-13-13 1 12-309 1848  3-13-18 1 15-101 15-201-15-203 15.5-102 1863  4-25-18 1 18-201 18-400 20-206 24-301 24-306 24-314 24-601, 24-602 1864 10- 1-18 1 14-107 1869  7-10-18 1 14-110.5 1883  3-12-19 1 App. A, § 2103 App. A, § 3040 App. A, § 3042 1884  2-12-19 1 App. A, § 3150, 3151 App. A, § 3155 App. A, § 4528.2 1885  1- 8-19 1       Added 2-104(f) 1       Added 2-108(e)(1)  
